THE CODE OF THE CITY OF HOLLY SPRINGS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1997 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 16, 1998  Effective: February 16, 1998 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HOLLY SPRINGS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Steven W. Miller 
Mayor 
____________ 
Karen Barnett 
Dee Phillips 
Jeremy Smith 
Kyle Whitaker 
Michael Roy Zenchuk II 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert M. Dyer 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen Norred, CMC 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Robert H. Logan, CPA 
City Manager/Finance Director 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HOLLY SPRINGS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Johnny Brackett 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kathy Tyndall, Mayor Pro Tem 
Kenneth Motte 
J. C. Bradley 
Elizabeth Barrett  Bob Douglas 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert M. Dyer 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Betty Cloer 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1991 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and John Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Betty Cloer, City Clerk, and Mr. Robert M. Dyer, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 1997. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Holly Springs, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 82, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 21, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 21, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective February 16, 1998. 
Passed and Adopted by the city council this 16th day of February, 1998. 

APPROVED AS TO FORM:   


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Charter as set forth in 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3281. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, CORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - City of Holly Springs. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of Holly Springs, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  Said map at time of Charter amendment is hereby attached and noted as Exhibit A "The Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia." 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3281; 1987 Ga. Laws, page 4964; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 1-24-13, eff. 2-21-13 ) 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.04. - Examples of power[s]. 
(a)  The corporate powers of this city may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(2)  To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by state law. 
(3)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, businesses, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(4)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(5)  To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(6)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(7)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(8)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures authorized by state law. 
(9)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, cable television, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced. 
(10)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards, and conditions applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations by the Public Service Commission. 
(11)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and to light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city, and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities. 
(12)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation as permitted under state law. 
(13)  To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so. 
(14)  To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures. 
(15)  To provide such comprehensive city planning for development by zoning, subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community. 
(16)  To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(17)  To regulate or prohibit junk dealers and pawnshops; the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and flammable materials; the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatsoever, by taxation or otherwise; to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors. 
(18)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(19)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(20)  To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city. 
(21)  To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof. 
(22)  To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(23)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items. 
(24)  To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(25)  To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to change the same from time to time, and to levy such fees on the users connecting with the sewerage system. 
(26)  To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(27)  To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(28)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(29)  To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of [any] ordinance enacted hereunder. 
(30)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(31)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles. 
(32)  To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city. 
(33)  To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements. 
(34)  To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be made therefor. 
(35)  To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same. 
(36)  To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(37)  To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to organize and operate a firefighting agency. 
(38)  To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(39)  To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(40)  To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(41)  To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(42)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  No listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2013-01, §§ 2—6, 1-24-13, eff. 2-21-13 ; Ord. No. 22-2017, § 1, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 1.05. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code reference— City council, § 2-36 et seq. 

Sec. 2.01. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, the legislative authority of the government of this city shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five (5) councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by article V of this charter. 
Sec. 2.02. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless he or she shall have been a resident of the city one year immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council: each shall continue to reside therein during his or her period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(2001 Ga. Laws, page 3679) 
Sec. 2.03. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in article V. 
Sec. 2.04. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation for their services in an amount set by ordinance. The mayor and councilmembers shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.05. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office of elective city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.06. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.07. - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Holly Springs as provided by article I. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Holly Springs and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The council may by ordinance change, create, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies, and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this charter. 
Sec. 2.08. - Chief executive officer. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of the City of Holly Springs. He shall possess, have, and exercise all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and all the executive and administrative powers granted to him in this charter. 
Sec. 2.09. - Duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive officer of the City of Holly Springs, the mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the official head of the city for the service of process and for ceremonial purposes; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign all written contracts entered into by the council on behalf of the city and all other contracts and instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(6)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(7)  Recommend to the council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(8)  Call special meetings of the council as provided for in section 2.12 of this charter; 
(9)  Examine and audit all accounts of the city before payment; 
(10)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports in connection with the affairs thereof whenever he deems it expedient; 
(11)  Suspend any appointed city employee or officer for cause, said suspension to be in effect until the next meeting of the council wherein the question of the employee's or officer's capability shall be decided by the council; 
(12)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(13)  Break a tie vote of the councilmembers; 
(14)  Perform other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or ordinance. 
Sec. 2.10. - Mayor pro tem. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem or, in his absence or disability for any cause, one of the councilmembers chosen by the council shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. 
Sec. 2.11. - Organization meeting. 
The city council shall meet for organization on the regular council meeting date. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor. The city clerk shall administer the oath of office to the newly elected member as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of mayor/councilman of this city and that I will support and defend the charter and ordinances thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
( Ord. No. 2013-01, § 7, 1-24-13, eff. 2-21-13 ) 
Sec. 2.12. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or electronically, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residences in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such meeting and attendance at the special meeting shall also constitute waiver of notice. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2.13. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.14. - Quorum; voting. 
A majority of all the members elected shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or contract except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Holly Springs hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. 
Sec. 2.16. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.17. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or mayor pro tem and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance; but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three (3) councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 60 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.18. - Code of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.19. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.19. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his/her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such code of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available pursuant to the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available pursuant to the Georgia Open Records Act. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
( Ord. No. 2013-01, § 8, 1-24-13, eff. 2-21-13 ) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.01. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  The council by ordinance may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereinafter created or established. The council may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment and may transfer or change the functions or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance. Each department shall consist of such offices, employees, and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the council. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall serve at the pleasure of the person or body who appointed the officer. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this charter for original appointment. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by an approved pay plan or budget, or as otherwise established by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 2, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 3.02. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general state law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions, or authorities shall be as prescribed by the council. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or general state law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three (3) members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or general state law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.03. - City attorney. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
Code reference— City attorney, § 2-106 et seq. 
Sec. 3.04. - City clerk. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.05. - Tax collector. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other funds belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
( Ord. No. 2013-01, § 9, 1-24-13, eff. 2-21-13 ) 
Sec. 3.06. - City accountant. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.07. - City manager. 
The council may appoint a city manager. The duties and authority of the city manager shall be established by ordinance and, in so doing, the council may specifically delegate to the city manager any of the administrative or budgetary duties of the mayor. 
Sec. 3.08 - Police chief. 
In the event that the City Council has determined that there shall be a Police Department, the City Council shall appoint a police chief. The Police Chief shall be in charge of the police department and shall obtain such training and certification as required under state law. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 4, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 3.09. - Consolidation of functions. 
The council may consolidate any two (2) or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 3, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 3.10. - Position classification and pay plan. 
The mayor and city council shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Said plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 3, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 3.11. - Personnel policies. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 3, 10-17-16 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Code reference— Municipal court, § 30-31 et seq. 

Sec. 4.01. - Municipal court; creation. 
There is hereby established a court to be known as Municipal Court of the City of Holly Springs which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance; to punish any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. 
Sec. 4.02. - Judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the council for a term of one year and until a successor is appointed. The compensation of the judges shall be fixed by the council. 
(b)  Municipal Court Judges may be removed from office on the grounds set forth in and following the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 32-32-2.2, as may be amended. 
(c)  A judge pro tem shall serve in the absence or disqualification of the judge, shall be appointed by the council, shall take the same oath as the judge, and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when acting in the judge's stead. 
(d)  Before entering on the duties of his office, the judge shall take an oath before the city clerk that he will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 5, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 4.03. - Convening. 
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.04. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Holly Springs and for its ordinances, and for violations of those state laws for which jurisdiction is given to municipal courts. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt. The municipal court may impose punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction to the full extent allowed by the law of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash, personal property, or real property as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear to the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and the defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be forfeited on order of the judge to the City of Holly Springs or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by state law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the City of Holly Springs granted by state laws generally to mayor's, recorder's, and police courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(Cht. Amdmt. of 1987; Ord. of 7-20-09, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 10, 1-24-13, eff. 2-21-13 ) 
Sec. 4.05. - Appeal. 
The right of appeal from the municipal court to the superior court shall be by certiorari as provided by law. 
Sec. 4.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in whole or in part the rules and regulations relative to the procedures for the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— House Bill No. 1137(Act No. 458), § 2, adopted March 20, 2014, repealed the former article V, §§ 5.01—5.06, and enacted a new article V as set out herein. The former article V pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Elections, § 2-211 et seq. 

Sec. 5.01. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Title 21. Elections of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Election Code," as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
( H.B. 1137, § 2, 3-20-14 ; Ord. No. 17-2016, § 6, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 5.02. - Regular elections. 
(a)  (1)  For purposes of electing members of the city council, the city is divided into five wards. One member of the council shall be elected from each such ward. The five wards shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan: hollysprings-2014 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Holly Springs User: bak'. 
(2)  For the purposes of such plan: 
(A)  The term 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of the city which is not included in any ward described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be included within that ward contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  Any part of the city which is described in paragraph (1) of this subsection as being included in a particular ward shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such ward. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that ward contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Those members of the city council who are serving as such on the effective date of this section and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(c)  On and after the effective date of this section, Kyle Whitaker shall be deemed to represent Ward No. l, Debbie Phillips shall be deemed to represent Ward No. 2, Michael Roy Zenchuk II shall be deemed to represent Ward No. 3, Karen Barnett shall be deemed to represent Ward No. 4, and Jeremy Smith shall be deemed to represent Ward No. 5. 
( H.B. 1137, § 2, 3-20-14 ) 
Sec. 5.03. - Election at large; plurality vote. 
The councilmember for each ward and the mayor shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city at large, and each candidate for mayor and city council receiving a plurality of the votes cast from the city at large shall be declared elected. 
( H.B. 1137, § 2, 3-20-14 ) 
Sec. 5.04. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Title 21. Elections of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Election Code," as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
( H.B. 1137, § 2, 3-20-14 ; Ord. No. 17-2016, § 7, 10-17-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-2016, § 7, adopted October 17, 2016 , set out provisions intended for use as § 5.03. To preserve the style of this Charter, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 5.04. 
Sec. 5.05. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall by ordinance prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the provisions of state law pertaining to elections. 
( H.B. 1137, § 2, 3-20-14 ) 
Sec. 5.06. - Grounds and procedure for removal of elected officers. 
The council may by ordinance set forth the grounds and procedure for the removal of elected officials of the City of Holly Springs. 
( H.B. 1137, § 2, 3-20-14 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Sec. 6.01. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.02. - Millage rate, due dates, payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one (1) lump sum, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.03. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.09. 
Code reference— Occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-36 et seq. 
Sec. 6.04. - Licenses, permits, fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and if unpaid shall be collected as provided in section 6.09. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.05. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys, for the purpose of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city. All franchises granted by the city shall be recorded and maintained in a registration book by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.06. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer, sanitary, health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.09. 
Sec. 6.07. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.09. 
Sec. 6.08. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.09. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.01 through 6.08 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, allowing exceptions for hardship, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.10. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.11. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to [be] paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.12. - Short-term notes. 
The city must obtain and repay any short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year or as is otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
Sec. 6.13. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.14. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.15. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies or on a revised estimate of revenue. 
Sec. 6.16. - Contracting procedures. 
All contracts shall be made or authorized by the council and no contracts shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council. 
Sec. 6.17. - Centralized purchasing. 
The council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City of Holly Springs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of Holly Springs for governmental or other purposes at a public or private sale, with or without advertisement, for such consideration as the council shall deem equitable and just for the city. 
(b)  The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city in connection with the extending or widening of any street, avenue, alley, or public place in the city, the council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.01. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken in accordance with the provisions of Title 22. Eminent Domain of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to eminent domain, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted or any other Georgia law applicable now or provided in the future. 
( Ord. No. 17-2016, § 8, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 7.02. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Sec. 7.03. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of this city not in conflict with this charter shall continue in force, unless repealed or amended. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the city not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall also remain in effect until they have been repealed or amended. 
Sec. 7.04. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.05. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel, or office as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.06. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 12 months or with such fine and imprisonment. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws in the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Charter of those ordinances adopted since the 1991 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1991 Charter. 

 
PART II - CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
City. "City" shall mean the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
City council. "City council" shall mean the city council of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. "Corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Holly Springs. 
County. Whenever the words "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Court. "Court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month, year. "Month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Holly Springs" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. "Oath" shall include affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. "Person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. "Preceding" and "following" shall mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. "Property" shall include real and personal property. 
Schedule of fees and charges. "Schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city, which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk, where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; "may" is permissive. 
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the words "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. "Street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. "Writing" shall include printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, substantially the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  The city's development regulations. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful for an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required, or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise provided by state law, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for up to 12 months, or both. Fines may be collected by execution. Each day such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. of June 15, 2009, § 1, repealed § 1-12, and enacted a new § 1-12 as set out herein. The former § 1-12 pertained to similar subject matter. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, adopted October 17, 2016 , repealed the former chapter 2, article I, §§ 2-1—2-3, article II, §§ 2-36—2-49, article III, division 1, §§ 2-81—2-84, division 2, 2-106—20-109, article IV, §§ 2-141—2-144, article V, §§ 2-176—2-180, article VI, §§ 2-211, 2-212, article VII, division 1,, §§ 2-246—2-251, division 2, 2-271—2-277, division 3, § 2-280, and enacted a new chapter 2 as set out herein. The former chapter 2 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30; planning, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporate governmental powers of the city shall be exercised by the city council in the manner provided by the Charter and by the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2. - City hall. 
(a)  City hall, and all other administrative units, shall be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except for legal holidays. 
(b)  The mayor, based on emergency or good cause, shall have the authority to close city hall at other times upon the posting of notice of closure and the reasons for it on the inside bulletin board and on a place conspicuous to the public outside. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-3. - Records management. 
(a)  All municipal records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, including but not limited to personnel files, criminal investigations, documents relating to the future acquisition of real estate not yet disclosed to the public, attorney-client communications, documents pertaining to matters in litigation or those pertaining to a meeting lawfully closed pursuant to the state open meetings act, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service prescribed in this section. 
(b)  The city clerk is responsible for records management activities, and shall designate a person or officer to act for and on behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(c)  No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with an approved retention schedule. 
(d)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city, which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-4—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-36. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at city hall, unless otherwise ordered by the council. All meetings shall be open to the public, except as otherwise permitted by state law. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each regularly scheduled meeting of the city council unless he or she is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
Sec. 2-37. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the conduct of city council meetings. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-38. - Call to order. 
All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. A clerk shall be present to take the minutes of the meetings. The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special or called meeting and shall immediately call the council to order. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-39. - Order of business. 
The business of the city council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order by presiding officer; 
(2)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting; 
(3)  Petitions and communications; 
(4)  Reports of standing committees; 
(5)  Reports of special committees; 
(6)  Unfinished business; 
(7)  New business; and 
(8)  Adjournment. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-40. - Reading of minutes. 
Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a councilmember, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-41. - Standing committees. 
The following shall be standing committees of the city council. Each committee shall be composed of two council members, who shall review all matters brought before the council concerning his subject area: 
(1)  Community development; 
(2)  Finance and administration; 
(3)  Parks and recreation; 
(4)  Police; and 
(5)  Public works. 
The mayor shall propose committee assignments which shall then be approved by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-42. - Reports by committees. 
Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor or by the city council, or any member of the city council, to examine any matter referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city council, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-43. - Manner of addressing council. 
No member, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call him to order or for explanation. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-44. - Limitations on addressing council. 
Any person not a member of the city council who desires to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so, and then shall step up in front of the dais, give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the council as a body rather than to any particular member. The presiding officer may, at the beginning of the meeting, set limits on the time allowed for addressing the council. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-45. - Recording vote. 
Whenever there is a split vote on decisions before the city council, the yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded in the minutes on the question taken. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-46. - Questions of order. 
The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilmember who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-47. - Appointments. 
All appointments by the city council shall be by a majority vote of the whole council. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-48. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the city council are open pursuant to the state open meetings act and shall be closed only pursuant to that act. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-49. - Compensation; expenses. 
(a)  The mayor and members of the city council shall receive as compensation such amounts as established by home rule ordinance. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties and in accordance with such amounts pursuant to the City of Holly Springs Financial Management Policy. 
(c)  The rate for mileage reimbursement shall be set by the current IRS regulations. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-50—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-81. - Officers. 
Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the mayor. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-82. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the city council shall require any department head, city official or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the city council. This bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of the official's or employee's duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful expenditures in office. These surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the city council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-83. - Code of ethics and conduct. 
(a)  Purpose. Residents of the city as well as persons doing business with the municipal government have a right to expect that city officials will behave in a manner conducive to promoting public confidence in the municipal government. The purpose of this code is to: 
(1)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for the conduct that is to be expected of city officials at meetings, events, and appearances sponsored by the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure of all conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, by city officials in matters concerning or affecting the city; and 
(4)  Set forth disciplinary measures that may be taken against city officials who choose to violate the code of ethics and conduct. 
(b)  City officials. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to the following city officials: the mayor; members of the city council; and members of the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of appeals, and any additional board(s) that may be established and duly appointed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Prohibited activities. No city official shall: 
(1)  Provide reason by his or her conduct for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or her or unduly enjoy his or her favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Use his or her official position to secure or attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(3)  Perform any activity or engage in any transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him or her by virtue of being a city official; 
(4)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a loan, gift, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the city official in the discharge of official duties. This shall not apply in the case of an occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; an award publicly presented in recognition of public service; a commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; and campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law; 
(5)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his or her position for his or her or another person's private gain; 
(6)  Engage in, or accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. This shall not apply to a city official who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by subsection (d) are made to the mayor and city council 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed; 
(7)  Use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself or herself or persons having an interest; 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; and 
(9)  Use his or her position to request or require an employee of the city to do clerical work on behalf of the city official's family, business, social club, church, or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a legitimate city interest; perform any work outside the employee's normal course of employment with the city; purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and work for the city official personally without paying the employee just compensation. 
(d)  Disclosure of conflicts of interest. An appointed city official (i.e., members of planning and zoning commission and other boards appointed by the city council) who has a financial interest that he or she has reason to believe may be affected by his or her official acts or actions shall disclose the precise nature of such financial interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the city council's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest, and shall abstain from discussion and voting. An elected city official (i.e., the mayor and members of the city council) shall disclose the nature of any financial interest he or she has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and city council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(e)  Prohibited contracts. The city council shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the city council or with a business in which a member of the city council has a financial interest. This shall not apply in the case of the designation of a bank or trust company as a depository of city funds; the borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; contracts entered into in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; or contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor or his designee prepares a written record explaining the emergency. 
(f)  Prohibited conduct at public meetings, hearings, events, and appearances. No city official shall: 
(1)  Be found guilty of the city's policy prohibiting the possession or consumption by employees of alcohol or illegal substance in any city facility, vehicle or work site at any appearance in which the city official is serving in his or her capacity as a city official; 
(2)  Treat any member of the general public or other city official or employee in a fashion designed to demean, degrade, or humiliate that individual; 
(3)  Intentionally and/or repeatedly violate Robert's Rules of Order, the general guidelines by which the city council and appointed boards of the city conduct their meetings. 
(g)  Exceptions. This Code section is not intended to apply in the following circumstances: 
(1)  City officials are also members of society and, therefore, share the same general personal and economic interests in the decisions and policies of government as all members of the community do; 
(2)  City officials retain their rights to publicly express their views on matters of general public interest, and to express their opinions on the effect of public actions on their personal or economic interests or rights; 
(3)  It is sound public policy for standards of ethical conduct for city officials to distinguish between those minor and inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free society, and those conflicts which are personal, material, and avoidable; 
(4)  City officials are entitled to engage in employment, professional or business activities, other than official duties, in order to support themselves and their families and to maintain a continuity of professional or business activity, and are entitled to maintain their investments; and 
(5)  It is possible and reasonable to require city officials to engage in employment, professional or business activities and to maintain investments which do not impede or undermine the integrity of their service to the community. 
(h)  Hearings and determinations. Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts that, if proven to be true, would constitute a violation of this Code section as determined by the city manager and the city attorney, the city council shall conduct a public hearing at which the accused city official shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either personally or through counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the city official in question. The primary actions available to the city council concerning a determined instance of violation by a city official of this Code section are: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand or similar public censure by the mayor and city council; and 
(2)  Request for resignation by the mayor and city council. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-84. - Grounds for removal. 
Should the mayor or any member of the council fail or refuse to perform the duties of his office for the term of three consecutive months, the office may be declared vacant by the remaining members. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-85—2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-106. - Appointment and qualifications. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-107. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by the Charter for city officers. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-108. - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in such capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise the city council or its committees or any city officer, when requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city business; 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the council or any committee thereof, and keep the Code of Ordinances of the city up-to-date and properly indexed; 
(3)  Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the council, or any of its committees, or by any city officer; 
(4)  Attend council meetings when requested for the purpose of giving the council any legal advice requested by its members; 
(5)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the city; 
(6)  Prepare, when authorized by the council, all charges and complaints against, and appear in the municipal court in the prosecution of every person charged with a violation of this Code or of a city ordinance or of any regulations adopted under authority of the Charter, and see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city; 
(7)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city unless otherwise directed by the council; 
(8)  Make immediate report to the council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has an interest; 
(9)  Make an annual report to the council of all pending litigation in which the city has an interest and the status thereof; 
(10)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the city: 
a.  All suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by him to the city, or any department or official thereof; and 
(11)  Render such other legal services as may be required by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-109. - Compensation. 
The city attorney shall bill the city for any services. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-110—2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 2-141. - Administrative service. 
The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following departments: 
(1)  Community development; 
(2)  Finance and administration; 
(3)  Parks and recreation; 
(4)  Police; and 
(5)  Public works. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-142. - Job descriptions list. 
A description of each department's composition, the method of appointment and the duties of the head of each department shall be found by department title in the list of job descriptions on file in the city clerk's office. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-143. - Duties of department heads. 
Except as otherwise provided within the Charter or by ordinance, each department head shall be responsible as prescribed in their respective job descriptions on file in the city clerk's office, the personnel policy, financial management policy and any other policies adopted by the city council for the daily administration and operations of their department. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-144. - Cooperation between departments. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the mayor, any other department such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-145. - City manager. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager and delegate all administrative and budgetary duties of the mayor to the city manager pursuant to section 3.07 of the City Charter. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-146—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 2-176. - Generally. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced, and adopted in the manner prescribed in this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-177. - Ordinance preparation. 
All ordinances shall be prepared by or referred to the city attorney. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-178. - Administrative staff approval. 
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the city council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or his authorized representative where there are substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution or contract document would devolve and be approved by the department head. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-179. - Introduction and adoption. 
(a)  Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the city council; except the mayor or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the council; and any councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted. 
(b)  No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance or section thereof shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed; and when practicable all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(c)  An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. 
(d)  Upon request by a councilmember the passage of an ordinance, resolution or contract may require two separate readings of the council, with the second reading being on a separate day from that of the first reading. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-180—2-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-211. - Polling place. 
Those persons living within the designated election district shall vote at their designated county precinct. 
Secs. 2-212—2-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-246. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-247. - Payments accepted by city. 
(a)  The city may accept payments in the form of cash, checks, money orders, credit cards or automated clearing house (ACH) credits. 
(b)  There shall be a service charge as fixed from time to time by the city council on all checks returned to the city and all of its agencies and departments. On any and all checks not validated within ten days, further legal action shall be taken at the expense of the check writer. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-248. - Deposits. 
All departments of the city shall forward a daily deposit of any funds collected from the public to the finance director or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-249. - Signing checks. 
All checks of the city shall be signed by two persons authorized from time to time to sign by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-250. - Publication of audited financial statement. 
Within six months after the close of the fiscal year, the audited financial statements of the city shall be posted on the city's official website as well as the official State of Georgia repository of audited financial statements for local governments. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-251. - Fee schedule; fees established by resolution. 
The city maintains a schedule of fees for permits, licenses, and other municipal charges. The amount of fees or charges imposed by the city including, but not limited to, those encompassed in the city's fee schedule, shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, as it deems necessary. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-252—2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGETS 

Sec. 2-271. - Budget; appropriation. 
The proposed budget and appropriations ordinance shall be prepared by the finance director and submitted to the mayor and city council no later than the first Monday of November of each year. The mayor and city council shall schedule such public hearings on the proposed budget as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5. The annual operating budget shall be adopted by the mayor and city council on or before the third Monday of November. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-272. - Amendments. 
The city council may amend the budget during or after the budget adoption in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-273. - Form and content of budget. 
(a)  The municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, by department, by fund, for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: 
(1)  Administration, operation and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown for salaries and wages for each such unit; 
(2)  Interest and debt redemption charges; 
(3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable; 
(4)  Deficits from the preceding year; 
(5)  Contingent expenditures in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation and maintenance expenditures; and 
(6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the city council. 
(b)  The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue and prior year fund balance. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-274. - Capital program. 
(a)  A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the same time the budget is introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
(b)  The information given in subsection (a) may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-275. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The city council may at any time during the fiscal year or 180 days subsequent to fiscal year end transfer part of or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office; and the city council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another; except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-276. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption of the budget or for which adequate provision was not made in the budget. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 2-277. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Secs. 2-278, 2-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPENDING LIMITATION POLICY 

Sec. 2-280. - Spending limitation policy—In general. 
(a)  Monthly expenditure list. 
(1)  The city manager is limited to expenditures as set forth in the Holly Springs Financial Management Policy. All such expenditures shall only be made if they are budgeted and if it is prudent use of city funds. 
(b)  Without prior mayor and council approval. There are certain functions and purchases that may be performed without prior mayor and council approval. They include: 
(1)  The emergency repair of city infrastructure and clearing of blocked streets and roads resulting from washouts or similar natural or man-made disasters. However, if such exceeds the city manager limitation as set forth in the Holly Springs Financial Management Policy, the city manager shall report the situation to the mayor and council within 48 hours following such repairs. 
(2)  The city manager's limitation does not apply for the purchase of routine administrative office supplies, fuel and oil for the city vehicles, payment of routine utility bills and other similar routine commitments by the city and where written agreements are established outlining the cost for certain specific services. 
(c)  Only with prior mayor and council approval. 
(1)  The purchase or lease of all new or used equipment or vehicles exceeding the approved capital asset value as set forth in the City of Holly Springs Financial Management Policy. 
(2)  Employment or contracting for service that will require monthly payments. 
(3)  Rental or purchase of real property, buildings, warehouse space, and other space and/or facilities to be used by the city. 
(4)  The establishment and/or cancellation of charge accounts, contracts, agreements, and other related transactions. 
(5)  The sale of equipment or vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1, 10-17-16 ) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted January 20, 2003 repealed in its entirety ch. 6, arts. I—VI, §§ 6-1—6-201, and enacted provisions intended for use as new ch. 6, arts. I—IV, §§ 6-1—6-80. To preserve the style of the Code, these new provisions have been included herein as arts. I—IV, §§ 6-1—6-127 at the discretion of the editor. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 9-1-1—9-1-30, 9-1-41, 9-1-42, and 9-1-51—9-1-56 of an ordinance adopted January 20, 1997. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; drinking in public, § 46-2; public drunkenness, § 46-3. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city manager or his designee. 
Agent means an individual who does not have an ownership interest in the licensed premises, who meets the requirements of section 6-60 of this chapter, who is employed in a management and designated by the owner of the licensed premises to be licensee. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Applicant means the person making application for a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages and, if applicable, any individual designated by that person to be licensee. 
Bottle club means any establishment or premises which is operated on a regular basis meeting any of the following conditions: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages sold on the premises; 
(2)  All members, guests or members of the public must provide their own alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; 
(3)  Fees or other charges are imposed on all members, guests or members of the public for admission to the premises; or for setups, i.e., liquid mixers, cups, ice and other items associated with the consumption of alcoholic beverages or for any other reason. 
BYOB establishment means any business location, including but not limited to restaurant, cafe, salon, art gallery, museum, recreational facility, auditorium, funeral home, cigar shop, retail establishment, or office, which admits individuals with alcoholic beverages on their person for consumption on the premises. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more of such street length is in use for business purposes. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. 
Closed function means an event sponsored by a nonprofit organization not open to the general public which must have a written, limited guest list prepared at least 48 hours in advance of the date on which the closed function is to occur, and which occurs at a city park or facility which is managed by the city. No pay-at-the-door guest[s] or drop-ins are to be permitted. Alcoholic beverages may be served without charge and consumed at closed functions, but the offer and sale of alcoholic beverages at such functions is prohibited; except that a general admission fee permitting attendance at the closed function may be collected in advance. 
College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state, and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Convenience store means a retail establishment whose primary business is the sale of pre-packaged or unprepared food and grocery items, which may sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and other goods commonly associated with the same. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act, being O.C.G.A. 42-8-60, or as may be amended from time to time. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Distance means the measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of a licensee in a direct line to the applicable property line or structure at issue under section 6-38 of this chapter. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any licensee. Should the proposed premises contain two or more customer entry doors, the distance shall be the shortest measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry as determined by city officials to the property line or structure at issue. 
Drink means any spirituous liquor not in its original package served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Farm winery means a domestic manufacture of wine in quantities of less than 100,000 gallons of wine per year, that is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. 3-6-21.1, or as may be amended from time to time. Provided a license is issued as required by this chapter, a farm winery is authorized to sell wine by the package, by the drink and operate a wine tasting facility on the premises of the farm winery without additional license requirements, except as is required in the Holly Springs zoning ordinance. 
Food caterer means any person whose primary business is the preparation of food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 24 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Grocery store means a retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
Growler means a professionally sanitized reusable container not exceeding 64 ounces in volume used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a capacity of at least 40, where meals are regularly served to such guest, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a bar, lounge, restaurant or nightclub on their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. 
License means the authorization by the mayor and city council to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages either by the package or consumption on the premises. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 4, Article 2 of Chapter 5, or Article 2 of Chapter 6 of Title 3 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room in which alcoholic beverages are sold, connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel as defined in this section with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air-conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 40. A lounge, as defined in this section, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant, shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefore. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "beer" and "malt beverage" are interchangeable throughout this chapter. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Managing capacity means the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operation, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the licensee. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means a person less than 18 years of age. 
Officer shall mean any officer, director, stockholder, owners, manager, or person who either has a financial interest of any nature in a bottle club or directs any policy of a bottle club. 
Person shall mean any individual, person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or organization. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Package store means a business establishment whose primary business activity is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
Permit holder means that person authorized with a work permit and designated by the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at the licensed premises. 
Person means any individual, sole proprietor, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether public, private or quasi-public. In the case of a partnership, it includes all partners. In the case of a corporation, it includes all principal shareholders. 
Pouring license means a license that authorizes on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Premises means floor space or curtilage thereof possessed, owned or controlled by the licensee or its agents of a business location to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Principal shareholder means a person who owns any shares of a corporation with less than 35 shareholders or more than five percent of the shares of a corporation which has more than 35 shareholders, except that a person who owns shares which are publicly traded shall not be deemed to be a principal shareholder or to have a beneficial interest in the corporation based solely on the fact of stock ownership. 
Private club means a nonprofit association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city, which has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued under this chapter, having at least 75 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholders or members, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use to its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meetings or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, a boardinghouse or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application for license, or any residence that shall be a nonconforming use in a commercial zone. 
Public park means any public lands owned or controlled and operated by this city, and county of this state, any municipality of the state, the state, the United States of America or any property owned or managed by a nonprofit organization, in and upon which facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee or his agent to the purchasers, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any spirituous liquor by the drink. 
Restaurant means any space, kept, used, maintained, advertised, offered and held out to the public where food, meals and/or snacks are prepared, served, or provided to members of the public for compensation. The serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted and food sales must be equal to or more than 50 percent of total sales. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. Such term shall also include, without limitation, the sale to any member of the public of any ticket or license, or the charging of any cover charge or fee, for admission to any event or premises where alcoholic beverages are available without further charge, as well as the sale of any ticket, stamp, token or similar item which may be redeemed or exchanged for alcoholic beverages. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, or as may be amended from time to time, including any public or private location that teaches the Georgia Prekindergarten Program and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not include residences where home study programs are located. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Spirituous or alcoholic liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
Underage person means any person below the age at which alcoholic beverages may be legally purchased in the state, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, or as may be amended from time to time. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, fortified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of any alcoholic beverages as defined in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 1, 4-24-17 ) 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan for the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the area and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values, and to protect against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages in one family or to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or business to offer any alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premise to any customer or employee without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-20-06) 
Sec. 6-4. - Territorial application of chapter. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply only within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale, possession, or consumption. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person on any public park except as otherwise set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Secs. 6-6—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-26. - License required for manufacture, sale. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured or stored, delivered sold at wholesale or retail, or manufactured in the city except under a license issued pursuant to this article and then only for specified beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. The requirements of this article shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code, and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this article, this article shall control. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, deliver, sell or offer to sell, or manufacture any alcoholic beverage, within the corporate city limits, without having the appropriate license issued upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(c)  All licenses shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by city ordinances and state law. 
(d)  Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)  Manufacturing of malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits, including the right to sell for consumption on the premises and the right to sell packages for consumption off the premises, as permitted by state law. 
(2)  Wholesale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits. 
(3)  Retail package sales of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine. 
(4)  Retail consumption on the premises of distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine. 
(5)  Brew pub, including the right to sell for consumption on the premises and the right to sell packages for consumption off the premises, as permitted by state law. 
(6)  Sunday sales permit. 
(7)  Ancillary tasting of wine and malt beverages for manufacturing or retail package. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. No. 18-2017, § 1, 9-25-17 ) 
State Law reference— Local permit or license for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-27. - On-premises consumption only in restaurants/lounges; Sunday sales permitted. 
(a)  A license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises shall only be granted to restaurants or lounges. 
(b)  Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink which allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises and the sale of malt beverages by the drink shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package. Such licensees shall have the right to sell wines, champagnes or malt beverages to the public by the bottle or package for consumption on the premises without the issuance of a separate retail license therefore. 
(c)  Licensed establishments may apply to the administrator for a permit for the purpose of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. No Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made by such an establishment without first having obtained the permit provided for in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 2, 5-16-16 ; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 2, 4-24-17 ) 
State Law reference— Governing authority to set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. 3-3-2(b)(1). 
Sec. 6-28. - Sunday permits. 
A separate permit is required for the Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages either for sale by package or for consumption on the premises. The following criteria are applicable to such sales: 
(1)  The establishment holds a valid city alcoholic beverage pouring license. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold and served for consumption on the premises only on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. Hotels or motels containing such establishments shall derive a minimum of 75 percent of their total annual gross income from the sales of prepared meals or food and from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(3)  Applicants for Sunday sales permits shall make written application to the city clerk at the city hall for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the city, supplying such information as may be requested. Prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant must make available records for determining whether the applicant meets the requirements of subsection (2) of this section. The permit may be denied or revoked for failure to conform or failure to produce satisfactory evidence of conforming as referenced in subsection 6-146(d). 
(4)  Annual Sunday sales permit renewals shall be made in the same manner and during the same time periods as other alcoholic beverage license renewals. All holders and applicants of an alcoholic beverage license must make available records for audit purposes upon the request of the city manager or his or her designee. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage holder or applicant shall be open for inspection at any time for agents of the City of Holly Springs and the police department. 
(5)  Sunday sales permits are not transferable. 
(6)  The Sunday sales permit shall be automatically revoked if the alcoholic beverage license is revoked. 
(7)  When any application for a Sunday sales permit has been denied for a location, no application for a Sunday sales permit may be made for the same location for a period of 12 months from the date of filing of the application which was denied. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 12-19-11, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 3, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-29. - Application—Filing; form; contents; timing. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this chapter shall make written application to the city clerk at the city hall for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Such applications shall state the name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is other than an individual, the application shall state the owner of the license, the name of the proposed licensee and a d/b/a name of the proposed licensed premises, if applicable. The application shall state the address where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and principal shareholders; and such other information as may be required by the administrator, or the police department, and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(b)  All applications for a license under this chapter shall be reviewed administratively by the administrator, the community development director, and chief of police upon filing. Applications must demonstrate compliance with all sections of this chapter, in addition to requirements by state law and other locally adopted ordinances. The failure or inability of the application to meet the minimum requirements set forth under this chapter or other applicable state and local codes shall render the application void and the administrator shall reject and return the application to the persons desiring to obtain a license, indicating the reason(s) for rejection. 
(c)  The minimum requirements of this chapter to make application for a license shall be met and demonstrated upon applying. No exemptions to any provisions of this chapter and the requirements set forth are authorized. 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons with ownership interest in the business of selling retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and what intervals it is paid; 
(4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and 
(5)  Any other information called for by the administrator, the police department, or city attorney. 
(d)  After administratively accepting the application for license, should additional information be needed by the city, the persons applying shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the city, through any authorized officer, such as the administrator or chief of police, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the city through its duly authorized representative, such as the administrator, chief of police, or city attorney, and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the issuance or denial of such license. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic denial of such application. 
(e)  All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons with ownership interest in the business of selling retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and what intervals it is paid; 
(4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and 
(5)  Any other information called for by the administrator, the police department, or city attorney. 
(f)  Each application furnished under this section must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(g)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any new license under this chapter and as a prerequisite to the issuance of a renewed license under this chapter, all applicants and existing licensees shall be required to execute and deliver to the city a verified statement indicating receipt of Holly Springs Code of Ordinances relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(h)  After staff has determined that an application is complete, the administrator shall render a decision not later than 45 days. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 2-24-11, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 2; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 4, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-30. - Same—Investigation; report. 
(a)  All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the police department, which shall report its recommendation within a reasonable time thereon to the administrator. A copy of the report shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  All licensed premises shall be open for inspection by a city inspector or member of the city police department, or any other person so designated by the mayor, council, city manager or chief of police. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 3) 
Sec. 6-31. - Same—Advertisement of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for license under this chapter shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement at least one time per week for two consecutive weeks in the daily paper published in the county in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and date and time any comments or objections to the application must be submitted in writing to the city clerk. The advertisement referred to in this section shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column advertisement. 
(b)  The running of the advertisement required in this section in a newspaper may be concurrent with the time after the application for license is filed, and if one day's advertisement in two weeks is not made before the filing of the application, the application shall state that the advertisement is being made. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following:" (Name and address of applicants, partners and corporation officers) has applied for a (specific license applied for) alcohol license with the City of Holly Springs to be located at (physical address of proposed business) and the Manager/Owner, (all members and addresses of owners of the business and/or corporation) . Any comments or objections to this application must be in writing and received by the City Clerk of the City of Holly Springs, at 3237 Holly Springs Parkway on or before 5:00 p.m., on this day ____________ of ____________ , 20 ____________ . For more information, call City Hall (770)345-5536. All interested persons take notice." The sign or signs shall not be less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible to persons using such public areas. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 4; Ord. of 2-23-12, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 5, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-32. - Same—Approval. 
After the completion of procedural requirements of the application phase, the administrator will approve or deny the application. Annual renewals shall be processed by staff; ownership changes shall be reviewed by staff and determined by the administrator. With the exception of an ownership change, no license shall be issued until it has been approved by the administrator. Denial of applications shall be provided to the applicant in writing providing the reasons for denial and mailed to the applicant. The applicant shall be notified of the right to appeal the denial to the mayor and council as provided in section 6-62(d). 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-21-11(1), § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 5) 
Sec. 6-33. - Same—Acceptance and consideration after rejection. 
When an application for license under this chapter is denied by the city, the city shall not accept or consider an application for a license under this chapter from that applicant or licensee within 12 months of the denial. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 16, 2012, § 1, repealed § 6-34, which pertained to architectural standards and derived from Ord. of January 20, 2003 and Ord. of January 19, 2012. 
Sec. 6-35. - Citizenship, residence and age requirement. 
(a)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a corporation any license for the sale of alcoholic beverage shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either the principal shareholder thereof, or an agent is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either the general partner of the partnership, or an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(c)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor, provided that the sole proprietor works in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises. If the sole proprietor does not work in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises, then the license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor and an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(d)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be a U.S. citizen, or a legal alien for at least three years prior to making application. 
(e)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be 21 years of age or older at the time the application for a license is filed. 
(f)  The principal shareholder in the case of a corporate applicant, the general partner in the case of a partnership applicant, the sole proprietor in the case of a sole proprietor applicant or the agent of such applicant shall be a resident of the State of Georgia at the time the application for a license is filed or renewed. 
(g)  The licensee shall notify the city in writing and shall keep such notification current, of the name, address and telephone number for such licensee and the agent of such licensee at such address and telephone number for the purpose of receiving communication and notices required under this chapter. 
(h)  All applicants for licenses under this article and all current managers of establishments for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of the state of Georgia for a period of one year proceeding the time of the filing of the applications. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 7) 
Sec. 6-36. - Location of business—Districts where permitted. 
(a)  Package distilled spirits. No license to engage in retail sale of distilled spirits in package form shall be issued to any person for the operation of such business except within the areas known as distilled spirits retail sales district and have frontage along a major local street. However, a new license may be issued to a legally nonconforming location where a prior license was once valid, in the event that no intervening use occupied the specified location. An intervening use is defined as any use other than a "package store." Package stores shall not be non-conforming uses, as defined by the Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance. Should a package store cease operations, change ownership, lapse or fail to renew the occupation tax permit by the penalty deadline, receive a revocation of occupation tax permit or be closed under the provisions of this Code, completion of the application requirements of this Code shall be made anew and a new license shall be required to operate. 
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, state, and local codes, licenses for package stores shall only be issued under the following provisions: 
(1)  Package store locations, known as "distilled spirits retail sales districts" are hereby created and illustrated on the map by the same name, attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and on file in the office of the administrator and chief of police. 
(2)  Of the four districts illustrated on the map, only one package store shall be considered for license per district. Should a package store already exist in a district, a new license in the said district is ineligible. 
(3)  Together with the application, persons seeking a package store shall submit a letter from the property owner, stating that the use is acceptable and the lease will be granted or property conveyed, should the license be approved. 
(4)  Persons seeking to operate a package store must first demonstrate to the administrator and chief of police that the proposed establishment and owners meet the minimum requirements of this chapter as stated in section 6-29. Upon demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the proposed package store, if eligible, must apply for and receive a conditional use permit (CUP) from the city council, in accordance with the Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance. If the CUP is approved by city council, the persons seeking to operate a package store must then proceed through the alcohol licensing application process set forth in section 6-29 et seq. 
(5)  Package store alcohol licenses and conditional use permits are non-transferable and shall not be considered non-conforming uses. 
(6)  The four districts illustrated on the map are aligned with planned commercial areas that the city council believes are appropriate areas for package stores to locate, however, this section and the districts illustrated are not intended to guarantee that a license will be issued or that the city manager is obligated to issue a license. 
(b)  All licenses granted herein shall be further subject to O.C.G.A. 3-3-21, or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-19-2007; Ord. of 4-19-10, § 1; Ord. of 2-24-11, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 8; Ord. of 4-16-12, § 2; Ord. No. 22-2016, § 1, 11-21-16 ; Ord. 16-2017, § 1, 8-28-17 ) 
Exhibit A 
Sec. 6-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 16, 2012, § 3, repealed § 6-34, which pertained to location of business—distance from residence and derived from Ord. of January 20, 2003; Ord. of March 19, 2007; an Ord. of June 20, 2011 and Ord. of January 19, 2012. 
Sec. 6-38. - Same—Distance from schools, churches, parks, hospitals and public buildings. 
(a)  No license for the retail package sale of distilled spirits shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 300 feet of a church building or at a distance of 600 feet of school or college grounds. No license for the sale of wine and/or malt beverages shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 300 feet of school or college grounds. No license for the sale of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 300 feet of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(b)  No license for the retail package sale of distilled spirits shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 200 feet of a daycare facility. Additionally, no license may share an ingress/egress of a daycare facility. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Code section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only when such location is located in a commercial sector with a mixed use overlay or within the Holly Springs Town Center District. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-19-2007; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 9; Ord. of 4-16-12, § 4; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1, 5-20-13 ) 
Sec. 6-39. - Existing licensed business; compliance. 
(a)  To prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the city in compliance with city ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the license and continuing to be in compliance therewith shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter involving residence, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. Renewals of such licenses shall also be deemed in compliance under this chapter to the extent provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Transfers of business ownership at the same location shall be deemed in compliance under this chapter with regard to requirements involving distance, location, parking and type of building structure, provided that such business complied with such requirements at the time a license was first issued for such business and further provided that such business has continuously been in compliance with such requirements. 
(c)  Business transfers to new locations require a new license with review and approval by the administrator ; in addition, ownership transfers at a licensed location mast be approved by the administrator, with the new owner applying for a new license, complying with all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-25; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-21-11(1), § 2; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 10) 
Sec. 6-40. - Same—Additional considerations. 
The administrator may take into consideration in its discretion the zoning of the surrounding area, the nature of the area, and the impact on traffic as factors in the consideration of a license application under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 11) 
Sec. 6-41. - Conditions disqualifying application. 
(a)  No application for any license under this chapter shall be granted, retained, renewed or transferred where the application or the evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  Evidence that the applicant, licensee or any individual having an ownership interest in said license, has been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony. 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee has had any license issued under the police powers of any county, state, municipality, or other government entity, revoked. 
(3)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee is family, as family is defined in this chapter, to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof. This subsection shall not restrict a farm winery from selling at retail or wholesale. 
(4)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee has failed to answer any question on the alcoholic beverage application accurately or failed to provide accurate information to the mayor and city council, police department, business license division staff or any city official or city employee. 
(b)  The city clerk shall have the authority to deny an application for a new license under this chapter upon a showing that any one or more of the above conditions exists without a hearing before the mayor and city council. Upon such a denial, the applicant shall have a right to appeal to the mayor and city council within ten days of the decision to deny on such basis. Upon the showing that one or more of the conditions outlined in section 6-59 exists on an existing licensee, the licensee shall be entitled to notice and a hearing pursuant to section 6-62 herein prior to any action taken on said license by the city. 
(c)  In addition to the standards stated elsewhere in this chapter, the following standards may also apply to the issuance, retention, renewal, transfer or denial of a license for alcoholic beverages either by the package or for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  Evidence that the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a five year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant has insufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(3)  Evidence that, despite compliance with the minimum distance requirement, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity causes underage persons to frequent the area. 
(4)  Evidence that the location and type of structure could create a difficulty in police supervision. 
(5)  Evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property owners in the area. 
(6)  Evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking which would result in parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(7)  Evidence that the conduct of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of underage persons, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises by underage persons, or causes the police to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. More than three underage persons without supervision of a parent or one authorized by a parent shall be prima facie evidence of a congregation of underage persons. 
(8)  Evidence of unusual police observation or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance regulating such business, if the applicant is a previous holder of a license. 
(9)  Evidence that the application is a guise or dummy application for another person who cannot meet the qualifications of this chapter for the issuance of a license. 
(10)  Evidence that the applicant or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, principal shareholder, general partner or managing agent is delinquent in the payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the city, the county or the state. 
(11)  Evidence that the applicant, licensee or any individual having an ownership interest in said license, has been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any misdemeanor of moral turpitude or DUI. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 12) 
Sec. 6-42. - Limitations on number of licenses within a family. 
(a)  No application for a retail license to sell distilled spirits in the package at retail shall be granted where any person or member of his family owns, holds or controls any interest whatsoever in more than one license to engage in the business of selling distilled spirits by the package at retail in the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Interest in a license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the owner of a license, a co-owner of a license, a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license, a shareholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of a license, an owner, lessor, sublessor or shareholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain owning or leasing any real estate which is occupied by a retail liquor store or shares in any of the income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a retail liquor store. 
(c)  All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to all interest, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, in retail liquor stores, this shall include the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which such retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the administrator. 
(d)  Any change in any relationship declared in this section must be filed with the administrator and failure to so file within a period of 30 days after such change is made shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license by the administrator. 
(e)  No retail licensee or person having interest therein shall have any business or commercial transactions with a wholesaler or manufacture of alcoholic beverage other than the purchase and payment for alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  No retail license shall be approved where the licensee pays to any person any rent, management fee, or other payment based on the profits or sales of such licensed store. Any legal, accounting, management or other consulting fees and all rentals shall be in an amount which is reasonable for the area, and consistent with amounts paid by other similar businesses and other retail establishments. All retail establishments shall maintain accurate books which correctly reflect all business transactions and shall make them available for inspection and audit by the city. Such records shall be maintained for a period of seven years. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or other person having interest therein to have any connection, either directly or indirectly, in any scheme or device to obtain an interest in a retail package store, being more than as allowed by this chapter, or to engage in any scheme or device to use another person as a quasi or dummy to obtain a retail license. 
(h)  Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause to revoke any license issued under this chapter in which such violators shall have an interest. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 13) 
Sec. 6-43. - City official, spouse, children prohibited from interest in license. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or full-time appointed official or any employee of the city, or his spouse or minor children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest as defined in this article in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city unless one of the following conditions is met. 
(1)  The interest was obtained prior to election or appointment to office; 
(2)  The interest is declared in writing at the time the application for the license is made and the elected or full-time appointed official shall not participate in official action or consideration of license; or 
(3)  The interest obtained in an ongoing business holding a license is declared in writing at the time of the acquisition and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-44. - Wholesale licenses prohibited from holding interest in other licenses. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license under the terms of this chapter. This section shall not apply to farm wineries. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-45. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval; issuance. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained not later than two weeks from the date of approval of the application by the administrator, and if not so obtained, the license granted by the administrator shall be void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city the required fee, the license shall be issued, subject to 6-47(a). 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 14) 
Sec. 6-46. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
Where a building in which a retailer intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-47. - Time limit for commencement of business; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter must within three months after the issuance of such license open for business or be working under a valid building permit. Applicant may seek a one-month extension after showing cause in writing to the administrator. The administrator shall hear and decide all extension requests within seven working days of request. Applicant may not seek more than three extensions. Failure to open the licensed establishment as required within the period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and revocation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder unless extended by the administrator. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall upon completion of such three-month automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be revoked without the necessity of any further action of the administrator. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-15-05(2); Ord. of 1-19-12, § 15) 
Sec. 6-48. - License fees; duration. 
(a)  The annual license fee for each classification of license under this chapter shall be set by the mayor and city council in the master fee schedule. 
(b)  The schedule of fees for each license classification under this chapter shall be on file at the Holly Springs City Hall. 
(c)  All licenses shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. 
(d)  In the case of revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of a full year since payment of the license fee, the holder of the license shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(e)  Each person manufacturing or selling distilled spirits, beer and or wine in the city shall pay an annual license as detailed under the alcohol fee schedule to be maintained at city hall. 
(f)  The collection of the annual license fee by the city shall be governed by an established policy, adopted and amended with resolution by city council from time to time. 
(g)  Application and license fees are not refundable. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-08(1), § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 16) 
Sec. 6-49. - Excise taxes. 
The following excise taxes shall be paid to the city: 
(1)  An excise tax computed at a rate of $0.22 per liter which shall be paid to the city on all distilled spirits sold in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the governing authority by the wholesaler on all distilled spirits sold to retail dealers in the city as follows: 
a.  Each wholesaler selling, shipping or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any retail dealer, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery to each retail dealer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
b.  The $0.22 per liter rate shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler to sell ship, or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to a retail dealer without collecting the tax. It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any distilled spirits on which tax has not been paid. 
(2)  In addition, there is an excise tax computed at the rate of three percent of the charge to the public on sales of distilled spirits by the drink. Such tax shall be paid to the city by the licensee on all distilled spirits sold to customers in the city on the tenth day of the following month. Licensees collecting the excise tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. §§ 48-8-1 et seq. 
(3)  An excise tax computed at a rate of $0.05 per 12-ounce container, or proportionately on containers of various sizes, where the malt beverage is sold in a bottle, can or other container; and $6.00 per container of not more than 15.5 gallons where the malt beverage is sold in a barrel or bulk container for draft or tap on all malt beverages sold within the city, to be paid by each wholesaler selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages to any pouring or retail outlet. Each wholesaler selling, shipping or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any retail dealer, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery to each retail dealer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(4)  An excise tax computed at a rate of $0.22 per liter on all wine sold within the city to be paid by each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering wine to any pouring outlet. Each wholesaler selling, shipping or in any way delivering wine to any retail dealer, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery to each retail dealer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(5)  The above per liter excise tax shall be prorated so that all containers of wine shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any wine to a pouring outlet without collecting the tax. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which such tax has not been paid. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to the following: 
a.  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
b.  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state under the Constitution of the United States; 
c.  Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or 
d.  Wine which contains less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 17; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 6, 5-16-16 ) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax authorized, O.C.G.A. 3-4-80. 
Sec. 6-50. - Gross revenue limitation on retail package licensees. 
At all retail package license locations, the gross revenue derived from the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be limited to 50 percent of the total revenue of the business at that location. The licensee shall make available sufficient records for inspection by the city to verify the revenue of the business. 
(Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-41; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-51. - Separation of malt beverages and wine from other merchandise. 
All licensees for retail package sales of malt beverages and wine shall separate the malt beverages and wine from their nonalcoholic merchandise so that the malt beverages and wine may be closed off from the rest of the premises. At all times when the sale of malt beverages and wine is prohibited the same shall be closed off. 
(Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-42; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-52. - Penalty for late fee payment. 
Any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, or other payment due to the city of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, or other charge, a separate penalty pursuant to state law (O.C.G.A. 48-2-44) will also be assessed to the balance beginning 120 days after the due date. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. No. 22-2016, § 2, 11-21-16 ; Ord. No. 05-2017, § 1, 3-20-17 ) 
Sec. 6-53. - Payment of fees, number of license, renewal; annual sales statement, inspection of records. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew their license shall file a renewal application accompanied by the requisite license fee with the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the city clerk on or before November 15 of each year without penalty, and not later than December 15. 
(b)  Applications for renewal filed after November 15 and on or before December 15 shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 6-52, in addition to other remedies under state or federal law and/or actions taken by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  No renewal license shall be granted on an application filed after December 15, but such application shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued. For purposes of this section, the date of postmark or actual receipt by the city shall constitute the day of filing. 
(d)  A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(e)  Each licensee shall provide the city with a certified statement prepared by his bookkeeper or accountant of the gross sales of the business for the preceding calendar year. Copies of the state sales tax returns for the same period shall be attached to the statement. Such statement must be properly notarized and certified to be true and correct by the licensee or his agent under penalty of law, and shall accompany the basic license fee payment on or before December 15 of each year. 
(f)  Any holder of or applicant for an alcoholic beverage license must make available for audit any and all records concerning such business upon request of the administrator or his representative. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage license holder or applicant for same shall be open for inspection at any time for agents of the City of Holly Springs and the police department. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 18) 
Sec. 6-54. - Supplemental requirements for the sale of spirituous liquors for on-premises consumption. 
No license for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, or private club, lounge or nightclub as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2016, § 7, adopted May 16, 2016 , repealed § 6-55, which pertained to food caterer permits and derived from Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 19. 
Sec. 6-56. - Name of license and license number to be displayed by package stores. 
The license itself shall be prominently displayed so as to be visible to the public inside the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-57. - Renewal—Required annually. 
All licensees under this chapter shall, in order to continue such business, renew their licenses annually. Renewing licenses are not required to meet the posting and advertising provisions of this chapter when the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  Same applicant and information as contained in the formerly approved application. 
(2)  Updated background check for criminal record or alcoholic violations in the past year conducted by police department. 
(3)  No prior, existing, or pending violations of the alcoholic beverage ordinance. 
(4)  Compliance with all State of Georgia alcoholic beverage regulatory statutes and regulations. 
(5)  Timely payment of renewal fees and timely submission of renewed information. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 20) 
Sec. 6-58. - Same—Application for existing licensed premises. 
Any applicant for renewal of a license on an existing licensed location shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this chapter, if not originally in violation; provided, that no license may be issued in violation of state distance requirements. An application for license renewal filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this chapter for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-59. - Transfer of license, restrictions. 
Licenses, under this chapter shall not be transferable as to location or ownership, except upon approval by the administrator and issuance of and payment for the license, subject to the following: 
(1)  In case of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, such license may, in the discretion of the administrator be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(2)  Nothing in this section, however shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners, who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(3)  Nothing in this section, however shall prohibit one or more principal shareholders in a corporation holding a license to withdraw from the corporation, who were principal shareholders at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however serve to bring any new ownership into the corporation. 
(4)  Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new location shall be considered under and meet the requirements of a new license under this chapter. Provided, however, where a transfer of an existing location is approved and there is no change in the ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(5)  It shall be deemed a change of ownership when an owner or licensee adds an additional partner or partners or an additional principal shareholder or principal shareholders. 
(6)  All applicants for transfer of location shall be posted as required by section 6-56. 
(7)  A change in ownership requires an application for a new license and the payment of a new license fee according to the procedures in this chapter. However, the administrator is authorized to render final decisions upon ownership changes that do not affect a transfer of location. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to promptly report any changes of any kind in the ownership to the city clerk. 
(9)  If a licensee desires to sell the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser of the business must be informed by the licensee that the purchaser of the business must make application for and obtain a license prior to operating the business. Any transfer of the business for which the license is issued without the new owners being licensed shall cause the automatic revocation of the license. 
(10)  In the event that an alcoholic beverage license is issued to a corporation and an agent, and the owner of the license desires re-issuance of the license under an alternative agent, such re-issuance shall not be deemed to be a change of ownership; provided however, that the owner of the license provided the name of a principal shareholder or alternative agent for purposes of background investigation, which may include fingerprinting of such person. No licensee under this chapter shall reissue to such designated alternative person unless and until the city grants approval of such background investigation. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-21-11(1), § 3; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 21; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 8, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-60. - Licenses constitute grant or privilege. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Holly Springs, and is subject to amendments to this chapter or state law upon hearing prior to revocation with or without cause." 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-61. - Procedure for suspension and revocation. 
(a)  In the event a license to sell alcoholic beverages is suspended as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance to the facility wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: 
"THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN SUSPENDED FROM ____________ TO ____________ AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON, AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE" 
In the event that the license to sell alcoholic beverages is revoked as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: 
"THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN REVOKED AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON, AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE" 
The sign shall stay in place for the period of suspension or in the case of a revocation for a period of 30 days. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-62. - Penalties; revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon conviction in the municipal court of any violation of any provision of this chapter, unless otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense, minimum fine of $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense, if within 12 months of the first, minimum fine of $750.00; 
(3)  Third offense, if within 12 months of second, minimum fine of $1,000.00; or 
(4)  As set by the municipal judge as allowed by the Charter. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a), a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked or placed on probation by the administrator for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay excise fees or any other fees or taxes required by the city. 
(2)  Disorderly conduct of the establishment. 
(3)  Acts of disturbance on the establishment. 
(4)  Violence on the establishment. 
(5)  Gambling on the establishment. 
(6)  Conviction of violating this chapter by any court with jurisdiction. 
(7)  Charges of or conviction of a felony by the licensee or any manager. 
(8)  Creation or maintenance of a nuisance on the establishment. 
(9)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation given in the application for the license. 
(10)  Multiple citation violations (two or more) of any provision of this article. 
(11)  Any and other just cause. 
(c)  If the administrator shall determine that a license should be suspended, revoked or placed on probation, the following procedures shall apply: The administrator, shall issue a notice of the proposed suspension, revocation or probation of any license, which notice shall include the address of the location and the specific allegations as to the violations of any provision of this chapter or any other provision of this Code. Further, any license issued under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the administrator in its notice for any reason outlined in subsection (b) of this section if it is determined that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. The notice shall be in writing and delivered by certified mail or in person. The notice shall include notice of the right to appeal the decision before the mayor and city council prior to the proposed action taking effect. The licensee shall have seven days from the date of the notice to appeal the decision. The request shall be in writing and delivered to the administrator. The appeal shall be held at the next regular scheduled council meeting unless the licensee shall agree to an extension of time. 
(d)  Procedure for denials, suspensions, revocations, probation. 
(1)  Any appeal scheduled before the mayor and city council under this chapter may be continued at the request of the applicant or licensee, for any good cause shown. 
(2)  At the appeal, the administrator and the applicant/licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and examine witnesses. The rules of evidence applicable to the superior courts shall apply but shall be liberally construed to allow the mayor and city council to arrive at the truth. Testimony may be presented only through live witnesses or written, sworn statements. 
(3)  After hearing all evidence, the mayor and city council may affirm, rescind or modify in any way the action taken by the administrator. 
(4)  The vote shall be governed by the requirements for voting as apply to any ordinance voted on by the mayor and city council. 
(5)  The decision of the mayor and city council shall be made in writing and shall state the reasons for the decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(6)  The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within 30 days of the date of the written decision. 
(e)  The decision of the mayor and city council shall be binding upon the retail party or holder of the license. 
(f)  When the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to the same person at that location for a period of 24 months from the date of revocation. 
(g)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in those products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city council or any municipal officer. 
(h)  All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be criminally responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee thereof; provided the municipal court may only impose a just fine under this subsection. 
(Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-26; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-19-2007; Ord. of 6-17-07; Ord. of 12-17-07; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 22) 
Sec. 6-63. - State revocation revokes city license. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in such products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-64. - Removal of signs where license revoked suspended or denied. 
When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked, suspended or denied, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased, including any and all advertisement signs shall be removed from such place of business, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the police department of notice of such revocation, suspension or denial, the police department shall take necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-65. - False information in application. 
Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for any license or permit issued under this chapter shall be unlawful, and shall be the cause for the denial thereof, and if any such license or permit has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute due cause for the revocation of such license. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-66. - Police investigation of application. 
All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the police department, including but not limited to, an investigation into the criteria as outlined in sections 6-54 and 6-65 of this chapter. After such investigation, the police department shall report its recommendation to the administrator. No further action shall be taken by the city or by the applicant with respect to any application until completion by the police department of its investigation. Once the applicant has submitted all of the required information and provided any additional information requested by the administrator or the police department, the police department shall make its recommendation. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-67. - Joint sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink and by the package prohibited. 
A pouring license shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the bottle or package and exception of wine sales at retail stores in which tasting events are hosted as a special event is allowed, licensee shall make application for the special event through the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 6-68. - Mandatory workshop for licensee; mandatory training for permit holders. 
(a)  Licensee policy workshop. 
(1)  Effective January 1, 2003 all applicants for an alcoholic beverage license shall attend an alcohol sales and service policy workshop for owners and managers which workshop shall be approved by the administrator. The applicant shall attend such workshop prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license. Such workshop shall be at the applicant's expense. If at any time the during the application review process, the applicant has not provided evidence of attending such workshop that the applicant has successfully completed the alcohol sales and service training workshop, the application shall be denied. This provision shall not be waived. 
(2)  Effective January 1, 2003, all existing licensees shall have three years in which to provide evidence to the administrator that the licensee has successfully completed an alcohol sales and service policy workshop. Such workshop shall be approved by the administrator and shall be at the licensee's expense. In the event that the licensee fails to timely provide evidence of attending such workshop, the alcoholic beverage license shall expire on January 1, 2006 and the license shall not be renewed until the city had received evidence from the licensee that the licensee has successfully attended and completed such workshop. This provision shall not be waived. 
(b)  Training of permit holders. 
(1)  Effective January 1, 2003, licensees are required to provide information to all permit holders on provisions of the law of this state regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated and underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(2)  Effective January 1, 2003, licensees shall provide regular information and training to all permit holders on the methods, procedures and measures to be taken in order to request, obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Detailed records of such training, including the date, time, persons attending and substance of such training shall be maintained for a minimum of 48 months of the training. Evidence of such training records shall be made available upon request for inspection by the city. 
(c)  The failure of the licensee to comply with this subsection regarding the attendance of a policy workshop and the training of permit holders shall be grounds for due cause to suspend and/or revoke the license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 23) 
Sec. 6-69. - Manager's permit. 
(a)  Every person licensed under this chapter for the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine may employ one or more persons as a manager for the licensed establishment. The manager and/or licensee shall be at the licensee's premises during all times alcoholic beverages are being sold therein, and such manager and/or licensee shall be in charge of the premises and responsible for the actions of the employees and customers of the licensed establishment. The manager and licensee shall obtain a manager's permit as provided in this section, and this permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Each person wishing to obtain a manager's permit must make application on a form provided by the police department within five business days of the date of employment. Upon receiving the completed application, the police department shall complete a criminal history check and arrange to have the applicant photographed and to place these records on file in the police department. The police department shall be authorized to issue a manager's permit after verifying the facts in the application. 
(c)  Licensees and managers under this section shall keep a copy of the permit on file at all times in the establishment and shall make these permits available for inspection during operating hours. 
(d)  If any manager of the licensee shall cease to be an employee of the licensee or shall cease to be a resident of the state or ceases to meet the requirements of this section, the licensee shall notify the administrator of such event and shall name a new manager within five business days after such event occurs. Such new manager shall meet all the requirements of this Code for managers. The city shall charge a fee, set by the mayor and city council, for a change of the manager; however, if the licensee fails to notify the city and name a new manager within the five business day period, the city may charge a fee, set by the mayor and city council, for a change of manager and/or revoke the alcohol license. The schedule of fees shall be included in the master fee schedule which is on file at the Holly Springs City Hall. 
(Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-52; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 24; Ord. of 2-23-12, § 2; Ord. of 6-4-12, § 1) 
Sec. 6-70. - Permit holders of licensees—Fingerprinting, investigation, reports. 
(a)  For whom required. The following persons shall be required to apply for and obtain a valid work permit from the city: 
(1)  All employees and independent contractors who sell and/or serve alcoholic beverages at a consumption on-premises establishment licensed under this chapter. 
(2)  Any person acting in a managerial capacity and licensee at a licensed premise, regardless of whether such person sells and/or serves alcoholic beverages. 
For purposes of this section, a work permit shall mean either a server's or manager's permit. 
(b)  Exemption. The licensee to whom an alcoholic beverage license has been issued under this chapter is not required to pay an additional fee for a work permit. 
(c)  Application and issuance. Subject to the time limit to make application for a work permit as provided herein, no person requiring a work permit may be employed with such responsibilities by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been issued a work permit from the Holly Springs Police Department. All applicants under this section shall be investigated by the police department, which may include, among other things, fingerprinting, an investigation of the criminal record, if any, of the applicant. No work permit shall be issued to any person who, within two years prior to the filing of the application for such permit has a felony violation or has violated any federal, state or local law, relating to the use or sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, an indictment or a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a violation. No work permit shall be issued by the police department if the applicant has violated any of the provisions of section 6-79 hereof. Any applicant who is not issued a work permit shall have the right to appeal such decision within ten business days to the administrator. 
(d)  Time limit. All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, within five business days after the date of their first day of employment in an establishment holding a license for alcoholic beverages, report to the police department for the purpose of applying for a work permit. 
(e)  Investigation and report. The police department shall conduct a complete and exhaustive search relative to any police record of the applicant under this section. If there is a record of a violation of this chapter, the chief of police shall issue a letter to the applicant, and a copy to the administrator, stating that the applicant is ineligible for a work permit. If it should be found that there is a violation of this chapter of the applicant, the chief of police shall refer the matter to the administrator for action and shall notify the employer that such person is not eligible for a work permit. When the administrator has heard the matter at a date and time to be determined by the administrator, he may issue a letter declaring such applicant to be eligible for a work permit if, in the discretion of the administrator, the record would not disqualify such person. 
(f)  Term; fee. Any work permit issued under this section shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked by the administrator. The police department may prescribe regulations certifying the eligibility for continued employment without the necessity of the employee being fingerprinted. The city shall charge a fee, set by the mayor and city council, for a work permit. The schedule of fees shall be included in the master fee schedule which is on file at the Holly Springs City Hall. 
(g)  List of employees to be filed. It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police or his designee the names of all persons holding a work permit, with their home address, home telephone number and place of employment. Changes in the list of persons holding a work permit, including the names of new persons requiring or holding a work permit, must be filed with the chief of police or his designee within five business days from the date of any such changes. 
(h)  Possession of permits by employees. Permit holders shall at all times during their working hours have the permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(i)  Permit holder on the premises. At all times that the business is open the licensee shall have at least one permit holder on the premises. 
(j)  Grounds for suspension, revocation, probation. No work permit which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued under this section shall be suspended, revoked or placed on probation except for due cause as defined in this subsection, and after a hearing and upon written notice to the permit holder of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which such hearing shall be held. A five business day notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the administrator may deem the circumstances to be justified. "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of the permit shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages or the violation of any state, federal or local ordinances set out in this chapter; or for the omission or falsification of any facts in any application; or for any reason which would authorize the refusal of the issuance of a permit; or any violation of this chapter. All hearings shall be before the administrator at a specially called meeting and shall be conducted in the manner provided in section 6-62. After the hearing, if the administrator determines due cause exists, the administrator may suspend, revoke or place the applicant on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 25; Ord. of 6-4-12, § 2) 
Sec. 6-71. - Special event. 
In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at an authorized special event on public property, the event organizer shall be required to supply the following documents and adhere to the following regulations: 
(1)  Apply for a special event permit and submit with the application the special event permit fee as set forth in the City of Holly Springs Municipal Services Master Fee Schedule. This permit must be posted in a conspicuous location at the special event function at all times during the event. The special permit shall specify the hours in which the function is permitted to function. 
(2)  Alcohol for the event shall be purchased within the City of Holly Springs, if available, and proof of transaction shall be supplied to the administrator, unless the event venue specifies that alcohol must be purchased from an authorized vendor. In that event, only alcohol purchased from the authorized vendor may be permitted at the special event. 
(3)  Provide the boundaries of the special event, and shall state whether alcohol will be permitted within the entire area of the special event, or whether alcohol shall be permitted only within a marked off area. 
(4)  The organization sponsoring any special event function, which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages, must hire an off-duty police officer or officers to monitor the function. The Chief of Police shall review the application and inform the event organizer how many officers will be required for their event. 
(5)  When a special event permit is approved and issued, persons attending the special event shall be authorized to possess and consume alcohol on public property only within the specified boundaries of the special event. 
(6)  The permit holder shall place signs at the boundaries of the special event or designated alcohol area containing the following language: "NO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE PERMITTED BEYOND THIS POINT." 
(7)  If a special event is permitted, then any on-premises consumption licensee located within the boundaries of the special event shall be permitted to allow customers to leave the premises with alcohol in a paper or plastic cup, containing no more than 16 ounces during the hours of the special event. No glass containers or cans shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 26; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 9, 5-16-16 ) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A 3-14-1. 
Sec. 6-72. - Off-premises permits. 
In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at an authorized catered function a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall: 
(1)  Apply to the city for an off-premises permit providing the name of the caterer, the date, the caterer's address, the time of the event and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. 
(2)  Pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. This subsection only applies to those licensed alcoholic beverages caterers who are domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the City of Holly Springs. 
(3)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. The event permit is valid for the length and duration of the authorized event and shall expire at the end of the event. It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person less than 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. It is unlawful for any food caterer to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained an event permit as herein provided. The event permit as contemplated herein shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 07-2016, § 10, 5-16-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2016, § 10, adopted May 16, 2016 , set out provisions intended for use as § 6-76. For purposes of classification, to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 6-72. 
Secs. 6-73—6-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 6-76. - Persons with prior convictions. 
No licensee shall employ, for compensation or otherwise, in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages under this chapter any person in any capacity requiring a work permit under sections 6-69 or 6-70: 
(1)  Who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
(2)  Who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the application for work permit of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, or any change relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the application for work permit: 
a.  Of any felony drug conviction; 
b.  Of felony sex offense; 
c.  Of any other crime involving moral turpitude; 
d.  Of two or more convictions of driving under the influence; or 
e.  For whom there exist any outstanding warrant charging such person with any crime described in this section, provided that this section shall not apply to private clubs as defined in this chapter. The omission or falsification of any material information in an application for an alcoholic beverage permit shall be a violation of this chapter and grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of any such work permit; however, any person denied a work permit under the terms of this section shall have the right to appeal such denial to the administrator. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 6-17-07; Ord. of 12-17-07; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 27) 
Sec. 6-77. - Employment of minors. 
No license shall allow or require or permit a minor to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for a minor to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-78. - Employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any purpose employed or working in any capacity in any licensed premises to solicit or encourage patrons to purchase drinks to be consumed by or otherwise disposed of by any such person so employed or working. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
State Law reference— Employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises; O.C.G.A. 3-3-42. 
Sec. 6-79. - Sale to underage persons. 
No licensee under this chapter shall furnish, sell or knowingly allow the possession of any alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  Any person under the age at which such beverages may be legally purchased in the state; 
(2)  Any person in an intoxicated condition; 
(3)  Any person known to such licensee or his employee to be a habitual drunkard; or 
(4)  Any person known to such licensee or his employees to be of intemperate habits or of unsound mind. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 11, 5-16-16 ) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons, O.C.G.A. 3-3-23 
Sec. 6-80. - Notice; allowing underage person on licensed premises. 
(a)  Licensees that own, operate or manage a nightclub, lounge or package store shall not permit underage persons on the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or unless such person is an employee. 
(b)  Each licensee shall post in a conspicuous location or locations a notice which shall contain the provisions of the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. 
Sec. 6-81. - Purchase, consumption or possession by or for underage person. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any underage person to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where underage persons knowingly are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy any alcoholic beverage and furnish it to an underage person for consumption. 
(d)  The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  When the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverages to the person and when possession is in the home or parent of guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age pursuant to the standard as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23(h), or as may be amended from time to time. The term "proper identification" means any document issued by a government agency containing the description of the person, the person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state-issued identification card for person's without a driver's license, "proper identification" shall not include birth certificate, traffic citation and complaint form, or student (college/university) identification card. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons, O.C.G.A. 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-82. - Same—Misrepresentation of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any underage person to falsely misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-83. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Packaged distilled spirits. Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall not engage in the sale of such liquors except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  Distilled spirits by the drink. Sale of distilled spirits by the drink for on-premises consumption: licenses for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink shall not engage in the sale or permit the consumption of distilled spirits between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. All distilled beverages will be consumed or removed no later than 45 minutes after legal sales have been terminated, provided that this subsection shall not apply to private clubs hereunder; and establishments holding a valid permit may be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(1), or as may be amended from time to time. If New Year's Day shall fall on Monday, then the Sunday sales hours of operation for the Sunday immediately prior to New Year's Day shall be extended to 2:00 a.m. 
(c)  Wholesalers. The business hours of any wholesaler licensed under this chapter shall be from sunup to sundown, exclusive of Sunday. 
(d)  Sales on election days. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20 the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages (distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages), shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, nothing in this subsection shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place or along the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(e)  Malt beverages by the package. Licensees for the sale of malt beverages by the package shall not engage in the sale between the hours of 11:55 p.m. Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Monday; on all other days, sales shall be permitted 24 hours each day. 
(f)  Sunday sales. Licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages under the provision of the Sunday sales permit may [sell] and serve for consumption on the premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight; and may [sell] in package stores on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-20; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-19-2007; Ord. of 12-19-11, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 12, 5-16-16 ) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-84. - Places where drinking prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  Except for those persons holding a valid Sunday sales license, no person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter shall permit any person to drink any distilled spirit, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(b)  No person shall drink any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages while upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city, upon or within any vehicle upon the premises or in any adjacent parking area of any business establishment holding a license under this article. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, the administrator may permit, with respect to special city-sanctioned events, the consumption of distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages while upon streets, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 13, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2016, § 14, adopted May 16, 2016, repealed § 6-85, which pertained to drive-in, curb service prohibited and derived from Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-22; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1. 
Sec. 6-86. - Offenses involving minors. 
(a)  No person under 21 years of age shall buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place where these beverages are kept. 
(b)  No person in charge of or employed in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept shall permit any person under 21 years of age to buy or allow to be bought for any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business or to frequent or loiter about the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  No person shall furnish or serve to any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverage. A valid driver's license may be reasonably accepted by the person under this subsection, as sufficient evidence of age. 
(d)  Any attempt to commit any act made unlawful by this section shall be itself unlawful and subject to punishment in the municipal court. 
(e)  No person under 21 years of age shall falsely represent his age, in any manner whatever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment, under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. However, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons, under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages sold for consumption off the premises. 
(g)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable in the municipal court; provided, violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 shall be handled as provided by the state juvenile court code. 
(Ord. of 1-20-97, § 9-1-23; Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 28) 
Sec. 6-87. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesalers shall be licensed under the provisions of this chapter and shall comply with this chapter before they can sell any distilled spirits to any establishment in the city. Deliveries and sales shall only be made to retailers properly licensed under this chapter for the operation of establishments in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this section and shall at all times when deliveries are being made be subject to inspection by any duly authorized authorities of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-88. - Retailers to purchase from properly licensed wholesalers; exception. 
Retail dealers in distilled spirits licensed under the applicable provisions of this chapter shall not buy nor accept deliveries of distilled spirits from wholesalers or other persons offering distilled spirits for sale exempt from wholesalers duly licensed under this chapter. Such retail dealers shall only accept deliveries of distilled spirits directly to the premises for which their license and permit was issued, and by no means other than a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as required by this chapter; except that, on written request to the business license division manager of the city and upon the granting of permission by the business license division manager in writing, deliveries may in special instances be made otherwise upon terms and conditions as prescribed by the mayor and city council as to each delivery. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-89. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises or unlicensed caterers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to allow the sale or delivery of any alcoholic beverage by the drink to any area other than the premises covered by the license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for unlicensed individuals or caterers to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-90. - Discrimination or interference by wholesaler. 
No wholesaler may discriminate between retail dealers as to quantity, selections, and brands sold to the retail dealer, nor use any business technique so as to control the retail dealer's business and pricing policy, or in any way interfere with the free enterprise operation of the retail dealer. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-91. - Storage—Regulation generally. 
All licensed retailers shall store all distilled spirits possessions on the premises for which the license was issued, and at no other place. All distilled spirits stock shall be available for inspection by authorized city officials. Any brand or type of distilled spirits found in any retailer's stock that is handled by a wholesaler who is not licensed to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-92. - Breaking of packages; consumption on premises; possession of alcoholic beverages on unlicensed premises; spirituous or alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  No retail dealer shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. This section shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  A restaurant, eatery, cafe, diner or other eating establishment not licensed under this chapter for on-premises consumption shall not knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the unlicensed premises or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the unlicensed premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee who is authorized to sell malt beverages or wine or both, to sell, store or possess spirituous or alcoholic liquors without an appropriate license therefore. 
(d)  Upon the suspension, revocation, denial of renewal or denial of transfer of any alcoholic beverage license under this chapter, the licensee shall remove from the licensed premises all alcoholic beverages within 48 hours of the effective date of such suspension, revocation or denial. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 6-93. - Clear view of entrance and interior of licensed premises; lighting; private clubs. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under the license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, private club or is located in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. Clearly visible shall mean that not less than 60 percent of the front area shall be glass. Front area shall mean the width of the premises from the ceiling to the floor. 
(b)  No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. Each such store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(c)  Private clubs which have been granted licenses under this chapter to sell distilled spirits at retail by the package shall not have an outside street entrance for such retail outlet to sell to the general public, neither shall any such establishment make any sales to any member of the general public who is not a member of the private club. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-94. - Sanitary and fire protection regulations; disturbances; inspections. 
(a)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on any licensed premises. 
(c)  The fire department shall inspect premises licensed under this chapter to determine compliance with subsection (a) and (d) of this section and report its findings to the administrator. 
(d)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-12, § 29) 
Sec. 6-95. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for licensees or their employees to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition, package malt beverage licensees, who are not also licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, may fill growlers with draft beer at the licensee's licensed location from kegs lawfully procured by the licensee, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The filling growler must be securely sealed, on premises, with a tamper-proof plastic cap; 
(2)  At least 90 percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from the packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine; and 
(3)  The licensee complies with all state, federal and local packaging and labeling laws regarding alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Each growler must be removed from the premises in its securely sealed condition. 
(d)  Except as permitted by an ancillary tasting license, consumption on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 15, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-96. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
Each retail licensee for sale in the package shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale; provided, however, a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-97. - Exterior advertisements. 
The sign ordinance shall control over all advertising and meet the state requirements outlined under O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-98. - Coin-operated devices, similar machines on licensed premises. 
No retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package shall permit on his premises any slot machines, other food or cigarette vending machines, or pinball machines of any kind or character or any machines operated for amusement purposes. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 6-99. - Possession or consumption on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or transport for the purpose of consumption on, or to consume, alcoholic beverages on any public property, with the exception of that permitted in sections 6-76 or 6-95 herein. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-100. - Public intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on public property within the city limits while intoxicated. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-101. - Entering amusement arcade under the influence. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter an amusement arcade in the city while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of an amusement arcade to enforce this section. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-102. - Pricing of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to every type of alcoholic beverage licensed to be sold in the city, including wine, malt beverages and spirituous liquors. 
(b)  Each licensee under this chapter shall maintain a daily schedule of the prices to be charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the prices from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be maintained in a manner so as to be available to the paying public and law enforcement officers or agents of the governmental authority. Such schedule shall be effective for not less than a 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending at midnight, and shall show thereon the date for which the schedule is effective. 
(c)  No licensee or holder of any license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption of the premises or in any part thereof, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. This subsection shall not apply to testing rooms of farm wineries where wine is offered in a quantity to only taste the product. 
(2)  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time, or allow any patron to possess more than two alcoholic beverages at one time. 
(3)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest or promotion, which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(4)  Knowingly allow an alcoholic beverage purchased on the premises to be removed from the premises without having been consumed. "Premises," for the purpose of this section, shall be construed to mean the entire area under the supervision, management or control of the licensee, excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles; and, in the case of licensees whose licensed location is located on a portion of the premises of a club, organization, establishment or entity offering outdoor recreation (for instance, golf or tennis), the word "premises" shall extend to cover all areas operated as a part of the club or entity excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles. 
(d)  There shall be no advertisement or promotion in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, of any of the practices prohibited under this section. 
(e)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as a part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by bottle or carafe when sold with meals to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests, or to prohibit the sale of more than two drinks at one time which are to be consumed by the purchaser out-of-doors on the premises of the licensee, as described in this section, in connection with the purchaser's participation as a player of games of golf or tennis; otherwise, no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee; however, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to allow a license to circumvent the intent of this section by offering meals which include an alcoholic beverage as a device or scheme to promote drink sales at a price per beverage less than the daily listed price. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-103. - Patio sales/outdoor sales. 
(a)  The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises shall be allowed in enclosed patio areas that are accessible through the interior of the restaurant, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment, including but not limited to regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(b)  The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises shall be allowed on public sidewalks within the city. The licensed premises shall provide and maintain dining tables and chairs located on the sidewalk which shall be located contiguous to, or as close as possible, to the licensed premises. The table and chairs shall not be within 36 inches from the nearest impediment i.e. curb, light pole, etc. 
(c)  Except as may be permitted pursuant to section 6-379(h) (special event permit), no establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave the premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. 
(d)  The licensee shall be in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment. 
( Ord. No. 07-2016, § 16, 5-16-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2016, § 16, adopted May 16, 2016 , set out provisions intended for use as § 6-126. For purposes of classification, to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 6-103. 
Secs. 6-104—6-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EROTIC ENTERTAINMENT/DANCE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-126. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values and on the public health, safety and welfare of the city, and on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development, will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of completing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment or activity, which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1) 
Sec. 6-127. - Happy hour promotions prohibited. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for alcoholic beverages during the same calendar day. 
(c)  No person licensed pursuant to this article or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink for any 24-hour period by up to one-half the price customarily charged; 
(4)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage; and 
(5)  The sale or service of alcoholic beverages by the pitcher to any party that includes less than two individuals who are at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. of 1-20-03, § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 17, 5-16-16 ) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Secs. 6-128—6-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE (BYOB) 

Sec. 6-200. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Holly Springs by regulating the licensing and operations of bottle clubs/BYOB establishments. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 18, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-201. - License required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall keep, maintain, operate, lease, or otherwise furnish, either to its members and guests or to the general public, any premises, in the City of Holly Springs, for use as a bottle club or BYOB establishment, without first having obtained a "BYOB license" therefore to be issued by the city clerk after review and approval of the administrator in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1, Ord. No. 07-2016, § 19, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2016, § 20, adopted May 16, 2016 , repealed § 6-202, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1. 
Sec. 6-203. - License fee. 
The license fee shall be established by city council and shall be published in the adopted master fee schedule for the City of Holly Springs. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 21, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-204. - Application. 
All applications for a BYOB license shall be made in writing to the City of Holly Springs and shall state: 
(1)  The name of the applicant(s); 
(2)  Address of applicant(s); 
(3)  Whether applicant is a corporation, association or partnership; 
(4)  Attested copies of articles of incorporation, association or documents of partnership; 
(5)  Names and addresses of all principal officers or owners; 
(6)  Consent by the principal owner(s) for a criminal history; 
(7)  Location and description of premises for which license is desired; 
(8)  Whether applicant(s) has had a bottle club license elsewhere; 
(9)  Whether applicant(s) has ever had an alcohol license denied or revoked; and 
(10)  Any additional information that may be required by the City of Holly Springs in the issuing of the license. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-205. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon the receipt of an application for a BYOB license, the City of Holly Springs shall require that: 
(1)  The police chief/or his designee investigate the background of the owner(s); 
(2)  The building official or his designee shall inspect the proposed location and premises to determine proper fire marshal and/or safety standards; and 
(3)  The health inspector inspect the premises to determine whether the premises meets proper health and safety standards. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 22, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-206. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2016, § 23, adopted May 16, 2016 , repealed § 6-206, which pertained to public hearing and derived from Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1. 
Sec. 6-207. - Transfers. 
A separate license must be obtained for each location and each license shall authorize the operation of such an establishment only at the location described in such license and in conformity with all applicable codes. No license shall be sold or transferred to another person or to any other location, without the approval of the administrator. A BYOB license issued shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1, Ord. No. 07-2016, § 24, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-208. - Hours of operation. 
Shall adhere to the hours of operation established under section 6-83. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-209. - License expiration. 
The BYOB license shall expire on December 31 st each year. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-210. - Suspension; revocation. 
A BYOB license, as provided for in this article, may be denied, suspended or revoked by the administrator for either violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or with the provisions of any other applicable law or ordinance. Determination of the severity of the violation and whether or not a denial, suspension, or revocation is warranted shall be made by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 25, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-211. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(1), § 1) 
ARTICLE VI. - ANCILLARY TASTING LICENSE 

Sec. 6-212. - Ancillary tastings permitted. 
The holder of a retail sales license shall be eligible for an ancillary tasting license to provide samples of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale to customers in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Title 3. Alcoholic Beverages; Chapter 4. Distilled Spirits, Chapter 5. Malt Beverages, and Chapter 6. Wine. 
( Ord. No. 07-2016, § 26, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 6-213. - Additional fee required. 
The annual fee for an ancillary tasting license shall be published in the adopted master fee schedule for the City of Holly Springs. 
( Ord. No. 07-2016, § 26, 5-16-16 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - BREW PUBS 

Sec. 6-214. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  "Barrel" means 53 gallons. 
b.  "Brew pub" means an eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises or for retail package sales. 
( Ord. No. 18-2017, § 2, 9-25-17 ) 
Sec. 6-215. - Regulations. 
Brewpubs shall operate according to the following regulations: 
(1)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brew pub without first obtaining a proper brew pub license and each brew pub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements; and 
(2)  A brew pub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
a.  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail on the premises and solely in draft form; and 
b.  Operate an eating establishment that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer and may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter; provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises only and provided, further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers. 
c.  Sell up to a maximum of 5,000 barrels annually to licensed wholesale dealers. Under no circumstances shall such malt beverages be sold by a brewpub licensee to any person holding a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the purpose of resale. 
( Ord. No. 18-2017, § 2, 9-25-17 ) 
Sec. 6-216. - Other licenses available. 
Possession of a brew pub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this article for the same premises. 
( Ord. No. 18-2017, § 2, 9-25-17 ) 
Sec. 6-217. - Payment of fees and taxes. 
A brew pub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this article as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesalers. 
( Ord. No. 18-2017, § 2, 9-25-17 ) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Lewd dancing prohibited where on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted, § 6-200; businesses, ch. 22; carnivals and circuses, § 22-121 et seq.; pool and billiards, § 22-156 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, adopted December 18, 2017, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 10-31—10-63, pertained to adult entertainment, and derived from Ord. of May 28,1996, § 5.4-32(1)—(26); Ord. of March 20, 2006(2), §§ 1, 3, 4—7. 

Sec. 10-31. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-32. - Findings and rationale. 
Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774(2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425(2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277(2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41(1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50(1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560(1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109(1972); and Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196(11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306(11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944(11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232(11th Cir. 2004); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334(11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350(11th Cir. 2000); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F.3d 1251(11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325(11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993(11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358(11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319(11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403(6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943(11th Cir. 1982); International Food and Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520(11th Cir. 1986); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114(9th Cir. 2005); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186(9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702(7th Cir. 2003); and Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520(2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129(2000); Sewell v. Georgia , 233 S.E.2d 187(Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982(1978)(sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106(Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887(2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33(1998); World Famous Dudley's Food and Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618(1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214(1978); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas—1986; Indianapolis, Indiana—1984; Garden Grove, California—1991; Houston, Texas—1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona—1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee—1999-2003; Los Angeles, California—1977; Whittier, California—1978; Spokane, Washington—2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota—1994; Littleton, Colorado—2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma—1986; Dallas, Texas—1997; Greensboro, North Carolina—2003; Amarillo, Texas—1977; New York, New York Times Square—1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the city council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this section, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this section are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-33. - Classification. 
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
(2)  Adult cabaret; 
(3)  Adult theater; 
(4)  Seminude model studio; 
(5)  Sexual device shop; 
(6)  Sexual encounter center. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-34. - License required. 
(1)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(2)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in this article, of a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(3)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the community development department a completed application made on a form provided by the city. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection 10-34(4) below and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection, accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
a.  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
b.  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
c.  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate, accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
d.  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
e.  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
f.  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a crime which is a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude, within the previous ten years, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
g.  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or, been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
h.  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this section shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. 
i.  The information provided pursuant to this subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city manager within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(4)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(5)  Confidentiality; disclosure. The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this section shall be maintained by the community development department on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by court order. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-35. - Issuance of license. 
(1)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the city manager shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the city and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the city manager shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city manager shall issue a license unless: 
a.  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
b.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
c.  The license application fee required by this section has not been paid. 
d.  The sexually oriented business is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this section or is not in compliance with locational requirements of this section or the locational requirements of any other part of the Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance, the Holly Spring Code of Ordinances, or Georgia law. 
e.  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or, been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
f.  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a crime which is a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude within the previous ten years. 
(2)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city manager shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the city manager shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city manager shall issue a license unless: 
a.  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
b.  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this section for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
c.  The license application fee required by this section has not been paid. 
d.  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or, been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a crime which is a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude, within the last ten years. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-36. - License information; posting. 
The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-37. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall established by city council. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-38. - Inspection. 
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the city manager and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this section, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this section, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-39. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(1)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this section. 
(2)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-40. - Suspension. 
(1)  The city manager shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this section or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this section. 
(2)  The city manager shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly violated this section. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-41. - Revocation. 
(1)  The city manager shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee violates this article or has allowed an employee to violate this article and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. 
(2)  The city manager shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
a.  The licensee has given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license. 
b.  The licensee has engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
c.  The licensee has engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
d.  The licensee operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
e.  The licensee has engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(3)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(4)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this section, city council revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-42. - Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(1)  When the city manager issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city manager shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this section for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city manager for the respondent. The notice shall specify a date, not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date the notice is issued, on which the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the city manager's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. 
(2)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city manager's witnesses. The city manager shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this section, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
(3)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the tenth day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city manager to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, city manager shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(4)  If any court action challenging the decision of the hearing officer is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. 
(5)  The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the city manager: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's denial, suspension, or revocation decision, the city manager shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. The provisional license shall not be construed to provide the applicant with any substantive right, entitlement, or claim of estoppel beyond the ability to operate until the court enters judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-43. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-44. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-45. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. City manager may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five-foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsection O.5 above. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-46. - Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: 
a.  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; 
b.  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
c.  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(3)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-47. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(1)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such. 
(2)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this section to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this section, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this section or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-48. - Applicability of article to existing businesses. 
All existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of 90 days following the effective date of this article. By the end of said 90 days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-49. - Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business licensee to violate the following regulations or to allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations: 
a.  It shall be a violation of this section for a patron, employee, or any other person to, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
b.  It shall be a violation of this section for a person to, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a seminude condition unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet. 
c.  It shall be a violation of this section for any employee who regularly appears seminude in a sexually oriented business to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
d.  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
e.  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(2)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city manager, and summarizing the provisions of subsection (1) above, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-50. - Scienter required to prove violation or business license liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this section. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this section, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this section, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-51. - Failure of city to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a city official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this section within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the city official under this section, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city's action has passed. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-52. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: 
a.  One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by another sexually oriented business or by a business licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises; and 
b.  One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by a religious facility, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, any residential structure or any property zoned for residential purposes. 
(2)  For the purpose of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on a boundary line of the sexually oriented business parcel to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel occupied by a religious facility, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, any residential structure, any property zoned for residential purposes, another sexually oriented business, or a business licensed by the State of Georgia to sell alcohol on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-53. - Noncomformity. 
(1)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance or the Holly Springs Code of Ordinances, a nonconforming sexually oriented business, lawfully existing in all respects under law prior to the effective date of this article, may continue to operate for one year following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location. At the conclusion of said one year, the use will no longer be recognized as a lawful nonconforming use, except that a nonconforming sexually oriented business may obtain an extension of the original one-year period upon a showing of financial hardship. An application for an extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion of the aforementioned one-year period. 
(2)  An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the city manager, and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, appraised value of the property and/or leasehold interests, and costs of relocation. Within ten days after receiving the application, the city manager shall schedule a hearing on the application before the hearing officer, which hearing shall be conducted within 30 days after the city manager is in receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be provided to the applicant via certified mail at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten days after the hearing on the application for a hardship extension. The hardship extension shall be granted upon a showing of financial hardship. Such a showing shall be established if the hearing officer makes the following findings: 
a.  The applicant has, prior to the effective date of this section, made a substantial investment, including, but not limited to, lease obligations incurred in an arms-length transaction, in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; 
b.  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
c.  The applicant has made good-faith efforts to recoup the investment prior to the conclusion of the one-year period. 
d.  Any extension granted under the provisions of this subsection shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Sec. 10-54. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall have their customary dictionary definitions. The following terms are defined for the purposes of this article: 
Adult arcade. Any business establishment or concern containing one or more coin or slug operated or manually or electronically controlled still or motion picture projectors, video machines, projector or similar image-producing devices, that are maintained to display images to an individual or group of individuals when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store. Any establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented merchandise, sexually oriented material, books, periodicals, magazines, or other printed materials, or photographs, drawings, sculptures, films, motion pictures, videos, discs, cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas (see "Adult-oriented business" for definition of regular and substantial course of conduct). 
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant, or similar business establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, computer generated images, videos, discs, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dance studio. Any business establishment or concern which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel/motel. A hotel, motel, or other similar business establishment or concern offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videos, discs, slides, other photographic reproductions, or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 12-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than once in a 24-hour period. 
Adult modeling studio. Any business or premises where there is furnished, provided, or procured, a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas where the model(s) is being observed or viewed by any person for the purpose of being sketched, photographed, painted, drawn, sculpted, filmed, or videotaped or otherwise depicted for a fee, compensation, gratuity, or other thing of value as consideration for the right or opportunity to so observe the model(s) or to remain on the premises. "Adult modeling studio" does not include any live art class or any studio or classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree in compliance with standards set by the state board of education or the state board of regents. 
Adult-oriented business operator. A person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. This term shall hereinafter be referred to as "operator." 
Adult theater. A business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents live entertainment performances, motion pictures, videos, computer generated images, slide photographs, or other pictures or visual or audio representations or reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Applicant. A person who is required to file an application for a permit under this article, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business. 
Bar. Any commercial establishment licensed by the City of Holly Springs and the State of Georgia to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
City manager. The City Manager for the City of Holly Springs, or any person who has been designated by the city manager. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. Shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by the phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character or theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina (1981) Cal.App.3d 151. 
Employ, employee, and employment. Describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Entertainer. Any person who dances, models, entertains, and/or performs specified sexual activities or displays specified areas in an adult-oriented business. 
Establishment of an adult-oriented business. Shall mean and include any of the following: The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business; the conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein; the addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or the relocation of any adult-oriented business. 
Figure model. Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire, or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted. 
Hearing officer. An independent attorney licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Influential interest. Means any of the following: 
a.  The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business; or 
b.  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Live art class. Any premises on which all of the following occur: There is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing, or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical areas; instruction is offered in a series of at least two classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and pre-registration is required at least 24 hours in advance of participation in the class. 
Nudity or a state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the aerola. 
Operate an adult-oriented business. The supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business. 
Permitee. The person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
Sexual device shop. 
(a)  A commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in the term "sexual device shop" shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall the term "sexual device shop" be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to their premises by reason of age. 
(b)  Any store which meets the following criteria shall not be considered a sexual device shop: 
(1)  Sexual devices are displayed in less than five percent of store floor space; 
(2)  Sexual devices comprise less than five percent of store sales; 
(3)  Sexual devices comprise less than five percent of store inventory; 
(4)  Sexual devices shall not be visible from outside the store; 
(5)  Sexual devices sold in the store shall be located in the rear of the store away from any outside windows; 
(6)  Sexual devices sold in the store shall be packaged in opaque packaging such that the sexual device can only be viewed if the packaging is opened; 
(7)  Sexual devices shall not be displayed outside of the above-described opaque packaging; 
(8)  Sexual Devices sold in the store shall not be designed to look like sexual organs; and 
(9)  A sign shall be posted at the entryway of the store which shall be visible to all customers entering the store and which shall state in English in at least 150 point type and in capital letters 
"WARNING: MATURE MATERIALS NOT SUITABLE FOR CHILDREN ARE CONTAINED WITHIN THIS STORE." 
(c)  Upon request by city staff members the store management shall provide such records to the city staff as are reasonable requested to demonstrate compliance with the provision of this ordinance, such as floor space diagrams, inventory counts and sales numbers. 
School. Any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the Georgia Board of Education (Georgia Education Code) and maintained in compliance with the standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education or an institution of higher education including a community or junior college, vocational/technical college, college, or university. 
Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center. Any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble, or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Sexually-oriented business (also known as "adult-oriented business"). Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel/motel, adult modeling studio, adult theater; any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct sells or distributes or offers for sale or distribution sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as a regular and substantial course of conduct when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The area devoted to adult merchandise and/or sexually oriented materials exceeds more than 20 percent of the total display or floor space area open to the public; 
(2)  The business establishment or concern presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas at least four times in any one month; 
(3)  The regular and substantial course of conduct of the business consists of or involves the sale, trade, display, or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Sexually oriented material. Any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, disc, computer generated image, or other written, oral, or visual representation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Sexually oriented merchandise. Sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia, including but not limited to dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery or electrically operated vaginas or penises, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Specified anatomical areas. Shall mean and include any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human: (1) genitals or pubic region; (2) buttocks; and/or (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
c.  Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in Subparagraphs a. or b., above. 
Specified sexual activities. Shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other cover: 
a.  The relocation of any adult-oriented business; 
b.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship, ant of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: Analingus, bestiality, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pdeerastuy, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; 
c.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
d.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
e.  Fondling, or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; 
f.  Masochism, erotic, or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; 
g.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal, or anal irrigation; or 
h.  The presence of any person who performs, or appears in a state of nudity or semi nude. 
( Ord. No. 26-2017, § 1, 12-18-17 ) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Enforcement. 
(a)  By joint agreement of the participating municipalities with the governing authority of the county, enforcement of this chapter shall be by the county governing authority. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the assistance of law enforcement persons within their jurisdiction. 
(b)  Where not specified, fees and costs shall be established from time to time by the governing authority of the county and posted publicly at the county animal shelter. Any such moneys received in connection with the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid to the county governing authority. 
(Code 1991, § 11-3-2) 
Sec. 14-2. - Conflicts. 
(a)  Where there is a conflict between this chapter and another county or municipal ordinance, this chapter shall apply. 
(b)  Where there is a conflict among articles or sections within this chapter, the article or section that is more restrictive and stricter shall apply. 
(c)  Definitions in article II of this chapter may be used to define other parts of this chapter unless the context is clear that the definition does not apply. 
(d)  This chapter shall apply to the participating municipalities, notwithstanding the use of the word "county" instead of "city." 
(Code 1991, § 11-3-3) 
Sec. 14-3. - Bird sanctuary; wildlife. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of each municipality are designated as a bird and wildlife sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any wild bird or to rob any wild bird's nest; however, if nuisance birds such as starlings are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the director of the animal control shelter, those birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible, under appropriate supervision, in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the director. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any other wild game in the city except by order of the director of the animal control shelter. 
(Code 1991, § 11-3-4) 
Sec. 14-4. - Fowl or livestock running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any domestic fowl or livestock to allow that domestic fowl or livestock to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 11-3-5) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
Sec. 14-5. - Enclosures for fowl. 
Where the keeping of fowl is allowed pursuant to applicable zoning, any housing or enclosure used shall be well drained, free from accumulations of excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Code 1991, § 11-3-6) 
Sec. 14-6. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed: 
a.  First conviction, $200.00. 
b.  Second conviction, $300.00. 
c.  Third conviction, $500.00. 
d.  Fourth conviction or more, to be determined by the court. 
(2)  In addition to the fine in subsection (1), imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(b)  The state courts of the county shall have jurisdiction of all cases arising from violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 11-3-41) 
Secs. 14-7—14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 4, 2008, section 1, amended chapter 14, article II, §§ 14-41—14-59, and article III, §§ 14-91—14-99 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 14, articles II and III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code 1991, §§ 11-3-21—11-3-40, and 11-3-51—11-3-59. 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 

Sec. 14-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation or shelter, for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age, and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species, and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species, and breed of animal. For dogs, adequate space means an enclosure with a minimum of 150 square feet per dog. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, and rancid contaminated water. 
Animal means any living organism, except a plant, bacterium, or human, which can move voluntarily and has specialized sense organs, included domesticated animals and fowl. 
Anima1 control board means the board constituted and appointed by the board of commissioners to perform the duties of the animal control board under this chapter. 
Anima1 control facility means and includes any vehicle, building, structure, pasture, paddock, pond, impoundment aria or premises where any animal is kept or housed by the county for the purpose of impounding or harboring stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, neglected or abused animals. 
Anima1 control officer means the county marshal or his/her designees, 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal by an act, an omission, or neglect. 
Dangerous dog means a classification made by an animal control officer for any dog that has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being or another domestic animal or, if such dog has previously been classified as a potentially dangerous dog, has aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered the safety of a human being or domestic animal without provocation. However, no dog may be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. The definition shall not be construed to include any dog that is part of a governmental organization or a trained guard dog in performance of its duties. 
Dogs running at large means any dog not under immediate control, not on a leash, not at heel, not beside a competent person, not in a vehicle driven or parked, or not confined within the property limits of his owner. Hunting and tracking dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's permission. Working farm dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when acting in conjunction with farming operations and/or otherwise under the general command of the owner. 
Domestic animal means an animal that, through long association with humans, has been adapted to human living conditions. 
Fighting dog means any dog that is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained, or maintained for the purpose of fighting. Fighting dogs are illegal in the county. 
Guard or protection dog means any dog trained for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A dog shall not be considered a guard or protection dog if it otherwise meets the criteria for being defined as a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, or vicious dog. 
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and transporting it to the animal control facility. 
Livestock means and includes horses, cows, goats, pigs, or any other hoofed animal used for pleasure or profit. Fowl and rabbits are expressly included within this definition. 
Necessary veterinary care means veterinary medical attention appropriate to the circumstances, whenever an animal is known or suspected to have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate, or exhibits signs of disease process such as shock, temperature fluctuation, tremors, swelling, broken bones, open wounds, inability to eat or drink, blistering, irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or total paralysis, abnormal discharge or bleeding, mange, or other signs of health problems. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, and/or other legal entity, who or which owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his/her care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his/her premises. 
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any adult at whose residence a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is kept or found shall be presumed to be an owner of such dog and shall have the burden of rebutting such presumption. 
If an animal has more than one owner, any one of such owners may be prosecuted for violations whether or not any other owners are also prosecuted. 
Police officer means any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests or cause to be issued citations or summonses in incorporated areas of this county. 
Potentially dangerous dog means a classification made by an animal control officer for any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to make unprovoked attacks, cause injuries, or otherwise threaten the safety of any human being or domestic animal. Potentially dangerous dog shall also mean any dog which, when unprovoked, inflicts a bite upon a human being or domestic animal or chases or approaches a human being or domestic animal on any public property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of an attack. A dog shall not be considered a potentially dangerous dog if the attack, injury, or threatening conduct by the dog was sustained by, or targeted at, a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A structure which is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping; 
(2)  A structure with secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; 
(3)  A structure whose sides are so constructed at the bottom so as to prevent the dog's escape by digging under the sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad; 
(4)  A structure which provides appropriate protection from the elements for the dog. The structure must contain adequate shelter inside it; 
(5)  A structure which is inside a perimeter or area fence; 
(6)  The gate to the structure shall be of the inward-opening type and shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
Provocation means committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or possessor of the animal, or teasing, tormenting, or abusing the animal or committing or attempting to commit a crime against a person. 
Sanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area that is not contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
Severe injury means any injury which results in a broken bone, lacerations severe enough to require multiple sutures or to render cosmetic surgery necessary or appropriate, puncture wounds that intrude below the surface of the skin, or death. 
Vicious dog , consistent with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-41(6), means any dog that inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation after the owner has notice that the dog has previously bitten or attacked or endangered the safety of a human being; or any dog that is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained, or maintained for the purpose of fighting. Such term shall not include a dog that inflicts any injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. A dog shall not be a vicious dog if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-42. - Enforcement and penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person violating this chapter may be issued a citation and summons to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction, and the offending animal may be immediately impounded by the anima1 control officer pending disposition of the citation by the court. Any person violating this chapter, may be deemed guilty of violating a county ordinance, and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment, in addition to the more stringent penalties that are provided for under state law for violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Each act or omission in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of any sentence, may do a combination of any of the following: 
(1)  Prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in the city any animal during the term of the sentence; 
(2)  Order that the animal be removed from the city; 
(3)  Order that the animal be surrendered to the county animal control facility; 
(4)  Order that the animal be humanely euthanized; 
(5)  Order restitution to the victim(s). 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-43. - Adoption of chapter by municipalities within county boundaries. 
In accordance with state law, Cherokee County may enter into agreements with the municipalities located within the territorial limits of the county to provide animal control services within the corporate limits of such municipality. 
Pursuant to such agreement, any municipality in the county may adopt this chapter. Any municipality adopting this chapter must authorize enforcement by the anima1 control officer. Municipal ordinances must provide that the incorporated areas shall be subject to the fees charged by the county and that all fees charged by the county shall be retained by the county to defray the costs of Cherokee County related to animal control. The mayor and city council of the city, hereby so authorize. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-44. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of any dog to fail to keep a dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(b)  A dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, guardian, possessor, or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other proper enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; or 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system. If using an invisible containment system, a sign must be posted on the property indications that the system is in place; or 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person, or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsection (1) or (2) above while on the owner's property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of any animal to restrain or anchor an animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, unless the tether or other restraint is being held by a competent person. An exception shall be made for the limited purpose of allowing the animal's owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian to temporarily restrain the animal by such means to allow the animal's needs to be met, such as the time necessary to clean the animal's living quarters, feed, and water. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements in subsection 10-29(b)(1), the following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of guard or protection dogs: 
(1)  Owners, possessors, guardians or custodians of any guard or protection dog must confine all such dogs within a perimeter fence sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times. 
(2)  A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(3)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on the property, have the dog(s) microchip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to the anima1 control officer. 
There shall be a fee for each guard or protection dog for the first year or any part thereof that the dog is in the city and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year. 
(4)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall report to Cherokee County Animal Control within 24 hours of any of the following: 
a.  Escape of the dog; 
b.  An attack on a human or animal by the dog; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the dog; Death of the dog; 
(5)  A guard or protection dog shall be deemed under control only when the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dogs prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length. 
(d)  Dogs found running at-large or in violation of this section may be immediately impounded by anima1 control officers, police officer, or any law enforcement officer. 
Any animal that is impounded under this section shall not be returned to its owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian in any event without strict proof of compliance with the provisions of this section. 
If the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian has not complied with this provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded or within 20 days of the date of disposition of the charges by the court if the anima1 control officer has determined to hold the dog pending such disposition, said dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(e)  The anima1 control officer, police officer, or any law enforcement officer may pursue the dog onto private property to effect capture of a dog believed to be in violation of this section. Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-45. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or to aid in the abandonment of any animal. An animal relinquished through written agreement with Cherokee County Animal Control, licensed rescue group, licensed shelter, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the respective entity. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-46. - Transient dogs and cats. 
Any dog or cat shipped or transported through the city or entering the city only for the purpose of a temporary stay, when such stay shall not exceed 15 days, shall be exempt from collar, and tag sections of this article. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-47. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of cruelty towards any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally train, breed, possess, harbor, keep, and have custody or control of an animal for the purpose of animal fighting. It shall be unlawful to be a spectator at or bet on an animal fighting activity. The intentional fighting of dogs, dog and hog, and cocks is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and animal control officers who euthanize animals under the direction of the city per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, Georgia Department of Agriculture, and this article shall not be guilty of cruelty to animals. 
(d)  A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him/her or another person or animal, provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-48. - Public nuisance animal. 
(a)  A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal, excluding livestock maintained on properly zoned property, that: 
(1)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner; or 
(2)  Attacks a human or another animal without provocation; or 
(3)  Makes any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if the vocalization is intermittent. 
These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter. 
Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the officer with the address of the owner, and a physical description of the offending animal. If the disturbance is not resolved within two days or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual, who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; or 
(4)  Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odors in enclosures or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept; or 
(5)  Is in heat and not confined within a secure enclosure to prevent unintentional breeding; or 
(6)  Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people. 
(b)  Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded immediately by an animal control officer and the owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian may be charged for a violation of this section. The animal may remain impounded pending disposition of the charges by the court. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-49. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal shelter may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after three days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the Anima1 control officer by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately. A11 persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide adequate and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required. 
Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for breeding, fighting, or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. 
The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted in the discretion of the Animal Shelter. 
(b)  Any person adopting an animal from the Cherokee County Animal Shelter shall pay an adoption fee in an amount stated in the Cherokee County Animal Shelter schedule of fees, and charges may also include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats. 
(c)  Any person adopting an intact animal shall cause to have the animal spayed or neutered (sterilized) within a period specified as follows, within 30 days from the date of adoption for animals over the age of six months or within the first six months of age for sexually immature animals. Any adopted animal not sterilized within the time specified may be reclaimed by the animal shelter. 
If an animal becomes pregnant after the time specified for the animal to be spayed, the owner may receive a citation for violating this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-50. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law shall be detained at the animal control facility. The anima1 control officer shall notify the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within three days after notice or attempted notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus a boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded, and the cost of rabies vaccination if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period, unless the Anima1 control officer has determined that the animal should be held pending disposition of charges by the court. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control facility. 
(b)  If any animal seized or impounded by the city's police department evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the anima1 control officer shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or humanely euthanize the animal; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the Anima1 control officer may, upon approval of the marshal, proceed with euthanization and prepare a complete report on the reason for euthanization. 
This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal. 
(c)  Upon approval of the anima1 control officer and at the request and expense of the owner, impoundment may be at a veterinary or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing, provided that the owner can demonstrate to the Anima1 control officer that the owner cannot cause the animal to be released from the boarding facility without the approval of the anima1 control officer. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-51. - Humane disposition. 
(a)  If an animal is not claimed by the owner within three days of the mailing of notice to the owner, or an animal of unknown ownership is not adopted within three days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the director of the animal shelter to euthanize the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible. 
An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the three-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the director of the animal shelter. Animals may be released to approved rescue groups or to approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(b)  Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be euthanized under the direction of the director of the animal shelter in as humane a manner as possible. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of the director of the animal shelter, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment, so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, he shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of administering necessary treatment. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-52. - Biting animals and quarantine. 
(a)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Cherokee County Board of Health, all dogs and cats known to have bitten or scratched a person shall be confined to the animal control facility, veterinarian's hospital, or at a boarding facility approved by Cherokee County Animal Control or under home supervision with the approval of the anima1 control officer for a period of ten days. All expenses incurred for boarding the animal during this period of time shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. 
(b)  In accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies. 
(c)  Unvaccinated or unwanted animals bitten or scratched by a known potentially rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately. 
If the owner of the unvaccinated animal is unwilling to have the animal euthanized, upon approval of the anima1 control officer, the exposed animal shall be placed in quarantine for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. 
The owner or possessor is responsible for quarantining the exposed unvaccinated animal in strict compliance with the policies and procedures of the animal control unit and county board of health and for all costs associated with same. 
(d)  Dogs and cats that are bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal that are current on their vaccinations shall be re-vaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. 
Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the marshal. 
(e)  For purposes of subsections (c) and (d), any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal including, but not limited to, bobcats, raccoons, foxes, skunks, or coyotes, which are not available for testing, should be considered exposed to rabies. 
Failure to comply with the quarantine and/or confinement requirements of this section, the marshal's office, or the county board of health constitutes a violation of this article and may result in the impoundment of the animal. In that event, the owner or possessor remains responsible for all veterinary, boarding, and other expenses incurred on behalf of the quarantined animal. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-53. - Livestock. 
(a)  All livestock shall be properly housed with adequate food and adequate water and confined within a fenced enclosure. The fenced enclosure shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any average livestock animal from escaping the enclosed compound and causing damage, accidents, or injury to any person or property. Owners of such livestock shall be liable for any damage, accidents, or injuries. Those who provide boarding pasturing space and/or services for hire shall have the responsibility for enclosure maintenance as described in this paragraph. 
(b)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any livestock within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. 
(c)  Owners or possessors of livestock impounded for violation of this article or any state and/or federal laws, will be charged in accordance with actual costs of impoundment, plus impounding and boarding fees. 
(d)  Impounded livestock shall be held for a period of 21 days. If such impounded animals are not claimed by the owner during that period of time, the animals may be given to persons willing to accept them, in the discretion of the marshal's office. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-54. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting, shall be forwarded to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Game and Fish Division or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division for proper disposition, i.e., compliance, apprehension, control and/or enforcement, as may be necessary and as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-55. - Dead animals. 
Officers of the marshal's office are authorized to remove dead animals from public property. 
Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal or property owner or possessor in accordance with state laws and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal, its parts, or blood on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal in a well or open pit of any kind, on private or public land. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-56. - Vaccines used and time of vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats owned, possessed, harbored, or residing within the limits of the county shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies before and no later than four months of age. Any dog or cat found not vaccinated by four months of age must have the consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reasons. 
(c)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any type of animal in his/her possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-57. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Upon administering anti-rabies vaccines, a certificate of vaccination must be issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, to provide evidence of vaccination. 
(b)  Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination, provided he furnishes one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the anima1 control officer upon request by Cherokee County Animal Control, and one copy is retained by the veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-58. - Animal license. 
The owner, possessor, or harborer of each dog or cat residing in the city must obtain and possess a current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
Upon vaccination, county veterinarians shall be responsible for issuing a metal tag with a vaccination and identification number. Tags must be renewed within 30 days of the expiration date of the vaccination. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-59. - Collar and rabies vaccination tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner or possessor to provide a collar and tag for each dog and cat, and the tag and collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under the immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal. Animals participating in organized or controlled competitions are exempt from this section only for the duration of the competition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-60. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
No person who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-61. - Citations; summons; subpoenas. 
(a)  The animal control officer or city law enforcement officer, at his/her discretion, may choose not to impound the animal or livestock found in violation of any section of this chapter, but may return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the animal or livestock to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction on a certain day to stand trial for the violation(s) of this chapter. 
(b)  If a violation(s) of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the animal control officer or a city law enforcement officer, a subpoena may be issued to any witness or the person(s) complaining to appear on the day and time set for trial to testify on behalf of Cherokee County Animal Control. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-62. - Liability of the county, holly springs police, officers, and employees. 
The county, the city police department, and its officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal control facility or any facility designated by the county to house such animal. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-63. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control facility, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his/her duties. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-64. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  Any animal or livestock owner or possessor who fails to provide adequate drink, adequate food, adequate space, adequate shelter, sanitary conditions, necessary veterinary care, and/or who causes unnecessary suffering of any animal or livestock shall be deemed in violation of this Section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave animals unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from heat exhaustion. 
(c)  Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law may impound any animal found to be neglected, as defined by this section. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-65. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-66. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane adequate care, collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article, or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-67. - Right of entry. 
A law enforcement officer may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the law enforcement officer shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-68. - Animals transported in vehicles. 
No animal shall be transported on a public road in an open vehicle including an open top vehicle or open truck bed, unless the animal is humanely secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or having the ability to extend over the edge of the vehicle that could result in an injury or strangulation of the animal while the vehicle is in motion. No animal shall be transported in the trunk of a vehicle or under a pick up truck's tonneau cover. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-69. - Training guard or protection dogs. 
It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog, unless the trainer holds a state kennel license, a county business license, and maintains at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog or dogs being trained, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog on public property, including but not limited to, public parks. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-70. - Limitation on ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect, abandonment or hoarding of an animal as provided in this chapter or has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of such animal, may not own, possess, or have on his premises in the city any animal for one year from the date of conviction. A no lo contender plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on the owner's property as provided in this chapter and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, may not be allowed to own a pet in their city household for one year from the date of conviction. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-71. - Backyard breeders. 
It is unlawful for any person who does not hold a license from the state department of agriculture to breed an animal if they are required by the state department of agriculture to be licensed. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Secs. 14-72—14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20, et seq. 

Sec. 14-91. - Title and purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to implement the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20, et. seq. (the "Act"), relating to dangerous dog control, and in some instances, to strengthen the requirements of the Act in furtherance of a community that is safe and secure from the harms of dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to amend or supersede any other ordinances relating to animal control. Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in the Act. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-92. - Exceptions. 
No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as a result of an injury upon a human being or other animal inflicted at a time when the dog was being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. No dog shall be considered a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as a result of an injury inflicted by the dog upon a person who, at the time of injury, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; who was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had done so in the past; or who was attempting to commit a crime. If the person injured is a child of tender years, the age, understanding, and capacity of such child shall be considered to determine whether such child was capable of committing a willful trespass or other tort or a crime. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-93. - Classification as dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; notice to owner. 
(a)  When the animal control officer classifies any dog as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog under this article, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. If a dog has more than one owner, notice to one owner shall be sufficient for purposes of this article. If there is a question as to the dog's ownership, notice shall be deemed sufficient if sent to the last person who received a citation for the dog. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that form the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing on the classification within 15 days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the animal control hoard shall conduct the hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if the owner does not request such a hearing within 15 days from the date of the notice, the classification of the dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be final and conclusive for all purposes. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such a request. 
(b)  When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing from an owner, it shall schedule such a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the request. The animal control board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing; such notice shall be made to the owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence. 
The animal control board shall also receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as it may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify, or overrule the classification of the dog by the animal control officer. Within ten days of the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If the determination is made that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
Unless the board determines that a later date is appropriate in a particular case, the effective date of the determination shall be the date of the animal control officer's classification. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of a dog which the animal control officer has classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog cannot be determined, the dog shall be immediately confiscated. 
If the dog's owner claims such a dog, the dog shall be released to its owner, together with a copy of the notice specified in subsection (a) of this section, upon proof of strict compliance with all provisions of this chapter. If the dog remains unclaimed for five days, the dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. Under no circumstances shall such dog be placed for adoption. In addition, all fees as described in this article must be paid before the dog will be released. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-94. - Requirements for possession of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  Any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be jointly and severally responsible with all other owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of such dog for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog except in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements for a proper enclosure set forth in section 10-29(b)(l), owners, possessors, guardians or custodians who maintain their dangerous or potentially dangerous dog out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a second perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter or area fence, the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad. The gate to the kennel shall be inward-opening and shall be kept locked, except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to be outside of its proper enclosure as provided for in section 10-29(b)(l) and section 10-74(b)(l), unless the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dog is attended by the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian, and the dog is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced. 
(3)  The premises where a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. Such signs shall include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is a dog on the premises which presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall be conspicuously displayed on each side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two signs, as well as a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. The signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(4)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall maintain at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. 
(5)  The animal control officer or his designee shall have the right to inspect randomly and without notice a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog which is required to be confined pursuant to this Section. 
(6)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall, prior to placing dogs on property, have the dog micro-chip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to Cherokee County Animal Control. The owner shall keep the registration information updated. 
(7)  Except when being transported to a licensed veterinary facility, dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs shall not be allowed off the property of the owner. 
(8)  Should transport to veterinary care be needed, the animal shall be securely and humanely confined within a vehicle. Movement of the animal from the residence of the owner to and from the transporting vehicle and to and from the veterinary facility shall be conducted with the animal securely leashed by a leash no longer than six feet in length and muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-95. - Registration of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  No dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be permitted to remain within the city, unless it is registered in accordance with this section. In addition to the annual registration fees provided otherwise in this chapter, the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee and shall register such owner's dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog according to the classification and determination previously made under this article. 
No dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be registered unless the owner can provide sufficient evidence that all of the provisions of section 14-64 have been and are being met. 
(b)  The registration provided by this section shall be nontransferable. The registration shall be renewed annually or upon the earlier transfer of ownership or possession of the dog or a change in the location of the dog's primary habitat. 
(c)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the dog as required in this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(d)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the county does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements of this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-96. - Transfer of ownership or possession. 
Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the transferor shall provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone numbers of the new owner of the dog and of the effective date of the transfer. 
Any transferee of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be presumed to have notice of the dog's classification as such. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-97. - Notice to dog control officer. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer in person or by telephone within 24 hours of the occurrence of any one of the following events: 
(a)  The dog has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such dog to be physically secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent adult. 
(b)  Such dog has attacked a human being or other animal. 
(c)  Such dog has been sold, given, or otherwise transferred to the ownership or possession of another person. 
(d)  The dog has died. 
(e)  The dog is leaving the city. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-98. - Confiscation and disposition of dogs. 
(a)  If an animal control officer or police officer has probable cause to believe that a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is being harbored in violation of this article, such officer or agent may do one of the following: 
(1)  Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner of the dog to appear in court for the violation; or 
(2)  If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the dog is posing a threat to human beings or other domestic animals, the dog may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner will be cited to appear in court for the violation. Upon approval of the marshal and at the owner's request and expense, such impoundment may be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing. 
(b)  Absent an order from the court to the contrary, any dog which has been confiscated under this section shall be returned to its owner only following disposition by the court on the citation and only then upon the owner's proof of strict compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of actual boarding expenses, plus reasonable confiscation costs, which shall be $100.00 upon the first confiscation of any dog, $200.00 upon the second, and $400.00 upon the third or subsequent confiscation. 
If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article and paid such confiscation costs within twenty (20) days following disposition by the Court, the dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-99. - Report to district attorney and solicitor. 
The animal control officer shall report to the district attorney the conduct of any owner which the animal control officer believes may constitute a felony under the Act. 
The animal control officer shall report to the solicitor the conduct of any owner that the animal control officer reasonably believes may constitute a misdemeanor under the Act. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Sec. 14-100. - Penalties. 
In addition to any other penalty that is available under this chapter, the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who violates this article shall be subject, at a minimum, to the penalties as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28 of the Act, and as such may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Secs. 14-101—14-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 14-151. - Adoption of state law. 
O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40, et seq., and as it may be amended from time to time, which is also known as "Mercedes' Law," is hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein for enforcement and regulation by Cherokee County Animal Control for vicious dogs in the city. 
(Ord. of 8-4-08, § 1) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— As part of its zoning ordinance adopted September 19, 1994, the city adopted by reference all state minimum standard building and construction codes as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Construction site portable toilets. 
(a)  Nonsewered toilets must be available to workers during the active construction process. If there are inactive construction periods of one month or more when no workers are on sites served by the unit, toilets are not required during such times. 
(b)  One unit may serve workers during the "active construction process" for up to four work sites, if all work sites are within 200 feet walking distance of the unit. The building inspector will not inspect/approve any inspection unless the nonsewered toilet system is within 200 feet and available for use. Location, sanitary maintenance, and use of a unit are the responsibility of the builder of the lot on which the unit is located. 
(c)  Compliance with these requirements will afford workers with proper sanitary facilities onsite and will reduce hazards to health and the environment. Building department officials will respond immediately to any complaint received concerning the lack of portable toilets on any construction site by simply shutting down all construction sites in the vicinity, which are not in compliance of the City of Holly Springs regulation. Implementation will begin on May 1, 2005. Inspectors will not perform requested building or technical trade inspections on any construction site within the city, which are not in compliance with the City of Holly Springs regulations and written interpretations. 
(d)  Construction sites within the city limits found in violation of regulations, in the opinion of a city building inspector, will be issued a complimentary notice of violation stating "NO NSTS," which will be attached to your building permit yard card. After placing this complimentary notice of violation on the permit yard card, the city inspector will leave the site without performing the requested inspection. There will be no exceptions to this position. The burden of compliance will remain with the permit holder. For first time violators for the same site inspections may easily be resumed upon notification from the permit holder, stating the violation site is in NSTS compliance. Permit holders may report compliance anytime during normal city work hours, but reinspections will be performed at any repeat violation site until written proof of compliance is received by the building department. 
(e)  As a guideline to help permit holders quickly gain compliance with the city regulations, the building department offers the following advise for proper placement and maintenance of portable toilets, so as not to delay construction schedules due to noncompliance to NSTS requirements: 
(1)  Portable toilets shall be installed in a reasonably level position and be easily accessible to users. 
(2)  Portable toilets shall not be located upon any public street or public right-of-way in Holly Springs. 
(3)  Portable toilets shall be located upon natural ground and not on an impervious surface such as asphalt or concrete. 
(4)  Portable toilets must be located on buildable lots with written permission of the property owner. 
(5)  Portable toilets located within one- and two-family dwelling unit subdivisions must be located within 200 feet walking distance of the construction that it serves. 
(6)  Owners of property containing portable toilets are responsible for maintaining the portable toilets in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(7)  Portable toilets must be cleaned and serviced by a licensed NSTS service at least once per week, or more frequently as needed to maintain a sanitary use environment. 
(8)  Portable toilets shall be placed at least 100 feet from any body of water and installed in such a way as to insure that there is no possibility of a spill or run-off into any body of water. 
(9)  In cases where multiple builders or contractors are working in one subdivision, the city strongly urges all builders in that subdivision to meet and agree among themselves, where to initially locate portable toilets and then mutually agree where to relocate the portable toilets as construction progresses to maintain NSTS compliance. 
(Ord. of 2-24-05) 
Sec. 18-2. - Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms. 
(a)  Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  In each sleeping room (local amendment). 
(2)  Outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. 
(3)  On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabited attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split-levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
(b)  When more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit the alarm devices shall be interconnected in such a manner that the actuation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
(c)  All smoke alarms shall be listed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72. 
(Ord. of 1-20-04(1)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 20, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as § 18-38. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 18-2. 
Sec. 18-3. - Hot water recirculation pumps. 
All hot water within residential homes is required to have a hot water recirculation pump. 
(1)  Check valve required and hot water heater recirculation pump. 
(2)  No faucets or fixtures attached to return lines. 
(3)  Continuous pipe loop from hot water heater. 
(4)  Two-inch minimum clearance between hot and cold water lines. 
(5)  Insulate all hot water lines. 
(Ord. of 1-20-04(2)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 20, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as § 18-39. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 18-3. 
Secs. 18-4—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 1991, § 6-1-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-32. - Residential standards. 
No construction may be initiated within the city of any residential building of any type that: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 1991, § 6-1-22) 
Sec. 18-33. - Commercial standards. 
There shall not be initiated within the city the construction of any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 18-32(1)—(5). 
(Code 1991, § 6-1-23) 
Sec. 18-34. - Applicability. 
The requirements of section 18-32 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after April 1, 1993, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Code 1991, § 6-1-24) 
Sec. 18-35. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-32, 18-33 and 18-34 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee for the inspection and issuance of such exemption shall be charged in an amount equal to that charged by the county for a building inspection or as established by the city council. 
(Code 1991, § 6-1-25) 
Sec. 18-36. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced, including by the issuance of citations, by the office of the building inspector of the city, the county planning, zoning and building department, or by such other agents acting on behalf of the city. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be tried before any court of law having jurisdiction. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1991, § 6-1-26) 
Sec. 18-37. - Grandfather clause. 
This article shall not apply to any construction of a residential building the contract for which was entered into prior to April 1, 1992, and shall not apply to any construction of a commercial building the contract for which was entered into prior to April 1, 1993. 
(Code 1991, § 6-1-27) 
ARTICLE III. - SPACE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS 

Sec. 18-38. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the health and safety of residents by providing for sufficient space for each person occupying a residential dwelling. 
(Ord. of 8-15-05(1)) 
Sec. 18-39. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Dwelling": For purposes of this article, the term "dwelling" shall be as defined in the Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance. 
"Occupant": means any person who sleeps in a residential dwelling. 
"Unfinished": means any space which does not meet the minimum requirements of the building codes in effect in the City of Holly Springs. 
(Ord. of 8-15-05(1)) 
Sec. 18-40. - Minimum space per occupant. 
There shall be at least 50 square feet of sleeping space per occupant, excluding bathrooms, complete kitchen facilities, living rooms, closets, halls, storage areas and utility areas, accessory structures or unfinished garages, basements or attics. 
(Ord. of 8-15-05(1)) 
Sec. 18-41. - Persons responsible. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced against all adult occupants of any residential dwelling found to be in violation. In addition, the provisions of this article may be enforced against the owner of any residential dwelling if the owner has knowledge, or has failed to take action to prohibit a violation. 
(Ord. of 8-15-05(1)) 
Sec. 18-42. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector, by a code enforcement official of the City of Holly Springs, or by the police department. 
(b)  The municipal court for the City of Holly Springs may issue warrants to permit inspection of any residential dwelling where sufficient evidence is shown to the municipal court judge that a violation may be occurring. 
(Ord. of 8-15-05(1)) 
Sec. 18-43. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as set forth in section 1-12, such fine to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. 
(b)  In addition to a citation and fine, this article may be enforced by injunction or other appropriate remedy sought by the City of Holly Springs to require compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-15-05(1)) 
Secs. 18-44—18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF STATE MINIMUM STANDARD CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 1.1) 
Sec. 18-52. - Codes remedial. 
(a)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the build environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The City of Holly Springs, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 1.2) 
Sec. 18-53. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability: 
(1)  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alterations, repairs, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling. The provisions of the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwellings or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)  The unsafe building abatement code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 1.3) 
Sec. 18-54. - Building department. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by section 18-141, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall be thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He/She may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 1.4) 
Sec. 18-55. - Existing buildings. 
Generally. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification or zoning of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 1.5) 
Sec. 18-56. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. Structures deemed historic shall apply for and receive a certificate of appropriateness from the Holly Springs Historic Commission prior to a permit being issued. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 1.5) 
Secs. 18-57—18-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 18-71. - Generally. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 2.1) 
Sec. 18-72. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 2.2) 
Sec. 18-73. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 2.3) 
Sec. 18-74. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 2.4) 
Sec. 18-75. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe building, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 2.5) 
Sec. 18-76. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 2.6) 
Sec. 18-77. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safely. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 2.7) 
Secs. 18-78—18-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 18-91. - Application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Exception: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.1) 
Sec. 18-92. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, three or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computation, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice or architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications an accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 sq. ft. (465m^2) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.2) 
Sec. 18-93. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conforms to the construction codes. For building and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, stains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are preformed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.3) 
Sec. 18-94. - Issuance. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lost or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the city planner for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.4) 
Sec. 18-95. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.5) 
Sec. 18-96. - Conditions. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless: 
(1)  The work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance; or 
(2)  If the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced; or 
(3)  If the work has not been completed and a final inspection received within one year of the permit issuance date. 
One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit after the building official has determined and received a reasonable renewal fee based upon any construction efforts made under the original permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Approval of a request for extension shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.6) 
Sec. 18-97. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees and shall be subject to appear before the municipal judge for further fines and or corrective action. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(f)  Method of applying cost of construction. In order to set a uniform method of applying cost of construction to all commercial and multifamily construction, the International Code Council's Building Valuation Data sheet for square foot construction cost along with all future updates shall be applied. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.7; Ord. of 10-17-05(1)) 
Sec. 18-98. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings; structures; electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems; from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f). He/She may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by a provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required or site requirements, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction of shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.  Note: See Section 311 to the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundation, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection: to be made after the building is complete and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-vale of ceiling and floor insulation. To verity correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathering and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.8) 
Sec. 18-99. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorized disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.9) 
Sec. 18-100. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect of engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 3.10) 
Secs. 18-101—18-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TESTS 

Sec. 18-121. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 4) 
Secs. 18-122—18-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 18-141. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The governing body shall appoint the board. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 5.1) 
Sec. 18-142. - Membership and terms. 
(a)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals serving on the board of commissioners with knowledge and experience in the construction codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)  Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(d)  Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 5.2) 
Sec. 18-143. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 18-144, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 5.3) 
Sec. 18-144. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations there under have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Requirements for variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 5.4) 
Sec. 18-145. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Establishment. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decisions. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 5.5) 
Secs. 18-146—18-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 18-161. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the construction codes is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 6) 
Secs. 18-162—18-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-181. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted there under, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Ord. of 10-21-03, § 7) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; secondhand goods, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 9-5-1 et seq. of the 1991 Code relating to going out of business sales is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 22-2—22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Occupation and business taxes, § 6.03. 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

Sec. 22-36. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city shall pay an occupation tax for the business, trade, profession or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-41) 
Sec. 22-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business license means a certificate or receipt issued by the city, providing evidence that a person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city is compliant with this chapter and current with requisite taxes and fees due. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Independent contractor means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer, but whose employer does not necessarily withhold FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. 1099 or equivalent. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site that serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. When stated in this code, the term is all inclusive of taxes levied for conducting business in the city. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 90 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-42; Ord. of 11-16-09, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-38. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses - regulatory activities - listed below. The regulatory fee shall be paid in lieu of the occupation tax, and upon payment and compliance with the additional requirements of this chapter, receive a business license. The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as shown on the schedule of regulatory fees, as may from time to time be modified by the City Council. 
As stated under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b) and in the City of Holly Springs, regulatory activities subject to the regulatory fee are as follows: 
(1)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, and workers; 
(2)  Carnivals; 
(3)  Taxicab and limousine operators; 
(4)  Tattoo artists; 
(5)  Stables; 
(6)  Scrap metal processors; 
(7)  Pawnbrokers; 
(8)  Dealers in precious metals; 
(9)  Peddlers; 
(10)  Parking lots; 
(11)  Newspaper vending boxes; 
(12)  Modeling agencies; 
(13)  Landfills; 
(14)  Auto and motorcycle racing; 
(15)  Boarding houses; 
(16)  Businesses which provide appearance bonds; 
(17)  Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
(18)  Hypnotists; 
(19)  Handwriting analysts; 
(20)  Fortunetellers; 
(21)  Garbage collectors; 
(22)  Escort services; 
(23)  Burglar and fire alarm installers; 
(24)  Locksmiths; 
(25)  Model home; and 
(26)  Vending machines, boxes. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-43; Ord. of 11-16-09, § 2; Ord. of 1-21-10(2)) 
Sec. 22-39. - Occupation tax levied. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. The amount of the tax shall be as shown on a schedule of taxes as may from time to time be modified by the city council. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the number of employees shall mean the number of full-time employees. This shall include all employees who work 40 hours or more per week; and for part-time employees, the total number of hours worked per week shall be added together and divided by 40 to determine an equivalent number of full-time employees. 
(c)  In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees expected to be employed for the new year and pay a tax based on the estimated number of employees. 
(d)  Independent contractors and sole proprietors shall be assessed the per employee occupation tax rate for a single employee plus the administrative fee. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-44; Ord. of 9-18-06, § 1; Ord. of 11-16-09, § 3) 
Sec. 22-40. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property that generates income and is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-45) 
Sec. 22-41. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-46) 
Sec. 22-42. - Multiple locations. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-47) 
Sec. 22-43. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) and listed under (c) below may elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A flat fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; however, a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the city relating to the number of employees of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. Unless otherwise elected, the city shall levy the flat fee occupation tax rate, more particularly described under subsection (2) above. 
(b)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(c)  Practitioners of professions under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), subject to compliance with this section include the following professions: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. 43-34; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. 43-34; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Massage therapists; 
(6)  Podiatrists; 
(7)  Dentists; 
(8)  Optometrists; 
(9)  Psychologists; 
(10)  Veterinarians; 
(11)  Landscape architects; 
(12)  Land surveyors; 
(13)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(14)  Public accountants; 
(15)  Embalmers; 
(16)  Funeral directors; 
(17)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(18)  Architects; 
(19)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
(20)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in paragraph O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); 
(21)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with Code Section 48-17-9; 
(22)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(23)  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(d)  This Code section shall not be construed to repeal other general laws which allow or require regulation of businesses, occupations, or professions by local governments. 
(e)  For each business, profession, or occupation, local governments are authorized to determine the amount of a regulatory fee imposed in accordance with this article only by one of the following methods: 
(1)  A flat fee for each business or practitioner of a profession or occupation doing business in the jurisdiction as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; 
(2)  A flat fee for each type of permit or inspection requested; 
(3)  An hourly rate determined by the hourly wage or salary, including employee benefits, of the person or persons assigned to investigate or inspect multiplied by the number of hours estimated for the investigation or inspection to be performed; 
(4)  An hourly rate as determined by paragraph (3) of this subsection with the addition of other expenses reasonably related to such regulatory activity, such as administrative and travel expenses, multiplied by the number of hours estimated for the investigation or inspection to be performed; 
(5)  For construction projects that are classified as new construction, the number of square feet of construction or the number of square feet of construction to be served by the system to be installed, in conjunction with and limited by the building valuation data, as established from time to time by the International Code Council or by similar data, and in conjunction with and limited by the hourly rate described in paragraph (3) or (4) of this subsection; or 
(6)  For construction projects that are classified as renovation and all other construction projects other than those classified as new construction, the cost of the project in conjunction with and limited by the building valuation data that conforms with the principles and methods established from time to time by the International Code Council or by similar data, and in conjunction with and limited by the hourly rate described in paragraph (3) or (4) of this subsection. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 4) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 4, repealed the former § 22-43, and enacted a new § 22-43 as set out herein. The former § 22-43 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-44. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Registration and occupation taxes shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of each year, be delinquent and assessed an interest charge of 1.5 percent. Should such occupation tax not be paid before April 1, an additional penalty of ten percent will be assessed to the balance of the tax or fee shall also be due, at which time a final notice shall be issued to the past due person or business account. 
(b)  The final notice shall include the occupation taxes due, along with notice that after April 1, the past due business account will be closed, and a citation to the Municipal Court of the City of Holly Springs will be issued in accordance with section 22-58. The business account shall only be reinstated when past due occupation taxes, fees, and penalties are paid and current. 
(c)  On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business, with a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city manager or designee; and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained registration, such offender shall be punished in accordance with section 22-58. 
(d)  In addition to the above remedies, the police chief or designee may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(e)  Any person beginning business in the city on or after July 1 of any calendar year shall be taxed at 90 percent of the annual rate. On or after October 1, any person beginning business in the city shall be taxed at 75 percent of the annual rate. On or after December 1, any person beginning business in the city shall be taxed at 50 percent of the annual rate. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 5; Ord. No. 06-2017, § 1, 3-20-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 5, repealed the former § 22-44, and enacted a new § 22-44 as set out herein. The former § 22-44 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995 and Ord. of November 16, 2009. 
Sec. 22-45. - Exemption for charitable businesses. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 90 percent or more of the entire proceeds from that business is devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-50) 
Sec. 22-46. - Application requirements for occupation tax; business license issuance. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall set forth the occupation tax application format, determining the pertinent information needed, in addition to the requirements set forth below. 
(b)  State licensure. Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the business license may be issued. Said license shall also be submitted with each annual renewal. Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(c)  Evidence of qualification . Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a business license, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(d)  Zoning . Compliance with the Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance, verified by the zoning administrator, shall be required prior to the issuance of a business license. 
(e)  Verifying status. Applicants shall comply with the federal S.A.V.E. Program and the Georgia Security and Immigration Compliance Act (GSICA), where applicable, now and as amended, and successor programs and statutes. Falsifying citizenship or alien status shall be punishable in accordance with O.C.G.A 16-10-20. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 6) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 6, repealed the former § 22-46, and enacted a new § 22-43 as set out herein. The former § 22-43 pertained to evidence of state registration required if applicable and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 7, repealed § 22-47, which pertained to evidence of qualification required if applicable and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 8, repealed § 22-48, which pertained to penalty and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-49. - Exempt businesses. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the United States armed forces was involved, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
(2)  Blind persons; 
(3)  Veterans of peace-time service in the United States armed forces who has a physical disability which was incurred during that service; 
(4)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(5)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor acting pursuant to a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair; 
(6)  Real estate brokers, except at the principal or branch office of a real estate broker; 
(7)  Motor vehicles required to be registered with the public service commission; 
(8)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(9)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. 46-3; 
(10)  Any Farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(11)  Non-profit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(12)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(13)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(14)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the City agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is make within ninety (90) days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(15)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(16)  Any business on which the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or in the United States. 
The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 9) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 9, repealed the former § 22-49, and enacted a new § 22-49 as set out herein. The former § 22-49 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-50. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-55) 
Sec. 22-51. - Inspections of books and records. 
The city council, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city; and upon demand of the city clerk, city manager or designee, or police chief, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination. If after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 100 percent will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 10) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 10, repealed the former § 22-51, and enacted a new § 22-51 as set out herein. The former § 22-51 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-52. - Revocation for failure to pay tax, file returns or permit inspection. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any business to pay an occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any returns within the time required, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business for the current year shall be ipso facto revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city council in accordance with provisions found in section 22-51. In the case of those practitioners when the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(b)  Any persons, their managers, agents or employee, who do business in the city after the registration for the business has been revoked shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-57) 
Sec. 22-53. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided for in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied, the city clerk or city manager, upon any tax or installment of tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of tax against the person liable for tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent; and the lien shall cover the property in the city or the person liable for tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of state law. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the police chief upon the property of defendant located in the city's jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and state law. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-58) 
Sec. 22-54. - Applications of provisions to prior legislation. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any legislation heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior legislation have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of legislation heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing the execution for any tax or assessment required by such legislation, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such legislation, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95, § 3-2-59) 
Sec. 22-55. - Revocation. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties provided by section 22-44, the city council may revoke the license of, and prohibit the operation of, any business or establishment for which a license may have been issued, in the event the same becomes a nuisance or is dangerous, hazardous or injurious to the health or morals of the inhabitants of said City of Holly Springs, and in the case of such, licenses shall be refunded. No business license may be revoked by the city without first having provided the business owner, person, firm or corporation with written notice stating the grounds on which the city council may choose to proceed, setting forth the time and place of the hearing on the revocation of such license. 
(b)  The city council may, if it finds this article or another city code has been violated by the licensee, an agent, or employee, instead of revoking a license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the city council may deem necessary. The city council may choose to revoke the license, ordering the business, person, firm, or corporation to cease and desist engaging in the business, trade, profession or occupation in the city. The decision of the city council revoking any such license shall be final. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 11) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 11, repealed the former § 22-55, and enacted a new § 22-55 as set out herein. The former § 22-55 pertained to enforcement and derived from Ord. of November 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-56. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 12) 
Sec. 22-57. - Enforcement. 
It is the duty of the city manager or designee, city clerk, and the police chief to enforce the provisions of this article, ensuring that compliance is observed, and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is also the duty of the city manager or designee, city clerk, and chief of police and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted under this article. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 13) 
Sec. 22-58. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Holly Springs. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 14) 
Secs. 22-59—22-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-10 , § 1, adopted July 15, 2013, repealed §§ 22-86—22-89, which pertained to auctions. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 22-86—22-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention regulatory license from state for traveling motion picture shows, carnivals and circuses, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-20; Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities, and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means and includes circuses, menageries, sideshows, and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Code 1991, § 9-6-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-122. - Requirements. 
The provisions of this Code requiring the payment of occupation taxes and compliance with the business tax registration requirements as set forth in section 22-36 et seq. shall apply to circuses, carnivals and public exhibitions, in addition to the following: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers and other debris, and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(2)  All rides have been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical and other hazards by the appropriate officers and employees of the city, and adequate safeguards have been placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches, and other possible or potential hazards. 
(3)  The applicant has placed on file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for each person, and $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Code 1991, § 9-6-3) 
Sec. 22-123. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire chief to see that proper inspections and patrols are made of the premises used for the activities licensed in this article. 
(Code 1991, § 9-6-4) 
Secs. 22-124—22-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POOL AND BILLIARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 

Sec. 22-156. - Requirements. 
The provisions of this Code requiring the payment of occupation taxes and compliance with the business tax registration requirements as set forth in section 22-36 et seq. shall apply to pool and billiard rooms. 
Sec. 22-157. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city to permit such establishment to be open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. weekdays or between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
(Code 1991, § 9-8-3) 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 
Secs. 22-158—22-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSURERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 22-191. - Insurers. 
(a)  Insurers license fees. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Holly Springs, Georgia in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b), which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Holly Springs, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurers writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Code 1991, § 3-2-57; Ord. of 2-21-94; Ord. of 11-16-09, § 15; Ord. of 9-19-11, § 1) 
Secs. 22-192—22-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation generally, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 22-226. - Levied. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, the city levies a business license tax from depository financial institutions having an office located within the city at a rate not to exceed 0.25 percent of the Georgia gross receipts, as defined and allocated in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95 and this Code section, of said depository financial institutions. The minimum annual amount of such levy upon any depository financial institution shall be not more than $1,000.00. 
(b)  Every depository financial institution subject to the tax authorized by this Code section shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the State of Georgia based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (c) of this Code section. The return shall provide the information necessary to determine the portion of the taxpayer's Georgia gross receipts to be allocated to the city, for each respective institution office located herein. The city shall assess and collect said tax based upon the information provided in the returns, in accordance with subsection (a) above. 
(c)  A depository financial institution's Georgia gross receipts shall be allocated among each taxing jurisdiction in which such institution has an office as of December 31 of the year in which gross receipts are measured, as follows: 
(1)  Each jurisdiction shall be assigned the gross receipts attributable to the offices located within such jurisdiction; and 
(2)  In determining the amount of "gross receipts" attributable to each office, 20 percent of the institution's Georgia gross receipts shall be attributable to that institution's principal Georgia office, which for this purpose shall be the Georgia office to which the greatest amount of deposits by value are attributable. The remaining 80 percent of Georgia gross receipts shall be attributable to the institution's other Georgia offices, pro rata according to the number of such offices. The term "office" as used in this section means a place of business of a depository financial institution at which the institution accepts deposits but shall not include unmanned automatic teller machines, point-of-sale terminals, or other similar unmanned electronic facilities at which deposits may be accepted. If there are fewer than five offices in addition to the principal Georgia office, the amount of gross receipts attributable to each such office shall be determined by dividing the Georgia gross receipts by the aggregate number of such offices. 
(d)  Any tax paid by a depository financial institution pursuant to this Code section shall be credited dollar for dollar against any state income tax liability of such institution for the tax year during which any business or occupation tax authorized by this section is paid. Such credit shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-7-29.7. 
(e)  Except as authorized by this Code section, no municipality or county shall levy any form of business license tax, fee, franchise, or occupation tax on any depository financial institution. 
(f)  The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-16-09, § 16) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 16, 2009, § 16, repealed the former § 22-236, and enacted a new § 22-236 as set out herein. The former § 22-236 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1991, § 3-2-55. 
Secs. 22-227—22-236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 22-237. - Tax levied. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq., there is levied an excise tax upon hotels and motels as provided in this section. This article shall be known as the "Hotel-Motel Excise Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-238. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Holly Springs and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Holly Springs is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq. 
City clerk means the duly appointed City Clerk of the City of Holly Springs or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-239. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of three percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 22-241. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-240. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of three percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 22-241. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-241. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from a permanent resident; the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or any official or employee of the state, or of its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-242. - Registration of operator; certificate of authority; due date and penalty; return; operator's collection fee. 
(a)  Registration; certificate. Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after September 1, 1997. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(b)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(c)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of taxes when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(d)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk showing the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-243. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-244. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 22-243(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-245. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-246. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Such records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by such official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Sec. 22-247. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required by this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 7-21-97) 
Secs. 22-248—22-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASSAGE THERAPY PROFESSION—BODYWORK THERAPISTS AND BODYWORK THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of January 21, 2010, § 1, repealed the former art. IX, §§ 22-260—22-281, and enacted a new art. IX as set out herein. The former art. IX pertained to massage establishments and derived from Ord. of October 17, 2005. 

Sec. 22-260. - Findings; public purpose. 
The mayor and city council find that the general assembly has adopted O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1, et seq. the "Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act," which imposes licensing requirements on massage therapists. The Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act and this article seek to clearly differentiate between the therapeutic and beneficial services of massage therapists, licensed by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy, and other types of bodywork and massage businesses that are, in most instances, operated by persons who are not licensed by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy. In fact, the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act does not impose any requirements upon those persons or establishments in the business of providing bodywork therapy. 
The mayor and city council find that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to provide for the regulation of bodywork therapists and bodywork therapy establishments. Based upon research and the experience of other communities and municipalities, the mayor and city council find that certain bodywork therapy establishments beget and degenerate into undesirable community conditions including, but not limited to, depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditures for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Accordingly, it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to enact regulations to reduce the adverse impacts of bodywork therapy establishments. 
However, the mayor and city council also find that the outright prohibition of such establishments could improperly infringe upon certain constitutional rights of those wishing to operate licensed establishments. The mayor and city council find that qualified bodywork therapists have received extensive training to provide bodywork therapy that has been proven to be therapeutic; however, regulations are necessary to protect the public from unqualified practitioners. The mayor and city council find that it is in the best interests of the public to set guidelines and procedures for those who seek to practice bodywork therapy; to promote high standards of professional performance for those practicing bodywork therapy; and to protect the public from unprofessional conduct by persons licensed to practice bodywork therapy. 
This article seeks to clearly differentiate between the therapeutic and beneficial services of bodywork therapists, and other types of bodywork and massage businesses that are, in most instances, operated by persons who have little or no formal training in bodywork therapy, and are commercial operations for illegal sexually oriented services. The mayor and city council find that state licensed massage therapists have received extensive training to provide massage therapy that has been proven to be therapeutic; however, regulations are necessary to protect the public from unqualified practitioners. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to differentiate from massage therapy and reasonably regulate bodywork therapy and bodywork therapy establishments in a manner that serves the legitimate governmental interests of reducing criminal activity, protecting property values, and providing for safe and sanitary conditions without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of licensed bodywork therapy establishments and their patrons. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-261. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are to clarify terms found in this article. Terms in this article that are not defined herewith shall be defined by the customary dictionary definition. If the term cannot be found or if there is no logical nexus between the term in this article and a dictionary, the police chief shall seek to provide a suitable definition. 
Advertise: The act or practice of calling public attention to one's service by the issuing of or causing to be distributed any card, sign, or other device or causing or permitting any sign or marking on or in any building or structure, or in any newspaper, magazine, or directory, or announcement on radio, or announcement or display on television, computer network, or electronic or telephonic medium. 
Asian bodywork therapy: The treatment of human body, mind, emotions, spirit, and energy field using traditional Asian techniques and treatment strategies based on principles of Chinese medicine for the purpose of promoting, maintaining, and restoring health. 
Asian bodywork therapist: A person providing Asian bodywork therapy who has completed minimum training as set by American Organization for Bodywork Therapies of Asia, and/or completion of the National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine (NCCAOM) Asian bodywork therapy certification exam. 
Board: The Georgia Board of Massage Therapy. 
Business name: The name under which the owner applies for an establishment license to provide massage or bodywork therapy. 
Bodywork therapist: One who engages in the practice of a bodywork therapy discipline(s). 
Bodywork therapy: A general term that refers to a group of body-based approaches to treatment that emphasize manipulation and realignment of the body's structure in order to improve its function as well as the client's mental outlook. These therapies typically combine a relatively passive phase, in which the client receives deep-tissue bodywork or postural correction from an experienced instructor or practitioner, and a more active period of movement education, in which the client practices sitting, standing, and moving about with better alignment of the body and greater ease of motion. Bodywork therapy may include, but is not limited to, Asian bodywork therapy, polarity therapy, reflexology, and structural integration. Bodywork therapies are not regulated in the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. Persons operating under the term of bodywork therapy may not advertise or operate under the term of massage therapist unless a Georgia massage therapist active state license has been issued in their name. Bodywork therapy shall not include a diagnosis, service or procedure normally provided by a doctor of medicine, doctor of chiropractic, or doctor of podiatry, nor shall it apply to massage therapists, athletic trainers, technicians, or physical therapists who act by prescription or under the supervision of an authorized licensee to practice medicine or surgery, approved by the Georgia Composite Medical Board or the Georgia Secretary of State Professional Licensing Boards Division. See section 22-262. 
Bodywork therapy establishment: Any business, conducted in whatever form, where one or more bodywork therapists perform bodywork therapy on a site or premises, or portion thereof, for compensation. Bodywork therapy establishments shall not include any establishment exempted by section 22-289 of this article. 
City: The City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
Employee: Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massage therapist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage or bodywork therapy business and receives compensation from the operator of the business. 
Good moral character: A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years. 
Governing authority: The governing authority of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
License, Active State Massage Therapy: A valid and current certificate of registration issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy. Pending status is not active status and is not included under this definition. 
License, bodywork therapist: The certificate issued by the city that illustrates compliance with this article. 
License, bodywork therapy establishment: The certificate issued by the city that illustrates compliance with this article. 
Licensee: Any person holding a business establishment license issued hereunder. 
Massage therapist: A person holding an active state massage therapy license, issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy, who administers massage or massage therapy for compensation. Pending status is not active status and shall not be included under this definition. Bodywork therapists without an active state massage therapy license are not included in this definition. 
Massage or massage therapy: Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including, without limitation, the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices that do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and that mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands. The term also includes evaluation by the state-licensed massage therapist to determine whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, or other deep thermal modalities. Massage therapy shall not include a diagnosis, service or procedure normally provided by a Doctor of Medicine, Doctor of Chiropractic, or Doctor of Podiatry, nor shall it apply to athletic trainers, technicians, or physical therapists who act by prescription or under the supervision of an authorized licensee to practice medicine or surgery, approved by the Georgia Composite Medical Board or the Georgia Secretary of State Professional Licensing Boards Division. Massage therapy shall not include any conduct or activity that is otherwise prohibited by state, federal or local law. O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-3 
Massage therapy establishment: Any business, conducted in whatever form, where one or more massage therapists perform massage therapy on a site or premises, or portion thereof, wherein a massage therapist with an active state license practices massage for compensation. Massage therapy establishments shall not include any establishment exempted by section 22-289 of this article. 
Minor: For the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Operator: Manager or other natural person principally in charge of an establishment. 
Out-call bodywork therapy service: Bodywork therapy service provided by a bodywork therapist at a location designated by the patron or the bodywork therapist, other than at the designated approved bodywork therapy establishment. Services may not be performed at the place of residence of the bodywork therapist. 
Owner or owners: The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors and persons holding ten percent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. 
Patron: Any person over 18 years of age who receives bodywork therapy under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefore. 
Person: A natural person only. 
Polarity therapy: The treatment of the human body, mind, emotions, spirit, and energy fields for the purpose of promoting, maintaining, and restoring health. 
Polarity therapist: A person who has completed minimum training requirements as established by the American Polarity Therapy Association&reg;, and/or designation as a registered polarity practitioner. 
Reflexology: The application of alternating pressure applied to the reflexes within the reflex maps of the body located on the feet, hands, and outer ears. 
Reflexologist: A person who has completed minimum training as established by the American Reflexology Certification Board, and/or passed the American Reflexology Certification Exam. 
Sexually oriented business: Any adult business, including but not limited to, a sex parlor, massage parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video store, adult motel, spa or sauna alluding to sexual content or services, or other commercial business that offer items or services to provide sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Structural integration: The restoration of postural balance and functional ease by systematically aligning and integrating the human body in gravity. Structural integrators work through manipulation of the connective tissue matrix, enhancement of the client's awareness, and education. 
Structural integrator: A person who has completed minimum training, as set by the International Association of Structural Integrators&reg;, membership in or qualification for membership in IASI, and/or completion of the certification exam for structural integrators (SM). 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-262. - Bodywork therapy industries and other practices. 
(a)  The Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq., exempts from regulation certain therapeutic industries, which for the purposes of this code are known as bodywork therapy. All industries exempt from regulation of the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, as listed in O.C.G.A § 43-24A-19, now and as may be amended in the future, shall be required to apply for and receive a bodywork therapy license from the City of Holly Springs to operate in the city. 
(b)  Examples of bodywork therapy shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  A person licensed, registered, or certified under any other chapter or article under O.C.G.A. tit. 43 while engaged in the professional or trade practices properly conducted under authority of such other licensing laws, provided that such person shall not use the title of massage therapist; 
(2)  A person pursuing a course of study leading to a degree or certificate as a massage therapist in an educational program recognized by the board, if such person is designated by title indicating student status and is fulfilling uncompensated work experiences required for the attainment of the degree or certificate; 
(3)  A nonresident person rendering massage therapy up to 60 days during a 12-month period for treatment of a temporary sojourner only, provided that such nonresident massage therapist holds a license, registration, or certification from another state, jurisdiction, or country if the requirements as determined by the board for licensure are substantially equal to the requirements contained in this chapter or provided that such nonresident massage therapist is currently nationally certified in therapeutic massage and bodywork; 
(4)  Reflexology. A person who restricts his or her practice to the manipulation of the soft tissue of the human body to hands, feet, or ears who does not have the client disrobe and does not hold himself or herself out as a massage therapist; 
(5)  Hellerwork&reg;, Rolfing&reg; structural integration, structural integration. A person who uses touch and movement education to effect change in the structure of the body while engaged in the practice of structural integration, provided that he or she is a member of, or whose training would qualify for membership in, the International Association of Structural Integrators and provided that his or her services are not designated or implied to be massage or massage therapy; 
(6)  A person who uses touch to affect the energy systems, polarity, acupoints, or Qi meridians, also known as channels of energy, of the human body while engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics, provided that his or her services are not designated or implied to be massage or massage therapy: 
Asian bodywork therapy 
Acupressure 
Amma 
AMMA Therapy&reg; 
Chi Nei Tsang 
Craniosacral therapy 
Jin Shin 
Jin Shin Do&reg; bodymind acupressure 
Jin Shin Jitsu 
Jin Shin Jyutsu&reg; 
Medical Qigong 
Nuad Bo 'Rarn (traditional Thai bodywork) 
Okazaki restorative therapy 
Polarity 
Polarity therapy 
Polarity bodywork therapy 
Qigong 
Reiki 
Shiatsu (all forms including, but not limited to, Five Element Shiatsu, Integrative Eclectic Shiatsu, Japanese Shiatsu, Macrobiotic Shiatsu, Ohashiatsu&reg;, Quantum Shiatsu, Zen Shiatsu) 
Shiatsu Anma therapy 
Tuina 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-263. - Massage therapy licensing process; application requirements. 
Massage therapists and massage therapy establishments. Any person, operator, or owner desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of massage therapy or operate a massage therapy establishment in the city shall complete the following: 
(1)  Submit a copy of his or her active state massage therapy license issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy. O.C.G.A. § 43-24A, before engaging in that business trade or profession. Pending status shall not be accepted as active status. 
(2)  Seek from the city council any zoning or conditional use approval required. Upon zoning approval by the city council and with requisite occupation taxes paid, a business license to operate may then be issued. 
(3)  The current and active state massage therapy license shall be submitted upon annual business license renewal. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-264. - Bodywork therapy licensing process; application requirements. 
(a)  Bodywork therapy license required. No person shall engage in bodywork therapy without first obtaining a license from the city. 
(b)  Bodywork therapist license process. Any person desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of bodywork therapist, or a bodywork therapy establishment shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  File an application for a bodywork license with the city police department. 
(2)  Obtain approval of the location bodywork therapy establishment through the zoning or conditional use process. Upon approval of the location for the bodywork therapy establishment, said applicant may then apply for and receive an occupational tax license to operate. Upon the issuance of the occupational tax license, the bodywork establishment license as detailed in this article shall also be issued. 
(3)  Any corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other business entity may employ bodywork therapists, provided that each bodywork therapist shall obtain a bodywork therapy license, and the corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other business entity must obtain the approval for the location to provide the bodywork therapy. 
(c)  Bodywork therapist license application. All bodywork therapists must make application for a license and provide the following information: 
(1)  Applicant must provide evidence of certification by a nationally recognized organization, and/or evidence of successful completion of a psychometrically valid certification exam that tests for entry level competence in the bodywork profession; 
(2)  Personal information. 
a.  Name, 
b.  Date of birth, 
c.  Social Security Number, 
d.  Gender, 
e.  Home address, 
f.  Home telephone number, 
g.  Valid Georgia Driver's License or an official state sanctioned identification card, 
h.  Current two-inch by two-inch photograph of the applicant, taken within six months of application, 
i.  Address of place of employment, 
j.  Telephone number of place of employment; 
(3)  The applicant, including each owner, operator, and employee, must be fingerprinted by the Holly Springs Police Department. Fingerprints must be made at least 15 days prior to issuance of any license in order to allow for the investigation of the applicant; 
(4)  The applicant, including each owner, operator, and employee, shall provide a signed and notarized consent on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center authorizing the release of each such person's criminal records to the Holly Springs Police Department; 
(5)  If applicant has had a bodywork therapy license, massage therapy license or similar type of license denied, revoked or suspended, the applicant must state the violation that led to the denial, suspension or revocation, the date of the denial, suspension or violation, the disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether or not the terms of the disposition have been completed; 
(6)  The applicant must furnish a list of at least three character witnesses providing their names, addresses and telephone numbers; 
(7)  The applicant must furnish the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's previous employers for the last five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  If applicant has been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years, applicant must state a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed must be furnished; 
(9)  The applicant must provide a copy of the insurance policy covering property damage and bodily injury liability; 
(10)  The applicant must be a legal resident of the United States; 
(11)  Changes thereto shall be filed with said department within three days from the date the change becomes effective; 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-265. - Qualifications. 
Each applicant, operator, and all employees hereunder, prior to making application for a business license must have the following qualifications: 
(1)  All bodywork therapists must provide evidence of certification by a nationally recognized organization, and/or evidence of successful completion of a psychometrically valid certification exam that tests for entry level competence in the bodywork profession. 
(2)  The applicant, operator, and all employees may be male or female and must be of good moral character, and in case the applicant is a corporation, it must be created in or domesticated by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-266. - Renewal of business license. 
(a)  Occupation tax licenses for bodywork therapy establishments shall be assessed on an annual basis and any changes from the originally approved licensing shall be stated and submitted with the occupation tax renewal. Should said changes violate the provisions of this article, the bodywork therapy establishment license shall be revoked in accordance with section 22-275. 
(b)  At the time of application for renewal, the applicant must provide a current copy of any bodywork therapy certifications issued by a nationally recognized organization. 
(c)  Each owner, operator, and employee shall provide a signed and notarized consent on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center authorizing the release of each such person's criminal records to the Holly Springs Police Department; 
(d)  Applicant must provide a copy of the current insurance policy covering property damage and bodily injury liability. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-267. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
(a)  A bodywork therapy establishment shall be located in a zone(s) as determined by the city council. Should a proposed bodywork therapy establishment location require a rezoning, map amendment, or conditional use permit from the city council, all licensing requirements as stipulated in this article must be satisfied prior to making application. 
(b)  No licensee under this article shall change the location of the business without applying for and receiving a new license for such location. Compliance with subsection (a) of this section shall be required for said license. 
(c)  All bodywork therapy establishments shall be in compliance with article 5, section 5.4-30 of the City of Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-268. - Outcall massage services; practice at place of residence prohibited. 
(a)  Any bodywork therapist who has complied with all applicable provisions of this article may provide out-call bodywork therapy services. Such bodywork therapist shall maintain his/her permits upon their persons; or within their immediate reach, at all times while performing bodywork therapy and shall display these upon the request of any client, police officer or code compliance officer. 
(b)  The licensee is prohibited from engaging in the practice of bodywork therapy from his/her place of residence; however, a business office will be allowed at the place of residence for the purposes of recordkeeping and other clerical duties. 
(c)  Any special circumstances that may warrant practicing at the place of residence of a bodywork therapist, such as blindness, a disability that prevents travel to an office, or care of ill family members, shall be submitted to agencies and authorities as directed by the city. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-269. - Bodywork therapists and bodywork therapy establishments license application fees. 
(a)  A licensing application fee, as established and adopted by the mayor and city council with resolution from time to time shall be paid to the city at the time of filing each application. 
(b)  If the application is submitted in proper form and is approved by the police chief, or designee, then the business license department is authorized to issue an occupation tax license to the applicant upon the payment of any occupation taxes due and in accordance with article II; however, all zoning requirements, if any, must be met prior to the issuance of the occupation tax permit. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-270. - Authority to train personnel. 
Any applicant granted a business license hereunder shall have the authority to train bodywork therapists under their supervision in their studio or establishment provided that the licensee remains in full compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-271. - Changes in ownership and/or employees. 
Any changes in ownership and/or employees shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The city shall be notified immediately, within three days, of any changes in ownership and/or partners and/or employees of the applicant. 
(2)  Upon the change of ownership for a bodywork therapy establishment, the establishment license issued under the former ownership shall be null and void. 
(3)  Any change in ownership and/or employees shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-272. - Transfer of business license. 
(a)  No bodywork therapist business license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferred, altered in name, or assigned in any manner, whether by operation of law or otherwise, from location to location or from person to person, except that any person possessing a valid bodywork therapist business license shall be able to move from one employer to another without filing a new application or paying a new fee, so long as the permit holder notifies the city of the change in his/her employment within three business days of their move date to the new location and the new location is in compliance with all requirements of this article. 
(b)  No bodywork therapy establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such business license and such business license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such business license, and in such case, the business license upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. A bodywork therapy establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of the business license, or any stock not issued at the time of the granting of a business license is thereafter issued. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-273. - Advertising. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article for any person or business to advertise bodywork therapy services unless such services are provided by a person who holds a valid business license under this article in the classification so advertised. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to advertise: 
(1)  Bodywork therapy services combined with any sexually oriented business, including escort or dating services or adult entertainment. 
(2)  Bodywork therapy services combined with sauna, health spas, or day spas unless only a bodywork therapist holding a valid business license under this article is performing legitimate treatment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person or business entity or its employees, agents, or representatives to practice any of the named bodywork therapy practices or to use in connection with its name or business activity the terms structural integrator, structural integration, Asian bodywork therapy or any of its practices, reflexology, polarity therapy or any other designation implying directly or indirectly that the person is licensed in any of the licensed bodywork therapy professions unless the license has been issued by the city. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to practice under another licensed bodywork therapist with a city issued business license number. O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-15 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-274. - Record of treatment to be kept. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a business license under this article to maintain accurate records with the following information: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment; 
(2)  Date and time of treatment; 
(3)  Type of treatment administered; 
(4)  Name of person administering the treatment. 
(b)  No bodywork therapy shall be performed by any bodywork therapist in the home of any client or in any place except for the place of business of the licensee hereunder, unless accurate records are maintained at the place of business with the following information: 
(1)  Name and addresses of persons receiving treatment; 
(2)  Date and time of treatment; 
(3)  Type of treatment administered; 
(4)  Name of person administering the treatment; 
(5)  Time each treatment was completed. 
(c)  The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any duly authorized city agent or police officer. 
(d)  The records of any person receiving treatment shall, at all times, remain confidential. 
(e)  Records shall be kept for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-275. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of business license; notice; hearings; refund. 
(a)  No business license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued, by the city to any licensee hereunder, shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing before the municipal court and upon a prior five-day written notice to the holder of the business license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with section 22-288. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of the business license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating the businesses, in accordance with section 22-279. 
(c)  The city manager or police chief is delegated the authority to suspend any business license hereunder for due cause in any emergency situation; and said suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next session of the municipal court. 
(d)  When a business license is so revoked, the licensing, business, and occupation tax fees shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-276. - Additional remedies. 
In the event any provision of this article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the city through its attorney may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-277. - Patronage of massage establishments by minors. 
(a)  Restricted. It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any bodywork therapy establishment unless that person carries with him or her, at the time of the patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given signed by a licensed physician and the minor's legal guardian accompanies him or her to the establishment and remains during the course of treatment. 
(b)  Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of a bodywork establishment to determine the age of the persons patronizing the establishment and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the business license of the bodywork therapy establishment in accordance with section 22-275 of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-278. - Hours of operation. 
No bodywork therapist shall engage in the business or profession except within and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. eastern standard time; nor shall any operator of a bodywork therapy establishment operate the same except within and between the aforesaid hours. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-279. - Signed affidavit to be filed with business license application. 
A signed and notarized affidavit stating the following shall be filed with any business license application: 
I, ___________________, have received and reviewed a copy of Article IX, Bodywork Therapist and Bodywork Therapy Establishments. 
      ______________________ 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-280. - Operating requirements; unlawful acts and restrictions. 
(a)  No bodywork therapist or owner or employee of a bodywork therapy establishment shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs of any person. 
(b)  The premises shall be kept clean, neat, and sanitary and shall comply with all sanitary and health requirements of the state, county, and city. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or provided to customers on premises. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any stand-alone bodywork therapy establishments (those establishments not located within a professional's office, e.g., chiropractor, doctor, etc.) to perform bodywork therapy within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within the establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Exterior doors may have locks, but such exterior doors shall not be locked while the bodywork establishment is open for business or while any bodywork therapy is being performed therein. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, or managing a bodywork therapy establishment to knowingly cause, allow, or permit in or about such bodywork therapy establishment any agent, employee or other person under his/her supervision or control to perform any acts prohibited under this section. 
(f)  No bodywork therapist, owner, or employee shall wear swimsuits, lingerie, or similar garment or garments, which expose areas described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(g)  No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a bodywork therapy establishment shall not permit any employee to be on the premises of a bodywork therapy establishment during its hours of operation while performing or available to perform any task or service associated with the operation of a bodywork therapy business unless the employee is fully covered from a point not exceed four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck. The covering will be of an opaque material and will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(h)  No bodywork therapist shall be on the premises of a bodywork therapy establishment during its hours of operation while performing or available to perform any task or service associated with the operation of a bodywork therapy establishment, unless the bodywork therapist is fully covered from a point not to exceed four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck. For the purpose of this section, the covering will be of an opaque material and will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(i)  All stand-alone bodywork therapy establishments (those establishments not located within a professional's office, e.g., chiropractor, doctor, etc.) which apply for a business license, shall provide a reception area with adequate seating and immediate accessible entry and exit into and from the back office and area where the treatment rooms are located. 
(j)  No bodywork therapy establishment shall employ or contract with as a bodywork therapist a person under the age of 18 years or a person not permitted pursuant to this article. 
(k)  During normal business hours as listed in this article, no one other than a patient, patient's legal guardian(s), and employees of the bodywork therapy establishment shall be permitted beyond the reception area. 
(l)  All bodywork therapy establishments shall designate a natural person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises on a regular basis. 
(m)  A licensed bodywork therapist must be on the premises of the establishment if a client or patron is in a treatment room. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-281. - Inspection of premises authorized; inspection procedures. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a bodywork therapy establishment license, an inspection will be made of the site. Such inspection shall be to confirm that the site is to be utilized for bodywork therapy and that all establishment requirements are in compliance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the building inspection department through duly authorized agents to inspect bodywork therapy establishments from time to time to determine compliance with this article. Upon showing the proper credentials, the representatives of the city, including police officers, shall be entitled to inspect portions of the bodywork therapy establishment open to the public to determine compliance with this article, along with all records maintained by such bodywork therapy establishment in regards to patrons served therein. 
(c)  Inspection procedures are outlined as follows: 
(1)  Inspections shall be made at a minimum of not less than one time a year. 
(2)  An inspection as outlined in subsection (b) above can be triggered by complaints or random; 
(3)  Inspections are to be made at reasonable times, with due regard to the nature of the business to be inspected, without advanced notice to owners or operators; 
(4)  Such inspection shall include, but not be limited to, whether the establishment is in compliance with the establishment's operation facilities, building, personnel, public health, safety, and zoning requirements. Records of treatment, current insurance coverage, each active licensed bodywork therapist's certification(s) and the city issued business license(s) shall be reviewed; 
(5)  Upon inspection of a bodywork therapy establishment, the operator or owner shall make all records available upon request as regulated by this article; 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to fail to allow authorized and designated agents of the city access to the premises or to hinder the agent in any manner; 
(7)  Should the duly authorized agent discover any violators of this article upon inspection, the agent may grant the bodywork therapy establishment 24 hours to comply with the stipulations of this article, or should said violation(s) be of an egregious nature, or under emergency conditions, the agent shall execute section 22-275 of this article and penalties shall be assessed in accordance with section 22-289; 
(8)  Should the bodywork therapy establishment fail to comply with the stipulations of this article within 24 hours after notice of given by the duly authorized agent, said establishment shall be penalized in accordance with sections 22-275 and 22-289 of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-282. - Complaints. 
Any complaints on one or more of the following grounds regarding a licensed bodywork therapist shall be filed with the city business license office: 
(1)  The licensee is guilty of fraud in the practice of bodywork therapy, or fraud or deceit in being certified and/or licensed to practice bodywork therapy. 
(2)  The licensee is engaged in the practice of bodywork therapy under a false or assumed name or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name. 
(3)  The licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or chemical or organic stimulants to such an extent that the licensee is unable to perform his/her duties. 
(4)  The licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices. 
(5)  The licensee is charged with, has been convicted of, or has plead guilty or nolo contendere to, a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of a lascivious nature. 
(6)  The original application or renewal thereof contains materially false information or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(7)  The licensee has exhibited conduct, which could constitute a violation of law. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-283. - Facilities. 
All bodywork therapy establishment facilities shall comply with article 5, section 5.4-30 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-284. - Posting of business license. 
Every person obtaining a bodywork therapy establishment license under this article shall display such certificate in a prominent and public area of the establishment. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-285. - License to include only licensee. 
(a)  Each business license issued to an individual bodywork therapist shall only include that licensee to which the license is issued. 
(b)  No one may practice as a bodywork therapist under another licensed bodywork therapist's business license. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-286. - Financial responsibility and insurance coverage. 
Each bodywork therapy establishment shall maintain property damage and bodily injury liability insurance coverage. Individual massage therapists shall maintain bodily injury liability insurance coverage. The original or a copy of such policy shall be available on the premises of the establishment. A copy of the policy must be provided at the time of application. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-287. - Reapplication after denial or revocation of business license. 
Any licensee under this article whose business license application is denied or business license is revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such license for 12 months immediately following the revocation or denial. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-288. - Appeal of business license denial or revocation. 
(a)  Upon denial or revocation of a business license pursuant to this article, the applicant may appeal in writing to the mayor and city council within 30 days of denial. 
(b)  The mayor and city council may consider such appeal within 60 days of the date of receipt of written appeal. Should mayor and city council choose not to consider said appeal, the revocation or denial shall stand. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-289. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance; penalty. 
(a)  Any bodywork therapy establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, revocation, or enjoinment thereof in accordance with section 22-275 and in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such bodywork therapy establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a bodywork therapy establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with chapter 1, section 1-12 and upon conviction shall be fined for each offense in an amount to be established by the judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-290. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state. 
(3)  Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of the state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic purposes. 
(4)  A person duly licensed, registered, or certified in another jurisdiction, state, territory, or a foreign country when incidentally in this state to provide service as part of an emergency response team working in conjunction with disaster relief officials or as part of a charity event with which he or she comes into the state. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-291. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect, restrict, or prevent the practice, services, or activities of: 
(1)  A person licensed, registered, or certified under any other chapter or article under O.C.G.A. tit. 43 while engaged in professional or trade practices properly conducted under the authority of such other licensing laws, provided that such person shall not use the title of bodywork therapist; 
(2)  A person pursuing a course of study leading to a degree or certificate as a bodywork therapist in a nationally recognized educational program, if such person is designated by title indicating student status and is fulfilling uncompensated work experiences required for the attainment of the degree or certificate. 
(Ord. of 1-21-10(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-292. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-2017 , adopted January 19, 2017, repealed art. X, §§ 22-293—22-308, which pertained to vehicles for hire and derived from Ord. of April 21, 2008. 

Secs. 22-293—22-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 22-309. - Definitions. 
Dealer means (a) a person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturer's representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remodeling, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk; (b) a person engaged in any other business, if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturer's representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remodeling, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Dealer is not intended to apply to any person engaged in the acceptance of precious metals or gems on a consignment basis where there is no payment for acceptance of the precious metal or gem until such time as an end-user purchases the item from the person engaged in the consignment. 
Gems means any precious or semi-precious stone which is cut and polished. 
Person means an individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-310. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All dealers shall keep books in compliance with state law, wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material of which the article is made, the weight and quantity and/or volume. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in business as a dealer who shall fail or refuse to keep books so provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and the articles pledged or sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-311. - Reporting. 
(a)  Dealers will make daily reports to the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  The dealer shall obtain from each person selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person selling the article. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature must be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person sells any article. 
(c)  A digital image shall be made with a digital camera at the time of the acquisition, of any article and of the articles serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(d)  All persons who enter a dealer's place of business and attempt to sell an article must provide an affidavit stating they are the rightful owner or the owner's representative of the said property. In addition to the affidavit, proper photo identification must be provided. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a valid United States Driver's License, a valid state I.D. card, or a valid government identification card (military I.D.). In the event one of the aforementioned identifications or affidavit cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(e)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, shall be made by the dealer and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(f)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the dealer's possession. 
(g)  To the extent that the dealer utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintained for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-312. - Precious metals/gems not to be disposed of for 30 days. 
Dealers must hold all precious metals and gems for 30 days prior to sale, assignment, trading, or other disposal of same. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-313. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any dealer, or any agents or employees of the dealer, to receive any gems or precious metals from a minor. For the purposes of this section, a minor is any individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-314. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the Cherokee County Sheriff or his designee. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-315. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the dealer or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the municipal court for the City of Holly Springs and the violator shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as with a city ordinance violation. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(1), § 1) 
ARTICLE XII. - PAWN SHOPS 

Sec. 22-316. - Definitions. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property (other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness), including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this article, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with the law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-317. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall keep books in compliance with state law, wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material of which the article is made, the weight and quantity and/or volume. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was deposited or sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so pledged or sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in business as a pawnbroker who shall fail or refuse to keep books so provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and the articles pledged or sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-318. - Pawn tickets and daily reports. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers will make daily reports to the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  Pawnbrokers shall capture an image, with a digital camera, of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the article. The image shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(c)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging or selling the article. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature must be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any article. 
(d)  A digital image shall be made with a digital camera at the time of the acquisition, of any article and of the articles serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(e)  All persons who enter a pawnbroker business and attempt to sell or pawn an article must provide an affidavit stating they are the rightful owner or the owner's representative of the said property. In addition to the affidavit, proper photo identification must be provided. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a valid United States Driver's License, a valid state I.D. card, or a valid government identification card (military I.D.). In the event one of the aforementioned identifications or affidavit cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(f)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, shall be made by the pawnbroker and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(g)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the pawnbroker's possession. 
(h)  To the extent that the pawnbroker utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintained for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-319. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the Cherokee County Sheriff or his designee. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173(b), firearms shall not be regulated under this Article. However, pawnbrokers must comply with all requirements, including but not limited to record-keeping requirements for firearms as specified in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 of title 44, article 3, part 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and shall be subject to all applicable criminal penalties under State law for any violation of same. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-320. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the pawnbroker or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the municipal court for the City of Holly Springs and the violator shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as with a city ordinance violation. 
(Ord. of 11-21-11(2), § 1) 
Secs. 22-321—22-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MEDICAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND PHARMACIES 

Sec. 22-400. - Purpose and findings. 
Since the 1990's, the abuse of prescription opioids has risen dramatically, due in large part to the increase in the use of these analgesics to manage pain. 1 [] Opioids are prescribed to alleviate pain ranging from moderate to severe, as described by the patient. These analgesics principally affect the nervous system, suppressing the signals of pain sent to the brain; examples of these medications can include, but not be limited to morphine, codeine, oxycodone (e.g., OxyContin, Percodan, Percocet), and related drugs. As opioids "block the perception of pain" they also have the effect of creating a state of euphoria, which may be heightened when abused. Side effects can include drowsiness, nausea, constipation, and respiratory constraint. 
Opioids are recognized as very effective when taken as prescribed for legitimate purposes, post surgery, for example. As the National Institute on Drug Abuse states, "Many studies have shown that the properly managed, short-term medical use of opioid analgesic drugs is safe and rarely causes addiction - defined as the compulsive and uncontrollable use of drugs despite adverse consequences - or dependence, which occurs when the body adapts to the presence of a drug, and often results in withdrawal symptoms when that drug is reduced or stopped." 4 [] Unfortunately, opioids taken long-term can create physical dependency in some patients, producing withdrawal symptoms when the medication is not taken. Cessation side effects can include bone pain, insomnia, and vomiting, to name a few. 
Since the tragic events of September 11, 2001, the rise in the diversion of legal prescription drugs has grown exponentially, due to increased security at the borders and ports. 6 Amplified security has effectively reduced the supply of illegal drugs, traditionally smuggled by the drug trade, necessitating the need to find alternative methods of supplying drugs to users; consequently, legal prescription drugs are now being diverted to illegal uses - "Diversion." These diverted drugs are schedule II, III, and IV drugs, which principally include opioids as well as complementary drugs like Soma (Carisoprodol), a muscle relaxant, and Xanax (Alprazolam), an anti-anxiety medication. 7 [] 
In recent years, South Florida, including Miami-Dade, Broward, and Palm Counties, have witnessed tremendous growth in the number of "pain clinics" that have opened in addition to the rapid increase of the diversion of prescription drugs. Broward County has been termed "The Painkiller Capital of the Unites States," and "The Columbia for Pharmaceutically Diverted Drugs." 8 Broward County had four pain clinics in 2007, jumping to 115 by November 2009, of a total of 176 such clinics in all of South Florida. 9 The majority of these pain clinics are nothing more than pill mills, diverting these scheduled drugs to illegal uses. As "clinics" have multiplied, the deaths due to overdoses of prescription drug medications, specifically opioids, have skyrocketed. 10 [] 
With Broward County on the forefront of this epidemic, a grand jury was empanelled to investigate, issuing a report on November 19, 2009, after hearing testimony from prescription drug abusers and their families, federal and state law enforcement officials, physicians, prosecutors, and many more stakeholders. The report provides valuable information regarding the current state of this epidemic as well as recommendations to curtail this rapidly growing public safety concern. 
As Broward County and other South Florida jurisdictions struggle to eliminate "pill mills," this outbreak of illicit pain clinics crossed into other states, notably Georgia and Texas. 11 In fact, the Cobb County Prescription Drug Task Force reports that in 2007, 82.46 percent overdose deaths statewide involved pharmaceuticals, going to 85.11 percent in 2008. Alprazolam, Hydrocodone, and Oxycodone were found to constitute the top five substances involved in all of these overdose deaths. 12 Soma and Xanax, are often combined with opioids as a "cocktail" distributed together at illegal pain clinics. 13 
Illegal pain clinics commonly known as "pill mills" dispense large quantities of schedule II, III, and IV drugs for cash, with little examination of the patient conducted. Scheduled drugs are dispensed at these establishments or prescriptions are written to be filled at a legitimate pharmacy. Often, out of jurisdiction and out-of-state license plates are in the parking lots of these clinics, with individuals driving great distances to receive these "prescriptions." Pill mills often hire security guards to handle unruly patients and perhaps even scout for law enforcement. Individuals seeking these services will often fake an ailment, forging an MRI or providing falsified medical documentation to receive prescriptions. In turn, the physicians conduct lackadaisical examinations of these individuals, simply asking them "what they want" with regard to medication. 14 
While studies and research illustrate that "pill mills" more often than not pose as "pain clinics," this perception can be inaccurate. Many legitimate pain clinics operate daily throughout the state and nation, faithfully treating their patients with the highest ethical standards. Pill mills are capable of posing as urgent care clinics, family medical practices, and neighborhood pharmacies, for example. In fact, any medical "store front" could operate as a pill mill. 
The reality, however, is that the vast majority of medical establishments and pharmacies are absolutely legitimate. The City of Holly Springs City Council adopted a 12-month moratorium on the issuance of business licenses to "pain management clinics" on May 17, 2010, to conduct the proper research and vetting to create a new ordinance and municipal code addressing "pill mills." After thorough research, the city council has prepared this article to ensure that anyone dispensing or prescribing drugs within the city limits of Holly Springs is doing so in compliance with state law. Preliminary information will be gathered from proposed medical establishments and pharmacies to properly route the business through the applicable regulatory and zoning reviews, prior to the issuance of a business license (occupation tax permit). 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
  Khary K. Rigg, Samantha J. March, and James A. Inciardi. Prescription Drug Abuse & Diversion: Role of the Pain Clinic. Journal of Drug Issues. 2010;40(3): 681-702. 
 --- () --- 
  National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, http://www.nida.nih.gov 
  Charles Berde, M.D., Ph.D., and Samuel Nurko, M.D., M.P.H. Opioid Side Effects — Mechanism-Based Therapy. The New England Journal of Medicine. 2008; 358:2400-2402. 
  National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, http://www.nida.nih.gov 
  Ibid. 
  Interim Report of the Broward County Grand Jury. The Proliferation of Pain Clinics in South Florida. November 19, 2009, p. 3. 
 --- () --- 
  Ibid. 
  Khary K. Rigg, Samantha J. March, and James A. Inciardi. Prescription Drug Abuse & Diversion: Role of the Pain Clinic. Journal of Drug Issues. 2010;40(3): 681-702. 
  Interim Report of the Broward County Grand Jury. The Proliferation of Pain Clinics in South Florida. November 19, 2009, p. 6. 
 --- () --- 
  Khary K. Rigg, Samantha J. March, and James A. Inciardi. Prescription Drug Abuse & Diversion: Role of the Pain Clinic. Journal of Drug Issues. 2010;40(3): 681-702. 
  Judy McKee. A Prescription for Pill Mills: The Broward County Grand Jury Report. NAA Gazette: National Association of Attorneys General. http://www.naag.org/a-prescription-for-pill-mills-the-broward-county-grand-jury-report.php Marietta-Cobb-Smyrna Organized Crime Task Force. Cobb County Prescription Drug Task Force — Final Recommendations. December 2010. 
  Ibid. 
  Khary K. Rigg, Samantha J. March, and James A. Inciardi. Prescription Drug Abuse & Diversion: Role of the Pain Clinic. Journal of Drug Issues. 2010;40(3): 681-702. 
  K. Rigg, Samantha J. March, and James A. Inciardi. Prescription Drug Abuse & Diversion: Role of the Pain Clinic. Journal of Drug Issues. 2010;40(3): 681-702. 

Sec. 22-401. - Definitions. 
Dispense means to issue one or more doses of any drug in a suitable container with appropriate labeling for subsequent administration to or use by a patient. This excludes hospitals, surgery centers, inpatient care facilities, assisted living facilities, outpatient facilities operated or owned by a hospital system or pharmacy, and pharmacies. 
Dispensing physician means a state licensed physician who has notified the Georgia Composite Medical Board in writing of their intent to act as a dispensing physician. This notification may be made by letter to the Board, or may be noted on the state license renewal form. 
Medical establishment means, for the purposes of this article, any person, sole proprietor, corporation, or entity proposing to offer services to include: general and family medicine, specialists, chiropractic services, physical therapy, physical rehabilitation, urgent care, clinics, or any other similar healthcare services offered to the general public, including pain clinics. Shall not include facilities owned and operated by a hospital system. 
Medical treatment means the primary services expected and received from a medical establishment. 
Pharmacy means a commercial establishment with a physical location, where the practice of pharmacy occurs, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-4-4, now and as amended. 
Physician means a person licensed to practice medicine under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-21, now and as amended. 
Practice of pharmacy means the interpretation, evaluation, or dispensing of prescription drug orders in the patient's best interest; participation in drug and device selection, drug administration, drug regimen reviews, and drug or drug related research; provision of patient counseling and the provision of those acts or services necessary to provide pharmacy care; performing capillary blood tests and interpreting the results as a means to screen for or monitor disease risk factors and facilitate patient education, and a pharmacist performing such functions shall report the results obtained from such blood tests to the patient's physician of choice; and the responsibility for compounding and labeling of drugs and devices, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-4-4, now and as amended. Individuals engaged in the practice of pharmacy shall be properly licensed and in good standing with the State of Georgia (O.C.G.A. 26-4-40 et seq., now and as amended). 
Schedule II, III or IV drugs shall mean the drugs defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-26—16-13-29, now and as amended, as well as those so defined and regulated by the Controlled Substances Act adopted by the U.S. Congress in 1970, now and as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-402. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a medical establishment or pharmacy without having first complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-403. - Preliminary information; questionnaire; classification. 
A questionnaire shall be provided to persons seeking to operate a medical establishment or pharmacy in the City of Holly Springs ("applicant"), in conjunction with the completion of occupation tax/business license and zoning preclearance forms. In addition to other information deemed relevant, the questionnaire shall include the following questions: 
(1)  Detail of the services offered at the proposed medical establishment or pharmacy. 
(2)  If opening a pharmacy, do you intend to provide medical treatment services at the location? 
(3)  Do you intend to prescribe schedule II, III or IV drugs at your proposed location? 
(4)  Do you intend to dispense schedule II, III or IV drugs at your proposed location or on the premises? 
Each applicant, representing a proposed medical establishment or pharmacy, shall in good faith complete this questionnaire, answering the questions to the best of their ability. Signatures of the applicant and establishment owner or corporate officer (if not the same as applicant) shall be required on the questionnaire, attesting that all answers and information provided are true and correct to the best of their knowledge. Deception, false statements, and misrepresentations on the questionnaire shall cause enforcement action and penalties against the entity as detailed under sections 22-407 and 22-409. 
The community development department shall review each completed questionnaire to determine compliance for the proposed establishment, as mandated by this article. The city manager, police chief, or community development director may review each questionnaire to determine if a proposed business shall be classified as a medical establishment or pharmacy. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-404. - Pharmacy regulations. 
A proposed business classified as a pharmacy under section 22-403, shall adhere to the following regulations: 
(1)  Supervision. A pharmacy shall only be operated under the supervision of a state licensed pharmacist. 
(2)  State licensure required. A pharmacy or those seeking to practice pharmacy in the City of Holly Springs are required to apply for and receive a business license in accordance with chapter 22, article II. Additionally, prior to the issuance of a business license, the proposed pharmacy establishment and all employed pharmacists shall provide all current and proper facility and staff licensure in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 26-4-4; O.C.G.A. § 26-4-40 et seq., now and as amended). The most recent state licensure for each pharmacist is due each year with annual occupation tax renewals with the City. 
(3)  Clinic services. Pharmacies may elect to provide clinic services on site, offered to customers as a convenient ancillary service. These clinics shall not prescribe schedule II, III, and IV drugs. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-405. - Medical establishment regulations. 
A proposed business classified as a medical establishment under section 22-403, shall adhere to the following regulations: 
(1)  State licensure required. All medical establishments, as defined by this article, are required to apply for and receive a business license in accordance with chapter 22, article II. Additionally, prior to the issuance of a business license, the proposed medical establishment shall provide licensure for all practitioners in the respective field corresponding to the services proposed in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia (O.C.G.A. tit. 43, now and as amended). Respective state licenses shall remain in good standing and are due each year with annual occupation tax renewals with the City. 
(2)  Prescribing. Only licensed physicians, or non-physician practitioners so licensed and authorized by state law (advanced practice registered nurses, physician assistant, for example) shall prescribe schedule II, III, or IV drugs to patients. The documentation, as required by state law, authorizing non-physician practitioners to prescribe schedule II, III or IV drugs shall be available for inspection at all times. Said documentation shall remain current and in good standing. 
(3)  Dispensing. If the medical establishment proposes to dispense schedule II, III, or IV drugs to patients on site, the following requirements shall be apply: 
a.  The "dispenser" shall be a dispensing physician, as required by the Georgia Composite Medical Board and the State of Georgia. All dispensing physicians at the medical establishment shall provide to the city a copy of the notification sent to the board, seeking to dispense. 
b.  All distribution records, labeling, packaging, and storage requirements of state law shall be met (O.C.G.A. § 26-4-130). 
c.  This provision shall not apply to those persons authorized to dispense drugs under the authority of O.C.G.A. § 43-34-23. 
(4)  Pharmacy. Should a medical establishment seek to provide pharmacy services on site, compliance with O.C.G.A. § 26-4-4; O.C.G.A. § 26-4-40 et seq., now and as amended is required. A state licensed pharmacist, in good standing, shall be on site and responsible for the pharmacy operation. 
(5)  Facilities. The owner or establishment manager shall maintain an office on the premises in a room separate from proposed exam rooms. For the purposes herein, "exam rooms" are those rooms dedicated to the physical examination of a patient, where the patient may or may not disrobe. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-406. - Audit; review of records. 
(a)  All records authorizing non-physician practitioners to prescribe schedule II, III, and IV drugs as required by state law shall be kept on the premises and shall be made available upon request for inspection by the police chief, or his designee, during normal business hours. 
(b)  Dispensing physicians who dispense schedule II, III, and IV drugs on the premises must keep all records required by state law on the premises and shall make those records available for inspection upon the request of the police chief, or his designee during normal business hours. Failure to comply with the recording, distribution, labeling, packaging, and storage requirements of state law shall incur penalties as set forth under section 22-409. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-407. - Enforcement; suspension. 
In the judgment of the police chief and egregiousness of the violations of this article, the police chief shall be authorized to suspend an occupation tax permit previously issued for a pharmacy, medical establishment, or any business violating this article. In the event the police chief seeks to suspend an occupation tax permit, the police chief shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the applicant/owner. A review hearing of the suspension shall be docketed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled city council meeting by the city clerk, or within 30 days from the date the suspension is issued. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing, upon notification of the suspension. 
(1)  The police chief shall be authorized to suspend an occupational tax permit in the event that any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  An applicant/establishment provided false or misleading information in the original occupation tax application or questionnaire; 
b.  An applicant/establishment has allowed the illegal possession, use, sale, or distribution of controlled substances and schedule II, III, and IV drugs on the premises; 
c.  An applicant/establishment has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; 
d.  An applicant/establishment has violated any provision of this article; or 
e.  An applicant/establishment fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine or other amount of money due to the City of Holly Springs under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance of the City of Holly Springs. 
(2)  In the event the police chief shall suspend any occupational tax permit, the suspension shall remain in effect until the city council removes the suspension. The applicant, however, shall not be authorized to continue business operations until the suspension is lifted by the city council. 
(3)  Should the applicant continue business operations, the police chief is hereby authorized to physically close the establishment without notice. The establishment shall remain closed until a decision to lift the suspension is rendered by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-408. - Appeals; city council review hearing. 
The city council shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. The city council may release the suspension of an occupation tax permit issued under this article; and/or may assess penalties as detailed under section 22-408. Decisions of the city council are final and binding. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-409. - Penalties; revocation. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the review hearing, the city council may continue or lift the suspension of an occupation tax permit, pending the applicant/establishment complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Revoke the occupation tax permit at which time all business operations shall cease and desist indefinitely. Should the applicant fail to comply, the business operation shall be closed by the police chief and the applicant/establishment shall vacate the premises. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation per day and/or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 3-21-11(2), § 1) 
Secs. 22-410—22-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TEEN CLUB ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 22-500. - Purpose and findings. 
The mayor and city council of the City of Holly Springs find that teen clubs present a potential safety hazard to our youth. Unregulated and unscrupulous teen clubs can provide a dangerous setting for minors, who can especially be vulnerable to criminals and certain crimes. We want to protect our youth by properly vetting proposed teen clubs and the owners thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-501. - Definitions. 
Applicant means an individual, partnership, or corporation, including all partners in a partnership and all stockholders in a corporation. 
Club premises means any place where a teen club is operated or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and other adjacent portions of the premises which are accessible to the public during operating hours. 
Manager means and shall include any employee who is in charge and responsible for the conduct of the business activity at any given time. 
Person means one or more natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations or other entities capable of having an action of law brought against such entity. 
Teen club means a commercial premises open to the public, the primary function of which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers. As an incidental function, a teen club may sell and serve food and beverages (excluding alcoholic beverages) to its patrons. The term "teen club" does not include the following: Premises which serve alcoholic beverages as defined by state and local laws; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of background music which is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited guests which is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization. 
Teen club license A restricts its admission to persons age 14 to 17 years and to a person 18 years of age if such person is then currently enrolled in a high school and presents a valid identification card issued by the high school indicating that such person is currently enrolled in that school. 
Teen club license B restricts its admission to persons 18 years of age and over. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-502. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage or maintain a teen club in the city without first obtaining a teen club license from the city. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-503. - License application procedures. 
Initial and renewal applications for a teen club license shall be made to the city clerk in writing; signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit; shall be accompanied with a non-refundable application fee for the initial application plus the current rate by the Holly Springs Police Department for processing fingerprint cards for initial and all renewal applications for each individual, partner, or corporation stockholder, and manager; and shall contain the following information and statements: 
(1)  The name, date of birth, address (current and past five years), telephone number, place of birth, physical description, driver's license number, social security number, and fingerprints of the individual applicant(s), partners in a partnership, or stockholder(s) in a corporation. In the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses (current and past five years) of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name and address (current and past five years) of such person; 
(2)  A description of the business operation and marketing plan which shall include the proposed theme of the establishment; 
(3)  Detailed plans for preventing persons under or over the age required for a type A or B license from entering the premises, including security training of employees, identification checking system, and any other methods that will be utilized; 
(4)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license (include a drawing of premises with measurements of floor space and lay-out); 
(5)  A statement: 
a.  That if a co-partnership, all members of the co-partnership and manager(s) shall be qualified to obtain a license; and 
b.  That if a corporation, any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder is eligible to receive a license pursuant to this section of the Municipal Code. 
(6)  A statement indicating whether seeking teen club license A or B. The club premises may not be used for both a type A and type B teen club; 
(7)  Any additional information the applicant deems pertinent, or is subsequently requested by the city, to review in determining whether the applicant should be granted a license; 
(8)  The annual fee for such license shall be established with resolution by city council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-504. - Procedures for license application issuance or denial. 
After receiving a complete application for a teen club license, the city shall follow the following procedures: 
(1)  The city clerk shall forward copies of the application to appropriate city officials for their comments regarding compliance with regulations under their jurisdiction. The city clerk shall consider all materials and comments submitted and shall issue or deny the license; 
(2)  A teen club license may be denied by the city clerk for any one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The applicant is in violation of any of the requirements to obtain a license, listed in section 22-503; 
b.  The applicant and/or premises to be licensed have any outstanding, past due debts, fines, or fees to the City of Holly Springs or any ongoing code violations; 
c.  If the applicant and/or business premises do not comply with all applicable city ordinances and state laws; 
d.  If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material misrepresentation; 
e.  If the application does not show adequate measures for the protection and security, both inside and outside the premises, or the monitoring of the ages of patrons and citizens admitted to the teen club; 
f.  The applicant or any owners have been convicted of a felony. The applicant or any owners have been convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five years from the date of the application. 
(3)  If the city clerk denies a license, written notice stating the reasons for the denial shall be sent to the applicant. The applicant shall have a period of ten business days after the date of license denial to appeal the denial. Such appeal must be submitted to the city manager, in writing and must set forth the basis for the appeal. The city manager shall render a final decision of the appeal within 30 days from the date the appeal is filed. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-505. - License term. 
Each teen club license shall terminate annually on December 31 st . 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-506. - Operating rules and regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the following provisions. Such provisions shall apply to all teen clubs in the city: 
(1)  Persons of the following ages shall not be permitted to enter or remain on the premises of a teen club license A establishment: 
a.  Under the age of 14 years unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
b.  Eighteen years of age or older except for bona fide employees or entertainers hired by the licensee to work in the club, or a parent or guardian of a person under 14 years of age present in the club, or a person 18 years of age currently enrolled in a high school who presents a valid identification from such high school showing such person to be enrolled in such high school and at least one additional piece of identification showing the picture of such individual containing the date of birth of such person and issued by an officer, agent or department of the State of Georgia or other state. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to enter or remain on the premises of a teen club license B establishment unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, except for entertainers hired by the licensee to work in the club. 
(3)  Teen club license A establishments shall be operated only between the following hours: 
6:00 p.m. Monday—10:45 p.m. Monday; 
6:00 p.m. Tuesday—10:45 p.m. Tuesday; 
6:00 p.m. Wednesday—10:45 p.m. Wednesday; 
6:00 p.m. Thursday—10:45 p.m. Thursday; 
6:00 p.m. Friday—11:45 p.m. Friday; 
6:00 p.m. Saturday—11:45 p.m. Saturday; 
6:00 p.m. Sunday—10:45 p.m. Sunday. 
(4)  Teen club license B establishments shall be operated only between the following hours: 
6:00 p.m. Monday—1:00 a.m. Tuesday; 
6:00 p.m. Tuesday—1:00 a.m. Wednesday; 
6:00 p.m. Wednesday—1:00 a.m. Thursday; 
6:00 p.m. Thursday—1:00 a.m. Friday; 
6:00 p.m. Friday—2:00 a.m. Saturday; 
6:00 p.m. Saturday—2:00 a.m. Sunday; 
6:00 p.m. Sunday—1:00 a.m. Monday. 
(5)  The licensee and its agents shall not permit or allow alcoholic beverages or controlled substances to be consumed or be present on the teen club premises. 
(6)  It shall be the obligation of the licensee and/or manager to remove, or have removed, from the club premises any person who is, or appears to be, under the influence of, or affected by the use of, alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical danger to the safety of others present. 
(7)  It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper and adequate illumination of all portions of the club premises which are available for public use. Such illumination shall remain at all times when the premises are open to the public or when any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain on the premises. 
(8)  It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, and/or the creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by any patrons of the teen club on club premises or in the immediate vicinity. "Loitering" shall not include walking between the club building and a patron's vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain admission to the club. 
(9)  It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter resulting from club operations. The cleanup shall occur within eight hours after the end of each day's operation. 
(10)  Occupancy shall be established by the fire inspector with the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, in accordance with adopted fire and/or building codes. Maximum occupancy shall not be exceeded. 
(11)  All teen club license holders shall enter into an agreement with the Holly Springs Police Department to act as their agent for the purposes of enforcing criminal trespass laws. 
(12)  The licensee and its agents shall allow no person admitted into a teen dance club to leave and thereafter re-enter the club. 
(13)  A teen club shall be operated in such a manner that the entertainment, dancing, music and other activities occurring within the club and in the parking area do not create an unreasonable level of noise. The teen club shall remain within the guidelines set forth in the City of Holly Springs noise ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-507. - Obscenity prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee, his agent or employee shall allow or permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate: 1) sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 2) the actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; 3) the actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; 4) the actual or simulated displaying of the breast so as to expose the nipple of the female breast; 5) the displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live performance of which is prohibited by 1) through 5) above. 
(b)  No licensee, his agent or employee shall allow or permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes in public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus, or in the case of females, the breast so as to expose the nipple. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-508. - Police officers and security. 
All police officers of the city shall have a right of entry to all teen clubs for the purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this article at all times that the premises are open to the patrons. 
(1)  It shall be the obligation of the teen club licensee to maintain at all times when the teen club is open for business sufficient security personnel of adequately trained and properly licensed. Security personnel training shall be documented with the police chief. 
(2)  A minimum of one security staff member per 50 patrons shall be required. Security personnel shall be required by the license holder to maintain the public peace and order around the teen club, including the parking lot, public sidewalk and general vicinity of the teen club. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-509. - Patron age verification. 
It is the responsibility of the licensee to verify the age of each person admitted to a teen club. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly allow a person to enter or remain on the premises of a teen club in violation of the age restrictions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-510. - Suspension or revocation or licenses. 
(a)  A teen club license may be suspended or revoked by the city manager, after due process notice and hearing when the licensee, or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the licensee has caused or permitted any of the following: 
(1)  Failure to keep the building structure or equipment of the licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health, building, fire or safety laws, regulations or ordinances in a way which relates to or affects public health or safety on the teen club premises; 
(2)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(3)  Failure of the licensee or any manager, agent or employee to cooperate fully with police officers who respond to the premises; 
(4)  Making a material false statement or misrepresentation, or failure to disclose any material information to the city, in connection with any application for the teen club license or any license renewal; 
(5)  Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the licensee knowingly permits conduct on the licensed premises that violates any federal, state or city criminal or penal statute, law or ordinance; 
(6)  Whenever the operation of the teen club becomes the cause of a significant increase in activities on the premises or in the immediate vicinity requiring police response; 
(7)  The hearing shall be public and all interested persons shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard; 
(8)  If the city manager determines a violation has occurred, the following action may be taken: 
a.  Impose a probationary period and impose certain conditions which must be observed; 
b.  Suspend the license for a period of time; or 
c.  Revoke the license. 
(b)  In addition to any other relief provided herein the city attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article. The application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-511. - Penalty. 
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-18-11(2), § 1) 
Secs. 22-512—22-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 22-600. - Definitions. 
Garage sale means a temporary accessory use of a lot or premises for the sale of tangible personal property. The terms yard sale and porch sale are also included under this definition. 
Multi-family garage sale or block/neighborhood sale means a temporary accessory use of a lot or premises for the sale of tangible personal property of more than one residence or family. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-24-13 ) 
Sec. 22-601. - Number, frequency, duration, hours. 
(a)  No more than four sales may occur at the same lot or premises during any twelve-month period. 
(b)  A period of at least six weeks must pass before another sale may occur at the same lot or premises. 
(c)  No sale may last more than three consecutive days. 
(d)  All sales must be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-24-13 ) 
Sec. 22-602. - Permit required. 
(a)  No garage sale shall be conducted within the City of Holly Springs without the issuance of a garage sale permit. 
(b)  Any person(s) or group desiring to have a garage sale shall make application at City Hall. Such application shall state the name of the person(s) or group having the sale, the address of the person(s) or group, the location of the sale, and the dates of the sale. Upon submission of the application the person(s) or group shall be issued a permit that must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the sale is being held. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-24-13 ) 
Sec. 22-603. - Multi-family garage sales. 
(a)  Each participating family and/or residence must make application and be included on the garage sale permit. 
(b)  Participation in a multi-family garage sale will count as one garage sale for each family and/or residence participating. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-24-13 ) 
Sec. 22-604. - Prohibited sales. 
The sale of fireworks, hazardous material, firearms and ammunition is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-24-13 ) 
Sec. 22-605. - Violations; penalties. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the municipal court for the City of Holly Springs and the violator shall be subject to penalties in accordance with Section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-24-13 ) 
ARTICLE XVI. - FIREWORKS SALES 

Sec. 22-606. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the terms "consumer fireworks", "consumer fireworks retail sales facility", "consumer fireworks retail sales stand", "distributor", "fireworks", "NFPA 1124", "nonprofit group", "proximate audience", "pyrotechnics", "store" [are as defined in state statute(s).] 
(b)  "Fire marshal" shall mean the City of Holly Springs Fire Marshal or his designee. 
(c)  As used in this article, the term "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
( Ord. No. 09-2016, § 1, 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 22-607. - License required for temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(a)  A license shall be required for any person, firm, corporation, company, association, or partnership to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand within the city limits. 
(b)  Application shall be made to the fire marshal. All statements made by the applicant in the application for a license shall be under oath. Any person who knowingly and willfully makes a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement of representation in an application for a license under this Article shall be guilty of a violation of O.C.G.A. Section 16-10-20. 
(c)  The license fee for a distributor selling consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be on file in the City of Holly Springs Municipal Services Master Fee Schedule, payable to the City of Holly Springs. Upon finding by the fire marshal that a distributor has met the requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. Section 25-10-5.1, has a license pursuant to subsection (b) or (d) of O.C.G.A. Section 25-10-5.1 for a location applicable to the location of such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand as provided for in subparagraph (b)(6)(B) of O.C.G.A. Section 25-10-2, has no more than the allowable temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands pursuant to subparagraph (b)(6)(B) of O.C.G.A. Section 25-10-2, that the sales of consumer fireworks from such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall accrue to the benefit of a nonprofit group, and upon payment of such license fee, such license shall be approved by the fire marshal. Such license shall identify the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand applicable to such license and shall expire 90 days after the issuance of such license. 
(d)  A determination by the fire marshal as to whether a distributor has met requirements for the issuance of a license pursuant to this subsection shall be made within 15 days of the submission of an application for any such license. Such application shall be in writing and upon such form as may be provided by the fire marshal. If a determination has not been made within the time provided for by this paragraph, or for an appeal of a determination by the Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services, a distributor may seek review from the judge of the probate court of Cherokee County. The judge of the Probate Court of Cherokee County may provide for the issuance or nonissuance of a license and for the payment of license fees in such manner as is consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  A nonprofit group benefiting from the sale of consumer fireworks pursuant to this Code section shall directly participate in operating the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. It shall be unlawful for a nonprofit group or any agent or bona fide representative of a nonprofit group to knowingly lend the name of the nonprofit group or allow the identity of the nonprofit group to be used for the license under this subsection if such nonprofit group is not directly participating in operating such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(f)  The City of Holly Springs will expend such fees collected pursuant to this article for fire or public safety purposes. 
(g)  In making determinations as provided for in this article the fire marshal shall reference the list maintained by the safety fire commissioner as provided for in O.C.G.A. Section 25-10-5.1 (d)(2). 
( Ord. No. 09-2016, § 1, 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 22-608. - Location of permanent and temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(a)  Permanent and temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands must comply with the City of Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance and may be located only as permitted therein. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, it shall be lawful to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand only if such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand is: 
(1)  In compliance with the requirements for such a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand in the selling of consumer fireworks as provided for in NFPA 1124; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of a fire hydrant of a county, municipality, or other political subdivision or a fire department connection of a building affiliated with such consumer fireworks retail sales stand, unless the fire marshal provides in writing that such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand may operate in excess of 1,000 feet from such fire hydrant or fire department connection; and 
(3)  Selling consumer fireworks of a distributor licensed pursuant to subsection (c) of O.C.G.A Section 25-10-5.1. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks from any motor vehicle, from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle, or from a tent, canopy or membrane structure. 
( Ord. No. 09-2016, § 1, 6-20-2016 ) 
Secs. 22-608—22-629. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - PET SHOPS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 15, 2017 enacted provisions intended for use as a new art. XVII, §§ 22-1—22-3. To preserve the style of the Code, these provisions have been renumbered as §§ 22-630—22-632, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 22-630. - Definitions. 
(A)  As used in this article, the term: 
"Animal care facility" means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organization. 
"Animal rescue organization" means any not for profit organization which has tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. 
"Cat" means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus. 
"Dogs" means a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris. 
"Pet shop" means a retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined. 
( Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 3-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-631. - Restrictions on the sale of animals. 
(1)  A pet shop may not sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, or otherwise dispose of dogs or cats, but may offer for adoption only those dogs and cats that the pet shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with: 
(a)  An animal care facility; or 
(b)  An animal rescue organization 
(2)  A pet shop shall not offer for adoption a dog or cat that is younger than eight weeks old. 
( Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 3-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-632. - Recordkeeping and disclosures. 
(1)  A pet shop shall maintain records sufficient to document the source of each dog or cat the pet shop acquires, for at least one year following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available immediately upon request by the city manager, the chief of police, or any authorized designee of these city officials. 
(2)  A pet shop that offers space the adoption of dogs or cats shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of each such animal, a sign listing the name of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization from which the pet shop acquired each dog or cat. 
(3)  Each dog or cat offered for adoption in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Each recordkeeping violation under this section regarding a particular dog or cat shall constitute a separate offense. Each failure to post a sign as required by this section regarding a particular dog or cat shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 3-15-17 ) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 26-31. - Plan. 
The county (EMA) emergency operation plan, dated February 1986, adopted by the county and the city, and approved by the state and federal emergency management agencies, is the primary reference and establishes procedures and places responsibilities for the timely resolution of countywide emergencies. The city fire chief, supported by the city police department, is the primary executor of the plan within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-3-1) 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 4.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

Sec. 30-31. - Appointment and qualifications of judge. 
The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 30-32. - Bailiff. 
The chief of police shall be responsible generally for seeing that the courtroom is in proper condition for sessions of court, for assisting in keeping order while court is in session, and for doing such other acts of assistance as may be required of him by the judge of the court and the municipal court clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Docket. 
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the municipal court clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-3) 
Sec. 30-34. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as provided in this section. Such summons may be issued by the municipal court clerk, the building inspector, or any police officer of the city. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged; the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged; and the day, hour and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by a police officer of the city either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode; except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-4) 
Sec. 30-35. - Subpoenas. 
The municipal court clerk shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the municipal court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-5) 
Sec. 30-36. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person failing to appear in response to a summons or subpoena shall be punished for contempt the same as provided by state law for state and superior courts. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-6) 
Sec. 30-37. - Arrest and bond. 
When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer shall transport such person to the police station, where he shall be allowed to post a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense, or a bond with a good security, for the appearance of such person before the judge of the municipal court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may confine him in the county jail until a trial can be held, provided that the mayor, in his discretion, may release such person on his own recognizance without security. Nothing shall prevent the placement of the person in an appropriate detention facility of another jurisdiction, including a facility designated for juveniles. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-7) 
Sec. 30-38. - Forfeiture of bond. 
Upon the failure of a person to appear in the municipal court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the judge of the court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-8) 
Sec. 30-39. - Collection of fines; community service. 
(a)  When directed by the judge of the municipal court, the municipal court clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by the court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods, chattels, lands or tenements of the person so fined. 
(b)  At the judge's discretion, a person may be sentenced to community service in lieu of jail time, and/or as an alternative to fine imposed. 
(Code 1991, § 2-4-9) 
Sec. 30-40. - Collection of additional fine for fuel costs. 
(a)  The municipal court shall add $0.00 to the amount of every fine assessed for all traffic and vehicle violations or violations of the city codes and ordinances. 
(b)  $0.00 from every fine collected shall be allocated to pay for fuel costs for the police department. 
(Ord. of 6-16-08, § 1, Ord. of 12-1-08(2), § 1) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance as well as the county flood protection ordinance has been adopted as part of the zoning ordinance dated September 19, 1994. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; junk dealers and junkyards, § 58-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything that causes harm, inconvenience or damage to another, provided that the harm, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation or structure that is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance that damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Code 1991, § 11-2-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Conditions. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises. 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent upon premises that is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system that would be damaging thereto. 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit. 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises that are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual, loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas. 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities. 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed. 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city. 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(13)  The accumulation of household or domestic waste, including waste from the preparation and cooking of food, vegetable, fruit and meat scraps, ashes, cans and bottles, paper, floor sweepings, cardboard, and other such material to be disposed of from residences, businesses, churches, schools, and office buildings, or any similar places. 
(14)  Tall grass in excess of 12 inches in height, weeds and bushes, other undergrowth, and trash and debris of any type upon the premises of any dwelling unit or other structure, place or vacant lot. 
(15)  Packing boxes, lumber, junk, trash, salvage materials or other debris kept on property and visible from a public street. 
(16)  Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and furnishings stored on the property and visible from a public street. 
(17)  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children including abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerators, freezers, and hazardous pools, ponds and excavations including abandoned wells. 
(18)  Vehicle parts, or other articles of personal property which are abandoned or left in a state of partial construction or repair for an unreasonable period of time in front yards, sideyards, driveways, sidewalks or walkways and are visible from a public street. 
(19)  Any premises, dwelling unit or other structure, place or vacant lot permitted to deteriorate in appearance or condition so as to be degrading to the surrounding premises. 
(Code 1991, § 11-2-2; Ord. of 4-21-97, § 2; Ord. of 2-15-99(2); Ord. of 7-17-06, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 34-33. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 11-2-3) 
Sec. 34-34. - Complaint of nuisance; investigation. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police or building departments, who shall investigate. Upon investigating this complaint, should the investigator find the complaint valid and a violation(s) exists, notice shall be given to the violator(s) to abate the nuisance(s). The investigator shall grant the violator(s) time to achieve code compliance to abate the nuisance(s). Extensions of time may be granted at the discretion of the investigator, should circumstances warrant. Should the violator(s) not comply in the time allotted, the investigator may issue a citation(s) to the violator(s) for each violation of this article present. This citation shall summon the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession to the municipal court. The municipal court shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers and license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same, and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Code 1991, § 11-2-4; Ord. of 7-17-06, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 34-35. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  If the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate a nuisance in the time specified, or if the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, the chief of police may take steps to abate the nuisance at city expense. The chief of police shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same; and the costs shall be billed to the owner, agent and tenant for collection. 
(b)  If the bill is not paid within 60 days, the amount due shall constitute a lien against the property, which shall attach to the real property when the city files its lien in the real property records of the county superior court, attaching an itemized statement of the costs of abatement. The lien shall be enforced as a tax lien, and the owner shall have the right of redemption as provided for tax liens by state law. 
(c)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances under this section. 
(Code 1991, § 11-2-5; Ord. of 4-21-97, § 3) 
Sec. 34-36. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1991, § 11-2-6) 
Sec. 34-37. - Offense; penalty. 
It is an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1991, § 11-2-7) 
Secs. 34-38—34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE REGULATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of March 16, 2009, § 1, repealed the former art. III, §§ 34-71—34-75, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1991, §§ 11-1-21—11-1-25; Ord. of June 21, 1999; Ord. of June 21, 2004 and Ord. of December 16, 2008. 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 34-71. - Declaration of policy. 
The challenges of noise in the City of Holly Springs have been observed by the mayor and city council and city staff. These challenges have been documented by complaints received and investigated by staff. The mayor and city council find that it is necessary to minimize said noise to protect the citizens of Holly Springs from the physiological and psychological dangers of excessive noise and to promote the public health, safety and welfare as well as to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes the use, value and enjoyment of property; and the quality of the environment. 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-72. - Definitions. 
All terminology used in this article, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Acoustic means a musical instrument or other sound produced that is not amplified or electronically modified. 
Amplified noise is produced or reproduced sound, modified or enhanced through the use of electronic equipment and/or other means to artificially increase the decibel levels. 
Commercial property category is all property which is used primarily for the sale of merchandise or goods, or for the performance of service, or for office or clerical work. 
Construction is any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
Decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
Emergency is any occurrence or set or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work is any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Fast response is a setting on the sound level meter associated with measuring short bursts and sound peaks. 
Impulsive sound is a sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Industrial property category is any property which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing. 
Institutional property category is any property which is used primarily for public or non-profit purposes, such as city hall, a city park, public safety facility, charitable organization, or club; not otherwise defined as a noise sensitive facility . 
Muffler is a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
Multi-family dwelling is any building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family. 
Noise disturbance is any sound that: 
(1)  Endangers the safety or health of any person; 
(2)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)  Endangers personal or real property. 
Noise sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to: elder care/convalescence homes, group homes for children or the disabled, schools, hospitals, and places of worship. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, company, society, political subdivision, or any other entity, public or private. 
Plainly audible means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. 
Real property line is the line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another. 
Receiving property is property within which sound originating beyond its real property line is received. 
Residential property category is all property on which people live and sleep that is not commercial or industrial. 
Short bursts are impulsive sounds, typically amplified, that approach peak levels, but may also sustain longer than one second. 
Slow response is a setting on the sound level meter associated with measuring the average level of fluctuating noise. 
Sound amplification device is equipment used to produce or reproduce sound, modified or enhanced, through the use of electronic equipment and/or other means to artificially increase the decibel levels so as to communicate under normal business practices (outdoor loudspeaker or announcing system), attract attention to an activity, advertise, announce a sporting event, or exercise free speech. 
Sound level is measured noise in a decibel unit. 
Sound level limit is the maximum sound pressure level (threshold of noise) permitted by receiving property in units of decibels. 
Sound level meter (SLM) is an instrument used to measure sound levels conforming to IEC651 Type 2, ANSI S1.4 Type 2, or any Type 1 or Type 2 equivalent device as specified in ANSI Standard S1.4-1983 or the latest version thereof. 
Sound peak is an extreme level of noise disturbance; also known as "peak levels." 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-73. - Sound level limitations. 
(a)  No person, entity, or establishment shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in table 1, when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property using the slow response setting on the sound level meter, unless otherwise noted in subsection (b) below. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. 
TABLE 1: Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property 

 
(b)  Should the noise disturbance consist of short bursts or impulsive sounds, the fast response setting on the sound level meter may be used to determine sound peak. Sound peaks captured on this setting, greater than the levels indicated in table 1, above, shall constitute a noise disturbance if measured at more than one instance within any one ten-minute period or greater than four instances in any one-hour period, during the times indicated. 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-74. - Uses and activities, additional restrictions. 
Regardless of the decibel levels measured, the following uses and activities shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  Amplified noise. Amplified noise shall be prohibited if it is plainly audible at 100 feet. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly audible by any person other than the operator. This requirement shall not include non-amplified, acoustical instruments. 
Plainly audible means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the title of a song, specific words, or the artist performing the song. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound. 
(2)  Animals and birds. Domesticated animals shall not make any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, crowing or making any other noise for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. 
(3)  Construction equipment and activity. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building within the city other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (9:00 a.m. on Saturdays) is expressly prohibited. The operating of any equipment or the performing of outside construction projects on Sundays, unless a permit for such construction or repair work between such hours has been obtained, is expressly prohibited. 
(4)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the city is expressly prohibited. 
(5)  Exhausts. It shall be unlawful to discharge into the open air the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Motor vehicle horns. It shall be unlawful for the sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a warning signal. 
(7)  Multi-family dwelling . It shall be unlawful within a multi-family dwelling development to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds the daytime (7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m.) limit of 65 dBA and the nighttime (11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.) limit of 55 dBA as measured from the closest neighbor's dwelling. 
(8)  Peddlers and Solicitors. The selling of anything by outcry within the residential areas of the city, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events, is expressly prohibited. 
(9)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the residents of the area is expressly prohibited. 
(10)  Noise prohibited in general. No person shall willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing within the City limits. 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-75. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Non-amplified (acoustical) musical instruments practiced or performed on residential premises, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m., by the owner, tenant, or guest of the same; 
(2)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices; 
(3)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or responding to an emergency; 
(4)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger; 
(5)  Noise generated from government sponsored or approved celebrations or events; 
(6)  Noise generated by any farming or agricultural entity, operating in the general agricultural district (AG); 
(7)  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if intermittent; 
(8)  Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if the sound is intermittent; 
(9)  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
(10)  Noise resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of learning, including, but not limited to band, choir, and orchestral performances; 
(11)  Noise resulting from the activities of an organized sports league; 
(12)  Bells, chimes or carillons while being briefly used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m.; 
(13)  Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad; 
(14)  Events operating within the time and volume parameters set forth in an approved permit issued by the City of Holly Springs. 
(15)  Consumer fireworks, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 25-10-1, provided that the use of consumer fireworks is in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2 and § 25-10-2.1. Consumer fireworks may be used from 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on any day, except that they may be used up to 11:59 on January 1, July 3, July 4 and December 31, and from 12:00 midnight to 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1; Ord. No. 10-2016, § 1, 6-20-16 ) 
Sec. 34-76. - Procedures for the determination of sound levels. 
(a)  Insofar as practicable, using the sound level meter, sound and noise will be measured while the sound source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All sound and noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the receiving property, unless otherwise directed in this article. When the SLM cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this article, noise and sound measurements are measured on the A- or C-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter, as defined by this article. 
(b)  Measurements shall be taken by police officers or code enforcement officers, adhering to the instructions of the sound level meter. 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-77. - Permits. 
(a)  Sound amplification device permit . Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the operation of a sound amplification device, whether stationary or attached to a vehicle, provided the same is permitted by the City of Holly Springs in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Any person or entity seeking permission to operate a sound amplification device for the purpose of communicating under normal business practices (outdoor loudspeaker or announcing system), advertising, soliciting, attracting attention, announcing a sporting event, or exercising the right of free speech as guaranteed by the United States Constitution, shall be allowed to do so only after applying for and receiving a permit from the city; and such operation without such permit is declared unlawful. 
(2)  An application for a permit to operate a sound amplification device shall be in writing, filed with the city manager, or designee, and shall set forth the equipment to be used, the place or route to be followed, the intensity of sound level expected, the purpose of such use and the days and hours such use is desired. 
(3)  The city manager or designee shall consider such application at the earliest convenience and shall exercise discretion after considering all pertinent facts. The city may require the applicant to demonstrate the equipment before issuing the permit. The city shall not withhold a permit so as to deprive any person of constitutional rights, but shall have the right to control sound and noise emitted in the city for the general health and welfare of its citizens. Each permit issued shall be issued for a specific term. 
(4)  Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the city manager or designee regarding the issuance or denial of a sound amplification device permit, may appeal such decision directly to the city council for a final decision. 
(b)  Construction activities permit . A permit issued by the city manager or designee shall be required for any person or entity seeking to engage in construction activities, other than during the established times set forth by section 34-74(3). The permitting requirements and hours granted are at the discretion of the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-78. - Enforcement personnel. 
Any police officer or code enforcement officer employed by the City of Holly Springs is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-18-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. of October 18, 2010, § 1, repealed the former § 34-78, and enacted a new § 34-78 as set out herein. The former § 34-78 pertained to enforcement procedures, warnings and citatations and derived from Ord. of March 16, 2009. 
Sec. 34-79. - Penalties. 
Any person or entity that shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, in the Municipal Court of Holly Springs, be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 3-16-09, § 1) 
Secs. 34-80—34-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED, INOPERABLE, AND ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 34-101. - Findings; public purpose; authority 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Holly Springs hereby declare that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the city to regulate junked, inoperable, and abandoned vehicles as defined herein. The mayor and council find that junked, inoperable, and/or abandoned vehicles present a danger and nuisance to the public. Additionally, junked, inoperable, and/or abandoned vehicles create not only an unsightly environment, but affect the economic vitality of the community, as well. Even more importantly, however, are the negative affects on the health, safety, and welfare of the city, created by junked, inoperable and abandoned vehicles. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Holly Springs hereby invoke O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4, now and as amended. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words shall have the indicated meanings: 
Abandoned vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)  Is left unattended on a public street, road, or highway or other public property for a period of at least five consecutive days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(2)  Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having made claim thereto. 
Code enforcement officer is any sworn official of the City of Holly Springs, authorized to enforce the codes of the city, but not a peace or police officer, as recognized through certification as such by the State of Georgia. 
Dismantled vehicle is any vehicle from which factory installed parts have been removed and not replaced with substitute or similar parts and the vehicle is inoperable, or does not meet the minimum motor vehicle equipment required by O.C.G.A. ch. 40-8, its successors or amendment. 
Dismantled vehicle parts are parts from a vehicle, which were removed and not reinstalled on a vehicle. 
Inoperable vehicle shall be a condition in which the vehicle is unable to move under its own power, has one or more flat tires, or does not meet the minimum motor vehicle equipment required by O.C.G.A. 40-8, its successors or amendment. 
Junked vehicle shall mean: 
(1)  Is unusable due to disrepair because one or more of the major parts needed for its operation have been removed or destroyed or have been made not safe for operation of the vehicle through disrepair or damage; or 
(2)  Constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard in that it provides a place for insects, rodents and other animals to exist, attracts children, vagrants or other individuals and may cause injury to them; or 
(3)  Does not have a current license plate with an appropriate ad valorem tax decal affixed in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20, if that vehicle is required to have such under the provisions thereof. 
Law enforcement officer shall mean the chief of police, or designee. 
Motor vehicle and vehicle mean an automobile, truck, or any other motorized conveyance, or trailer. 
Owner means the titleholder, lessor, lessee, security interest holders and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue, official title, or any other legitimate documentation of ownership as recognized in a court of law. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Private property shall mean any real property within the city, which is privately owned, and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility including property owned or managed by the City of Holly Springs. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-103. - Violation of article prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise to violate this article. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-104. - Authority of law enforcement officer. 
The law enforcement officer, chief of police or designee, is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions and required to follow the procedures as mandated by the State of Georgia, now and as amended of the following code sections: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; 
(2)  O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-105. - Removal of junked, inoperable, abandoned vehicles from public streets and rights-of-way. 
A junked, inoperable, and/or abandoned vehicle may be removed only by the law enforcement officer from public streets and rights-of-way without notice or prior warning to the public or vehicle owner in accordance with the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., now and as amended, under any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The vehicle is a junked vehicle; or 
(2)  The vehicle has been left on the public highway or right-of-way and once sighted is marked by the law enforcement officer, and, if after a period of time in excess of five consecutive days, remains; or 
(3)  Any condition which, in the judgment of the investigating officer, presents a traffic hazard or a threat to the public safety; or 
(4)  Under the confines of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., now and as amended. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-106. - Junked, inoperable, abandoned vehicles on residentially zoned private property. 
No junked, inoperable, and/or abandoned vehicle(s) shall be stored on residentially zoned private property unless said vehicle(s) is garaged and entirely stored inside a structure, or completely covered by a fitted vehicle cover and stored from sight of public streets and rights-of-way. No dismantled vehicles or dismantled vehicle parts shall be stored anywhere on residentially zoned private property. Violation(s) of this section shall be removed in accordance with section 34-109. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-107. - Dismantled vehicles and dismantled vehicle parts on commercially zoned private property. 
No dismantled vehicles or dismantled vehicle parts shall be stored anywhere on commercially zoned private property, unless licensed as a "Junkyard," by the mayor and council in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Holly Springs. Violations of this section shall be removed in accordance with Section 34-109. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-108. - Junked, inoperable, abandoned vehicles on commercially zoned private property. 
No junked, inoperable, and/or abandoned vehicle(s) shall be stored on commercially zoned private property, except as exempted* below. Violations of this section shall be removed in accordance with section 34-109. No junked, inoperable, and/or abandoned vehicle(s) shall be stored on commercially zoned private property unless: 
(1)  Licensed as a junkyard by the mayor and council in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Holly Springs; or 
(2)  Validly licensed as an auto repair establishment, with current occupational taxes paid, whereby vehicles are repaired for the general public. Vehicles awaiting repair by such establishments, shall be accommodated within entirely enclosed buildings. A vehicle(s) that is operable, yet does not possess a current license plate with valid and appropriate ad valorem decals affixed, may be stored outside of enclosed building if: 
a.  The repair establishment operator attests that said vehicle(s) is present for repairs directly related to obtaining a valid license plate and decals (failed emissions testing, as mandated by the State of Georgia); and 
b.  Said vehicle(s) shall be stored on a paved surface in a marked parking space, beyond sight from public roadways and rights-of-way; and 
c.  Said vehicle(s) with license plates and/or decals exceeding six months past expiration, shall be accommodated entirely within enclosed buildings or removed from the premises in accordance with section 34-109. 
[*NOTE: Exemption shall only apply to auto repair establishments as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Holly Springs. This exemption shall not apply to auto service or similar establishments, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Holly Springs.] 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-109. - Private property removal procedures. 
A vehicle(s) found to be in violation of this article shall be removed from the premises. The law enforcement officer and code enforcement officer have the discretion to take the following action to seek the removal of vehicles in violation of this article: 
(1)  Issue a verbal warning to the owner, occupant, tenant, manager, or the most responsible party found to be on the premises, requesting the vehicle be removed within 72 hours; 
(2)  Should the violator not remove the vehicle in 72 hours, the law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer may issue a written warning, ordering the vehicle(s) be removed within ten days; 
(3)  Should the violator not remove the vehicle in ten days, the law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer may issue a citation(s) to municipal court in accordance with section 34-110; 
(4)  Should a violation(s) of this article be of an egregious nature, or in situations deemed emergency, the law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer has the discretion to issue a citation(s) without prior warning in accordance with section 34-110; 
(5)  In dire circumstances whereby the public's safety is eminently threatened, the city manager may order a vehicle(s) be removed from private property by the city's contractor at the cost to the property owner. In such cases a citation(s) to municipal court shall also be issued in conjunction with removal of said vehicle(s), in accordance with section 34-110. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Sec. 34-110. - Penalties for violation. 
The law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to issue citation(s) for violation(s) of any provision of this article. The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to issue citations only for violations of the provisions of sections 34-106, 34-107, 34-108, and 34-109. Persons issued citation(s) for violating this article are subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court of the City of Holly Springs, which provides as follows: 
(1)  For violations of section 34-105 of this article, the municipal court judge shall adjudicate in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., now and as amended or other relevant O.C.G.A. sections, now and as amended; 
(2)  For all other violations of this article, the following penalties shall be imposed: 
a.  A conviction under this article for a first offense shall constitute a minimum fine of $250.00 and/or a minimum of 40 hours of community service, per violation, per day, as determined by the municipal court judge; 
b.  Within twelve months after a first conviction, a conviction under this article for a second offense shall constitute a minimum fine of $500.00 and/or a minimum of 40 hours of community service, per violation, per day, as determined by the municipal court judge; 
c.  Within 24 months after the second conviction, a conviction under this article for a third offense shall constitute a minimum fine of $1,000.00 and/or a minimum of 80 hours of community service, per violation, per day, or imprisonment for no less than 90 days and such fine as determined by the municipal court judge; 
d.  For penalties as prescribed by state law incorporated by reference herein, the municipal court judge shall also have the discretion to execute. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06) 
Secs. 34-111—34-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATERING 

Sec. 34-121. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-20-10) 
Sec. 34-122. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in ordinance. 
(b)  A police officer or code enforcement officer employed by the City of Holly Springs shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-20-10) 
Chapter 42 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC HEALTH RULES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6. 

Sec. 42-31. - Adopted. 
The city adopts ch. 290-5-14 of the rules of the department of human resources for public health, as revised September 10, 1986, and as published by the department of human resources. 
(Ord. of 7-14-92) 
Sec. 42-32. - Correction of violations; penalty. 
(a)  The county health inspectors shall be empowered to cite violations of this article and shall, upon inspecting any food establishment, issue an order directing any violation of this article to be corrected within 15 days, excepting, however, a violation dealing with perishable food items, or where a violation may constitute an immediate and direct hazard to public health. Under these circumstances, the county health inspectors may use their discretion as to the amount of time necessary to correct the violation. If any violation of this article has not been corrected within the amount of time specified by the county health inspector, he shall issue a citation to be heard in the municipal court. 
(b)  Anyone violating this article shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00. This fine, or any part of it, shall not be suspended or waived. Any violation of this article shall be made by citation or accusation only, and no one cited for the violation of this article shall be arrested. 
(Ord. of 7-14-92) 
Sec. 42-33. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the City of Holly Springs Smokefree Air Act of 2009. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-34. - Findings and intent. 
The City of Holly Springs does hereby find that: 
The 2006 U.S. Surgeon General's Report, The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke, has concluded that (1) secondhand smoke exposure causes disease and premature death in children and adults who do not smoke; (2) children exposed to secondhand smoke are at an increased risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), acute respiratory problems, ear infections, and asthma attacks, and that smoking by parents causes respiratory symptoms and slows lung growth in their children; (3) exposure of adults to secondhand smoke has immediate adverse effects on the cardiovascular system and causes coronary heart disease and lung cancer; (4) there is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke; (5) establishing smokefree workplaces is the only effective way to ensure that secondhand smoke exposure does not occur in the workplace, because ventilation and other air cleaning technologies cannot completely control for exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke; and (6) evidence from peer-reviewed studies shows that smokefree policies and laws do not have an adverse economic impact on the hospitality industry. (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon General. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 2006.) 
Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute determined in 1999 that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of approximately 53,000 Americans annually. (National Cancer Institute (NCI), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: the report of the California Environmental Protection Agency. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph 10," Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (NCI), August 1999.) 
The Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program (NTP) has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen. (Environmental Health Information Service (EHIS), "Environmental tobacco smoke: first listed in the Ninth Report on Carcinogens," U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Public Health Service, NTP, 2000; reaffirmed by the NTP in subsequent reports on carcinogens, 2003, 2005.) 
Based on a finding by the California Environmental Protection Agency in 2005, the California Air Resources Board has determined that secondhand smoke is a toxic air contaminant, finding that exposure to secondhand smoke has serious health effects, including low birth-weight babies; sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS); increased respiratory infections in children; asthma in children and adults; lung cancer, sinus cancer, and breast cancer in younger, premenopausal women; heart disease; and death. (Appendix II Findings of the Scientific Review Panel: Findings of the Scientific Review Panel on Proposed Identification of Environmental Tobacco Smoke as a Toxic Air Contaminant as adopted at the Panel's June 24, 2005 Meeting," California Air Resources Board (ARB), September 12, 2005.) 
Scientific evidence has firmly established that there is no safe level of exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke, a pollutant that causes serious illness in adults and children. There is also indisputable evidence that implementing 100% smoke-free environments is the only effective way to protect the population from the harmful effects of exposure to secondhand smoke. (World Health Organization (WHO), "Protection from exposure to secondhand smoke: policy recommendations," World Health Organization (WHO), 2007.) 
A study of hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction in Helena, Montana before, during, and after a local law eliminating smoking in workplaces and public places was in effect, has determined that laws to enforce smokefree workplaces and public places may be associated with a reduction in morbidity from heart disease. (Sargent, Richard P.; Shepard, Robert M.; Glantz, Stanton A., "Reduced incidence of admissions for myocardial infarction associated with public smoking ban: before and after study," British Medical Journal 328: 977-980, April 24, 2004.) Similar studies have been conducted in Bowling Green, Ohio; Monroe County, Indiana; Pueblo, Colorado; New York State; France; Greece; Italy; and Scotland. All of these studies have reached the conclusion that communities see an immediate reduction in heart attack admissions after the implementation of comprehensive smokefree laws. ([n.a.], "Bibliography of Secondhand Smoke Studies." American Nonsmokers' Rights Foundation, February 26, 2008.) 
Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. (California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke", Tobacco Control 6(4): 346-353, Winter, 1997.) The Americans With Disabilities Act, which requires that disabled persons have access to public places and workplaces, deems impaired respiratory function to be a disability. (Daynard, R.A., "Environmental tobacco smoke and the Americans with Disabilities Act," Nonsmokers' Voice 15(1): 8-9.) 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has determined that the risk of acute myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease associated with exposure to tobacco smoke is non-linear at low doses, increasing rapidly with relatively small doses such as those received from secondhand smoke or actively smoking one or two cigarettes a day, and has warned that all patients at increased risk of coronary heart disease or with known coronary artery disease should avoid all indoor environments that permit smoking. (Pechacek, Terry F.; Babb, Stephen, "Commentary: How acute and reversible are the cardiovascular risks of secondhand smoke?" British Medical Journal 328: 980-983, April 24, 2004.) 
Given the fact that there is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation standards on totally smokefree environments. ASHRAE has determined that there is currently no air filtration or other ventilation technology that can completely eliminate all the carcinogenic components in secondhand smoke and the health risks caused by secondhand smoke exposure, and recommends that indoor environments be smokefree in their entirety. (Samet, J.; Bohanon, Jr., H.R.; Coultas, D.B.; Houston, T.P.; Persily, A.K.; Schoen, L.J.; Spengler, J.; Callaway, C.A., "ASHRAE position document on environmental tobacco smoke," American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), 2005.) 
A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25-50% higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function. (Pitsavos, C.; Panagiotakos, D.B.; Chrysohoou, C.; Skoumas, J.; Tzioumis, K.; Stefanadis, C.; Toutouzas, P., "Association between exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and the development of acute coronary syndromes: the CARDIO2000 case-control study," Tobacco Control 11(3): 220-225, September 2002.) 
During periods of active smoking, peak and average outdoor tobacco smoke (OTS) levels measured in outdoor cafes and restaurant and bar patios near smokers rival indoor tobacco smoke concentrations. (Klepeis, N.; Ott, W.R.; Switzer, P., "Real-time measurement of outdoor tobacco smoke particles," Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 57: 522-534, 2007.) 
The society of actuaries has determined that secondhand smoke costs the U.S. economy roughly $10 billion a year: $5 billion in estimated medical costs associated with secondhand smoke exposure and $4.6 billion in lost productivity. (Behan, D.F.; Eriksen, M.P.; Lin, Y., "Economic Effects of Environmental Tobacco Smoke," Society of Actuaries, March 31, 2005.) 
Numerous economic analyses examining restaurant and hotel receipts and controlling for economic variables have shown either no difference or a positive economic impact after enactment of laws requiring workplaces to be smokefree. Creation of smokefree workplaces is sound economic policy and provides the maximum level of employee health and safety. (Glantz, S.A. & Smith, L. The effect of ordinances requiring smokefree restaurants on restaurant sales in the United States. American Journal of Public Health, 87:1687-1693, 1997; Colman, R.; Urbonas, C.M., "The economic impact of smoke-free workplaces: an assessment for Nova Scotia, prepared for Tobacco Control Unit, Nova Scotia Department of Health," GPI Atlantic, September 2001.) 
Hundreds of communities in the U.S., plus numerous states, including California, Delaware, Florida, Massachusetts, Montana, New Jersey, New York, and Washington, have enacted laws requiring workplaces, restaurants, bars, and other public places to be smokefree, as have numerous countries, including Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, Scotland, Sweden, Uganda, and Uruguay. 
There is no legal or constitutional "right to smoke." Business owners have no legal or constitutional right to expose their employees and customers to the toxic chemicals in secondhand smoke. On the contrary, employers have a common law duty to provide their workers with a workplace that is not unreasonably dangerous. 
Smoking is a potential cause of fires; cigarette and cigar burns and ash stains on merchandise and fixtures causes economic damage to businesses. ("The high price of cigarette smoking," Business & Health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9, August 1997.) 
The smoking of tobacco is a form of air pollution, a positive danger to health, and a material public nuisance. 
Accordingly, the City of Holly Springs finds and declares that the purposes of this ordinance are (1) to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and (2) to guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smokefree air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smokefree air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-35. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by permanent or temporary walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Main entrance means the primary point of ingress and egress to the establishment used by employees, patrons, vendors, or any other individual accessing and departing the structure who may be exposed to the inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe in any manner or in any form. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private club is a "public place" when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Service line means an indoor or outdoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-36. - Application of article to city-owned facilities. 
All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the City of Holly Springs, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-37. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within City of Holly Springs, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(a)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(b)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service establishments. 
(c)  Bingo facilities. 
(d)  Child care and adult day care facilities. 
(e)  Convention facilities. 
(f)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(g)  Elevators. 
(h)  Gaming facilities. 
(i)  Health care facilities. 
(j)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(k)  Polling places. 
(l)  Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(m)  Public transportation vehicles, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the City of Holly Springs, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation facilities, including bus, train, and airport facilities. 
(n)  Restaurants. 
(o)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(p)  Retail stores. 
(q)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the City of Holly Springs or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of City of Holly Springs. 
(r)  Service lines. 
(s)  Shopping malls. 
(t)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(u)  Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-38. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-39. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed residential facilities. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential facilities: 
(a)  All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes. 
(b)  At least 80 percent of hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-40. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor areas. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places: 
(a)  Within a reasonable distance of 15 feet from "main entrances", operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas. 
(b)  In outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurants, bars, or a bar and grill and within 15 feet from "main entrances" thereof. 
(c)  In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters, except in designated smoking areas, which may be established only in perimeter areas at least 15 feet from any seating areas or concession stands. Smoking shall also be prohibited in, and 15 feet of, bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(d)  In all public transportation stations, platforms, and shelters under the authority of the City of Holly Springs. 
(e)  In all outdoor service lines. 
(f)  In outdoor common areas of nursing homes, except in designated smoking areas, which must be located at least 15 feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-41. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 42-37 and 42-38: 
(a)  Public places which have not more than eight full-time and/or part-time employees as defined by the United States Department of Labor. 
(b)  Not more than 20 percent of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(c)  Private clubs, military clubs, and noncommissioned officer clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is invited; provided that smoke from such clubs does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. This exemption shall not apply to any organization that is established for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this article. 
(d)  Retail tobacco stores provided that smoke does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(e)  Long-term care facilities, which are defined as any skilled nursing home, intermediate care home, personal care home, or community living arrangement subject to regulation by the state. 
(f)  All outdoor places of employment. 
(g)  Workplaces manufacturing, importing or wholesaling tobacco products. 
(h)  Private and semiprivate rooms in health care facilities licensed under state law so long as all persons in the room have written authorization to smoke from a physician 
(i)  Bars and restaurants to which access is denied to anyone under age of 18 and that do not employ anyone under 18. 
(j)  Private rooms in restaurants and bars if the rooms are enclosed and have a separate air handling system exhausting directly to the outside. 
(k)  Convention facility meeting rooms not owned by the state while the facilities are being used for private functions and where anyone under age of 18 is prohibited from entering or working. 
(l)  Designated smoking areas in places of employment so long as no employee is required to enter the smoking area to work, the area has a separate air handling system, and the area is for use of employee only. 
(m)  Common work areas, conference and meeting rooms and private offices in private places of employment, other than medical facilities, that are open to the general public by appointment only. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-42. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 42-43(a) is posted. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-43. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. Every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment under this article shall have at least one conspicuous sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-44. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the community development department code enforcement division and the police department uniform patrol division or an authorized designee of the city manager. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the City of Holly Springs. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the community development department code enforcement division and the police department uniform patrol division or an authorized designee of the city manager. 
(d)  The city fire marshal, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(f)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city manager or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-45. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. Repeat violators up to nine instances may result in the revocation of the business license. 
(d)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the municipal court judge by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the City of Holly Springs may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  The violation period shall be from January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-46. - Public education. 
The City of Holly Springs shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-47. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the City of Holly Springs to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes urging all federal, state, county and city district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-48. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-49. - Liberal construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-50. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Sec. 42-51. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective on January 1, 2010. 
( Ord. of 3-16-09 ) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

Sec. 46-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Such unlawful disorderly conduct shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except which occurs in organized boxing, martial arts, or wrestling exhibitions or training programs, organized and presented as part of a recognized athletic program or lawfully presented entertainment event. 
(2)  The commission of a reckless or knowing act that may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Code 1991, § 11-1-1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage while a pedestrian in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place within the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1991, § 11-1-6) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-3. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be and appear in an intoxicated condition upon any street or sidewalk of the city or in any other public place or private business premises patronized by the public, when such condition results in boisterous, disruptive or annoying behavior that interferes with the lawful pursuits of others. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-4. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person may not loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in a manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress. 
(b)  No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place by the city police office and/or any other authorized law enforcement official. 
(c)  A person shall not sit, lie, or sleep in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk or other place open for pedestrian travel, except when necessitated by temporary physical disability of such person. 
(Ord. of 4-21-08, § 1) 
Sec. 46-4.1. - Loitering by minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a minor, as defined herein, to loiter in any public place within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, subject to the definitions and exceptions contained in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. The term includes, hut is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Loiter means to stand idly about or linger aimlessly. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, driveways, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, malls, parking lots, office buildings, playgrounds, vacant lots and transportation facilities. 
Youth means any person under the age of 18 and is synonymous with the terms "juvenile" or "minor" for the purposes of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to minors under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Individuals emancipated pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 19-7-1 et. seq. or similar statutes of another state; 
(2)  Individuals accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult having legal care or custody of said minor; 
(3)  Upon a specific, legitimate errand at the direction of a parent or guardian having the care or custody of a minor, while such minor is actually and directly carrying out such errand; 
(4)  Going directly to or coming directly from a place of public amusement, school function, or place of employment, with the knowledge and consent of the minor's parent or guardian; 
(5)  Individuals present in a public place because of an emergency, as defined herein, while actually dealing with or responding to such emergency. 
(Ord. of 4-21-08, § 1) 
Sec. 46-4.2. - Panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Solicit or panhandle shall mean to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
Public area shall mean an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to aggressively panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor within any public area in the city or: 
a.  In any public transportation vehicle, or public transportation station or stop; 
b.  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
c.  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
d.  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for services or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(2)  Unauthorized solicitation shall constitute a misdemeanor, 
(c)  Aggressive panhandling shall mean and include: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to city ordinance shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or words intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
(7)  Aggressive panhandling shall constitute an aggravated misdemeanor. 
(d)  Applicability. This section regulates the time, place, and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. This section does not apply to solicitations by permitted charitable organizations as provided for below. 
(Ord. of 4-21-08, § 1) 
Sec. 46-4.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-05 , § 1, adopted January 24, 2013, repealed § 46-4.3, which pertained to charitable solicitation. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 46-4.4. - Urban camping. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
Camp shall mean residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private primary living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any prolonged period of time; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Public park includes all public parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
Public street includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
Storing personal property shall mean leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park, as defined above, owned by the city, unless specifically authorized. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public street, as defined above. 
(d)  Other public property-blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this code section until he or she has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he or she is subject to arrest. 
(f)  Exceptions. This code section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons in wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. of 4-21-08, § 1) 
Sec. 46-4.5. - Penalties. 
(a)  Upon the first violation of any of the provisions of this Loitering Ordinance, a warning citation shall be issued. 
(b)  Upon the second violation of any of the provisions of this loitering ordinance, a citation shall be issued and the individual will go before the city municipal court. 
(c)  Upon conviction, punishment shall be as set forth by the municipal court judge. Such punishment may include the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance and as such state law may be amended from time to time. 
(d)  For sentencing purposes, the first citation before the municipal court shall be deemed the "first offense"; however, consideration may be given by the court to the previous warning citation. 
(e)  Nothing in this loitering ordinance shall restrict the city from pursuing other means of enforcement as it deems necessary, including instituting appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity with a court of competent jurisdiction. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. 
(f)  Every violation and each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. of 4-21-08, § 1) 
Sec. 46-5. - Discharging firearms, air guns, BB guns. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within 50 yards of any street, alley or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof, or discharge at any time any air gun, or BB gun. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1991, § 11-1-2; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 7-21-14 ) 
Cross reference— Dangerous weapons prohibited on premises where on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted, § 46-5. 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 
Sec. 46-6. - Throwing of missiles. 
No person shall throw any stone, rock or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1991, § 11-1-3) 
Sec. 46-7. - False alarms. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the City of Holly Springs to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this section. 
Alarm company means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, monitoring moving and/or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the City of Holly Springs allowing the operation of an alarm system within the City of Holly Springs. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual; and/or silent generated by an alarm system, to which the Holly Springs Police Department is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which the Holly Springs Police Department will be requested to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the Holly Springs Police Department requesting police dispatch. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the emergency communications center that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to the Holly Springs Police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
Emergency communication center means the Cherokee County E 911 Communications Center. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon law enforcement personnel which occurs as a result of mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, unless the request for response was cancelled by the alarm user's alarm company before the Holly Springs Police arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Holly Springs Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises, which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm, which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued. 
Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The Holly Springs Police Department may in its discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction". 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting the Holly Springs Police for dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this section, telephone verification shall require, at a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.2. - Alarm permits. 
(1)  Permit required. Effective May 16, 2016, no alarm system shall be used unless the alarm user first obtains a permit for such alarm system from the City of Holly Springs. There will be no charge for the permit. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. 
(2)  Registration. Each alarm user has the duty to obtain and complete a permit application on a form provided by the City of Holly Springs. 
(3)  Nontransferability; new registration required. Alarm permits are not transferable. Upon transfer of the possession of premises at which an alarm system is maintained, the new alarm user shall register for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. 
(4)  Reporting updated information. When information required on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the City of Holly Springs within 30 days of the change. In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders will receive, from the city, a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the city within 30 days. 
(5)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.3. - Duties of the alarm user. 
An alarm user shall be required to: 
(1)  Register and obtain an alarm permit. 
(2)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within a reasonable amount of time when notified by the Holly Springs Police Department. 
(4)  Ensure that an alarm is not manually activated by the alarm user or any other person for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(5)  Upon obtaining a permit number, provide that number to the alarm company. 
(6)  Obtain a new permit if there is a change of address or ownership of a business or residence or if there is updated information. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.4. - Duties of the alarm company. 
An alarm company shall be required to: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain required state and local license(s) and/or permits. 
(2)  Maintain current contact information, including user permit numbers, which shall be provided to the emergency communications center at the time of a request for law enforcement response. 
(3)  Ninety days after the effective date of this section alarm companies will be required to use control panels meeting Security Industry Association (SIA) Control Panel Standard CP-0I on all new and upgraded installations. 
(4)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide verbal and written instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user and provide written information on how to obtain service from the alarm company. 
(5)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
a.  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
b.  Communicate a cancellation to the emergency communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
c.  Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.5. - Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than 15 minutes. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the emergency communications center or the Holly Springs Police Department. 
(4)  An alarm company shall provide the permit number for the alarm system that produced the alarm signal at the time the alarm company notifies the emergency communications center of an alarm signal to facilitate dispatch. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.6. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(1)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that four or more false alarms within a permit year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for false alarms within a permit year may be assessed against an alarm user. The schedule of fees for false alarms under this chapter shall be on file in the City of Holly Springs Municipal Services Master Fee Schedule. 
(2)  Other civil penalties. Violations will be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies). The schedule of fees for other civil penalties under this chapter shall be on file in the City of Holly Springs Municipal Services Master Fee Schedule. 
(3)  Payment of civil penalties. Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
(4)  Cause of verified response. The failure of an alarm user to make payment of any civil penalties assessed under this ordinance within 30 days from the date of the invoice will be cause for the Holly Springs Police Department to only respond to alarm calls at that location when the alarm has been verifiably set off due to a crime. All other calls to that location will be responded to normally by the Holly Springs Police Department. All alarms will be responded to normally once the alarm user's payment has been received. 
(5)  Noncriminal (civil) violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be civil in nature and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.7. - Alarm user awareness class. 
(1)  Alarm user awareness class. The City of Holly Springs may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. 
(2)  Alarm user awareness class in lieu of payment. An alarm user may have the option of attending an alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying one prescribed civil penalty, as on file in the City of Holly Springs Municipal Services Master Fee Schedule. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.8. - Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this section may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the City of Holly Springs' Municipal Court within ten days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions. The written notice of appeal shall contain the cause for the appeal and any other pertinent information relevant to the case. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. The court clerk shall notify the person appealing the civil penalties and other enforcement decisions within five days. The written notification shall include the date and time that the appeal will be heard in the municipal court. The municipal court judge will render a decision within five business days of the hearing. The municipal court judge's decision may be subject to review by the courts by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(2)  Appeal standard. The municipal court judge shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the municipal court judge shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.9. - Confidentiality. 
To the extent allowed by law, information contained and gathered through the alarm registration process will be held in confidence by the City of Holly Springs. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-7.10. - Government immunity. 
Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Holly Springs Police Department response may be influenced by factors such as the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
( Ord. No. 08-2016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 46-8. - Use of fireworks on public property. 
It shall be unlawful to use fireworks or consumer fireworks in any public right of way, in any public park, or on any public property without a permit. 
( Ord. No. 11-2016, § 1, 6-20-16 ) 
Chapter 50 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-2016, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 18, 2016 , repealed the former chapter 50, article II, §§ 50-31—50-43, article III, §§ 50-71—50-76, and enacted a new chapter 50 as set out herein. The former chapter 50 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS 

Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the terms set forth below shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
Commissary shall mean an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, or stored. 
Itinerant merchant means any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat or public room in any hotel, lodging house, apartment or shop within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Ice cream truck shall mean a motor vehicle in which ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind are carried for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. 
Mobile food vendor shall mean a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable, is a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle designed and equipped to serve food. 
Motor vehicle vendor means any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in motor vehicle vending. 
Motor vehicle vending means the use of any motorized vehicle, used by a lawfully permitted vendor for the purpose of vending only from public property, from place to place and on city streets. No such vehicle shall be authorized to vend from any fixed location. The vehicles include rolling stores, ice cream trucks and motorized carts. Mobile food vendors as defined above with an approved permit shall not be considered a part of this definition. 
Peddler means any person, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products, or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. 
Pushcart shall mean a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving commissary prepared or prepackaged food and non-potentially hazardous food, unless the equipment is commercially designed and approved to handle food preparation and service. Pushcarts shall not be required to comply with mobile vehicular safety requirements. 
Temporary food establishment shall mean a retail food establishment, other than a licensed mobile food vendor or pushcart, that is not intended to be permanent and that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
Solicitor shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock company, trust or unincorporated organization which, through door-to-door solicitation, engages in the practice of: 
(1)  Selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, merchandise, wares, or other items of value for further delivery, or services to be performed in the future, for commercial purposes; or 
(2)  Requesting contributions of funds, property, or anything of value, or the pledge of any type of future donation, or selling or offering for sale any type of property, including but not limited to goods, tickets, books, and pamphlets, for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes. 
Solicitation activities shall mean the practices of the "itinerant merchant," "peddler," and "solicitor," as defined under this section. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-32. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any "itinerant merchant," "peddler," or "solicitor" to engage in solicitation activities in the city without first obtaining a solicitor's license from the city police department. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-33. - Exemptions. 
The following solicitors are exempt from the provisions of this article pertaining only to obtaining a license, paying a fee, obtaining an identification badge, and posting a bond: 
(1)  Minors under the age of 18 engaged in the solicitation of donations or the sale of any type of property for the purpose of financing extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs, provided that such solicitation activities shall have been approved by the principal of the school sponsoring such social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs. 
(2)  Political candidates seeking elective office and their designees, engaged in the solicitation of campaign contributions and/or door-to-door canvassing for votes. 
(3)  Non-profit, tax exempt, charitable organizations and churches. 
(4)  Newspaper deliveries and other bona-fide merchants delivering goods in the regular course of business. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-34. - Application for solicitor's license. 
Application for a solicitor's license shall be made to the police chief, or designee, on an application provided by the city which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The solicitor's name, address and telephone number. If the solicitor is a chapter or other affiliate of an organization having its principal office outside the city, the name and address of the parent organization; 
(2)  The name and address of the person or persons who will be in charge of conducting the solicitation activities; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of each individual engaging in door-to-door solicitation and other solicitation activities on behalf of the solicitor; 
(4)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation activities; 
(5)  The period within which such soliciting activity shall be conducted, including the proposed dates and times for such solicitation activities; and 
(6)  A brief description of the nature, character and quality of the goods or merchandise to be offered for sale, if any. 
(7)  Whether or not the person having the management or supervision of the solicitation activities has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed therefore. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-35. - License fees; occupation taxes; duration of license. 
All solicitors, peddlers, and itinerant merchants applying for a license under this article shall pay a license fee as established by mayor and city council from time to time through resolution, for each individual engaging in solicitation activities on behalf of the solicitor, peddler, or itinerant merchant. The payment of occupation taxes and compliance with the business tax registration requirements as set forth in section 22-36 et seq. is required and all assessed taxes shall be paid prior to the issuance of a solicitor's license. A solicitor's license shall be valid for the period of time requested in solicitor's application up to 20 consecutive days. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-36. - Bond requirement. 
All solicitors, peddlers, and itinerant merchants, not exempted by section 50-33, shall furnish to the city a cash bond in the amount of $500.00 in conjunction with the licensing application and prior to the issuance of the license. The cash bond shall be refunded to the licensee not later than 30 days after the expiration of the license provided that no claims against the solicitor, peddler, or itinerant merchant have been filed prior to the date of such refund. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-37. - Damages. 
Any person aggrieved or damaged by the action of a solicitor, peddler, or itinerant merchant shall have a right of action on the bond for recovery of money deposited or damages or both. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-38. - Issuance of license; license nontransferable; identification badge. 
(a)  Upon applicant's fulfillment of the above requirements, and subject to compliance with this article, the police chief, or designee, shall issue to applicant a solicitor's license. No license shall be issued to any solicitor convicted of a violation of any provision of this article or whose solicitor's license has previously been suspended or revoked. No individual convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall thereafter be permitted to engage in solicitation activities within the city. 
(b)  Any license issued hereunder shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person, firm, corporation or association. Any such attempt at assignment or transfer shall render the license void. 
(c)  In addition to the license, the police department shall issue an identification badge to every solicitor, peddler, or itinerant merchant, who shall wear their badges in such a way that the badges may be easily read while doing business. If a badge becomes damaged or obscured, the solicitor shall return it to the police department and receive another badge. Identification badges shall only be used by the person to whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person. Any solicitor, peddler, or itinerant merchant shall be required to exhibit the identification badge upon request. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-39. - Regulations governing solicitations. 
The following regulations shall apply to all solicitors, peddlers, and itinerant merchants engaged in solicitation activities in the city, regardless of exemption status: 
(1)  Solicitation activities shall only be conducted between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 6:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time, and between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Savings Time. 
(2)  Solicitation activities shall not be conducted in defiance of any notice exhibited by a residence or business indicating that solicitors are not welcome or not invited. In addition, the police chief or designee shall maintain a list of addresses of residents and businesses which have notified the city that solicitors are not welcome or not invited to their residence or business. Solicitation activities shall not be conducted at these residences or businesses. Any solicitor may obtain a copy of this list upon reimbursing the city for photocopying expenses. 
(3)  No license holder under this article shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any other sound device, including any loud speaking radio or amplifying system, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise such certificate holder proposes to sell. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-40. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
At the order of the police chief or designee, any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for a license; 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting solicitation activities; 
(3)  Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the conditions of the license; or 
(4)  Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
Upon suspension or revocation, the city shall deliver written notice to the license holder stating the action taken and the reason supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the address set forth in the license holder's application. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-41. - Appeals. 
Solicitor[s], peddlers, or itinerant merchants who are denied a solicitor's license or whose solicitor's licenses have been suspended or revoked may appeal such denial, suspension or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the police chief. The appeal must be filed within ten days of the date of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal and the decision of the council shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-42. - Penalties. 
In addition to the suspension and revocation penalties provided in section 50-40, any solicitor, peddler, or itinerant merchant or individual engaged in door-to-door solicitation who violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 120 days, or both, or to labor on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding 120 days. Each day any violation of any provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-43. - Motor vehicle vendors; persons selling from motor vehicles. 
Motor vehicle vendors selling ice cream or other prepackaged food items out of motor vehicles shall be subject to this section. 
(1)  Every vendor selling ice cream or other food items out of a motor vehicle shall, before making any sale, park the vehicle at the right curb and at least eight feet from any other vehicle that may be parked on the street and not less than 100 feet from any intersecting street. When the vending vehicle stops, all sound equipment or other devices used to notify customers of the presence of the vendor shall be stopped and shall not be resumed until the vehicle is again put in motion. 
(2)  Vehicles using sound equipment or other method of attracting customers shall operate only during the hours set forth in section 50-39. 
(3)  No vehicle shall stop or stand and do business for more than 30 minutes. 
(4)  All motor vehicles used in the operation of motor vehicle vending shall remain on public property at all times and are not permitted to engage the public on private property, without complying with section 50-32 et seq. 
(5)  Upon request by any police officer, the motor vehicle vendor shall provide all requisite licensure issued by the county and state to conduct the said business being vended. Should the motor vehicle vendor be unable or unwilling to provide the proper license, certificate, or credentials, the vendor must cease and desist motor vehicle vending. 
(6)  Failure to comply with this section is punishable in accordance with section 1-12. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-44. - Mobile food vendors-annual. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a commissary, mobile retail food establishment, pushcart or temporary food establishment without a business occupation tax certificate being granted under this section, except for temporary events as listed in section 50-45 below. 
(2)  An application shall be submitted to the community development director or his or her designee setting forth all information required hereunder and in compliance with this ordinance. The community development director or his or her designee shall develop a form of application for the purpose of compliance with this article. 
(3)  The following information shall be provided with each application for a mobile food vendor permit: 
a.  Name of the mobile food vendor. 
b.  Make, model, and license plate number of vending unit. 
c.  Owner's contact information. 
d.  Operator's contact information. 
e.  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit). 
f.  Copy of approved permit from the Cherokee County Health Department. 
g.  List of operating locations and times. 
h.  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property. 
i.  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. 
(4)  Prohibited conduct and requirements: 
a.  Except for ice cream trucks, no mobile food vendor shall conduct business or operate in the public right-of-way. 
b.  A mobile food vendor shall not operate on any private property without the prior written consent of the owner. 
c.  A mobile food vendor shall maintain a $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Georgia, protecting the mobile food vendor, the public, and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without 30 days advanced written notice to the city. 
d.  Except for ice cream trucks, a mobile food vendor shall not make sounds or announcements to call attention to the mobile food vehicle either while traveling on the public rights-of-way or when stationary. At all times said mobile food vendor shall be in compliance with the City of Holly Springs noise ordinance. 
e.  The occupational tax certificate under which a mobile food vendor is operating must be firmly attached and visible on the mobile food vendor or pushcart at all times. 
f.  Any driver of a mobile food vendor motorized vehicle must possess a valid Georgia driver's license. 
g.  Except for ice cream trucks, mobile food vendor locations shall comply with the requirements of the Holly Springs Zoning Ordinance. 
h.  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk or ten feet of any driveway. 
i.  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 100 feet of the entrance to any restaurant. 
j.  No sale or offer for sale shall be made by any mobile food vendor between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such sale is in conjunction with a city-approved special event or temporary permit. 
k.  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
l.  All mobile food vendors shall comply with all state, federal, and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. 
m.  Mobile food vendors may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only as approved in the permit from the Cherokee County Health Department. 
n.  The following safety regulations shall apply to any and all vehicles operating under this article or used for mobile retail food establishments: 
1.  Every vehicle shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. 
2.  Every vehicle shall be equipped with two rear-vision mirrors, one at each side, firmly attached to the outside of the motor vehicle, and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. 
(5)  Indemnity. As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the City of Holly Springs, its agents, employees, and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(6)  Revocation and suspension. The city shall have the right to revoke or suspend any license granted hereunder. 
(7)  Fees. The fee for every application for license under this section shall be set by resolution. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-45. - Mobile food vendors—Temporary permit. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a commissary, mobile retail food establishment, pushcart or temporary food establishment for any special event or city-sponsored event without the issuance of a temporary permit. 
(2)  An application shall be submitted to the community development director or his or her designee setting forth all information required hereunder and in compliance with this ordinance. The community development director or his or her designee shall develop a form of application for the purpose of compliance with this article. 
(3)  In addition to compliance with subsection 50-44(3)—(7); above, the following shall be submitted in conjunction with the application: 
a.  Name of special event. 
b.  Location of special event. 
c.  Duration of special event. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Secs. 50-45—50-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITORS 

Sec. 50-71. - Permit required and duration. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A § 40-6-97.1 any person soliciting funds within the incorporated portions of the city shall have a permit issued by the governing authority of the city. Permits are valid for seven calendar days. No such permit shall be issued to the same applicant more than four times per calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-72. - Eligibility. 
Permits shall only be issued to those persons or organizations which are "charitable organizations" registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 or "charitable organizations" exempt from such registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-73. - Application. 
Applicants for charitable solicitation permits shall make application with the city police department, and shall provide the following information at the time of their application: 
(1)  Safety plans detailing safety measures to be utilized during solicitation; and 
(2)  The site of any proposed solicitation and traffic plans which indicate that their proposed solicitation will not hinder the free and orderly flow of traffic on the roads and highways in the city; and 
(3)  List of names, dates of birth, next of kin, emergency contact numbers, and address of each individual who will participate in the proposed solicitation; and 
(4)  Insurance information on the individuals and the organization which will participate in the solicitation; and 
(5)  A statement under oath that the organization is a "charitable organization" and that all proceeds raised will be used for the benefit of citizens to include those of the city; and 
(6)  The dates and times proposed for the solicitation. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-74. - Issuance. 
Permits shall only be issued by the city police department if he or she finds that the applicant is qualified and that the proposed solicitation shall not: 
(1)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97(b) stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle; and 
(2)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the citizens of the city; and 
(3)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the people participating in the solicitation; and 
(4)  Hinder the free flow of traffic on the roads and highways of the city. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-75. - Duty to exhibit. 
Solicitation permits must be available for inspection at the site of the solicitation upon the request of any law enforcement officer. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Sec. 50-76. - Variances. 
Variances to time limits for charitable solicitation permits shall only be granted by a majority vote of the mayor and city council after a showing by the applicant of the necessity of a variance. 
( Ord. No. 05-2016, § 2, 4-18-16 ) 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city's land development standards have been adopted as part of the zoning ordinance dated September 19, 1994, and include the following regulations: development ordinance, standard details, flood damage prevention, soil erosion and sedimentation control, water and sewer specifications, and standard building and construction codes. 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); the city's development regulations saved from repeal, § 1-11(16); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-A-1 et seq.; City Business Improvement District Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; Redevelopment Powers Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
The document entitled, "Community Agenda" (2006-2026 Comprehensive Plan) is approved and adopted. 
(Res. of 2-21-2008; Ord. of 8-18-08, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 18, 2008, § 1, amended section 54-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 54-1 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from a resolution adopted February 17, 1997. 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 
Secs. 54-2—54-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANNEXATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 18, 2008, § 2, amended chapter 54, article II, §§ 54-36—54-39, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code 1991, §§ 1-2-1—1-2-4 and an ordinance adopted February 3, 1997. 

Sec. 54-36. - Incorporated by reference. 
O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1, et seq. and all other applicable laws of the state governing municipal annexation, now and as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. of 8-28-08, § 2) 
Secs. 54-37—54-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 54-50. - Use of power of eminent domain limited. 
No plan for economic development adopted by the city shall include the use of the power of eminent domain when the only purpose of acquiring the property is to resell it to a private developer for economic gain. This limitation shall apply to the city council's direct use of the power of eminent domain and to any resolution authorizing any authority to use the power of eminent domain. 
(Ord. of 3-3-06) 
Chapter 58 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; auctions, § 22-86 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Junk or metal dealers' records, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350 et seq.; control of junkyards, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; Used Motor Vehicle Dismantlers, Rebuilders and Salvage Dealers Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises or premises means the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's business tax registration certificate or application for certificate, as provided for in this article. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material that might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
Junk dealer means a person who operates a junkyard within the city. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-32. - General operating requirements. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers holding a business tax registration certificate in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The junkyard, together with its contents, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  No space not covered by the certificate shall be used in the licensed business. 
(3)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(4)  No weeds shall be permitted to attain a height of more than four inches. 
(5)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises unless such refuse is junk and is in use in the business. 
(6)  No junk shall be allowed or rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(7)  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(8)  No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the business shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(9)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(10)  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code, and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open. 
(11)  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the business on any Sunday, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)  The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of ten feet measured from ground level. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the certificate holder not exceeding 16 square feet in size. 
(13)  Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the business. 
(14)  No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance, nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-6) 
Sec. 58-33. - Records. 
Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any police officer. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-7) 
Sec. 58-34. - Minors. 
No junk dealer shall have any business dealings as a junk dealer with a minor, nor shall a junk dealer's business tax registration certificate be issued to a minor, nor shall a junk dealer employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-8) 
Sec. 58-35. - Stolen goods. 
Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things of value that may have been lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-9) 
Sec. 58-36. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-10) 
Secs. 58-37—58-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 58-61. - Required. 
Each junk dealer who does business within this city shall obtain a business tax registration certificate from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-2) 
Sec. 58-62. - Application. 
Application for a business tax registration certificate shall be made as provided in section 22-36 et seq., except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each person signing the application, along with the locations of prior establishments; 
(2)  Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous five years; 
(3)  The name, residence address and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the application is filed; 
(4)  A sketch of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet, and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings and uses; and 
(5)  A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the business are or are to be made; a sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators and walls. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-3) 
Sec. 58-63. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for a business tax registration certificate to operate a junkyard shall be taken by the city council until the planning commission has reviewed such application and forwarded its recommendation to the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-4) 
Sec. 58-64. - Fee established. 
The annual business tax registration certificate fee for each junk dealer doing business in this city shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1991, § 9-4-5) 
Secs. 58-65—58-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 21, 2011, § 1, repealed art. III, §§ 58-96—58-102, which pertained to pawnbrokers and derived from the Code of 1991, §§ 9-3-1—9-3-8. Similar provisions can be found in ch. 22, art. XII. 

Secs. 58-96—58-102. - Reserved. 
Chapter 62 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Residents contract with private companies for solid waste collection and disposal. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - County plan adopted. 
The Cherokee County Solid Waste Management Plan is adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
(Res. of 7-17-95) 
State Law reference— Local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 

Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial waste. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate that may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations, or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge or small quantity generator hazardous waste is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree pruning, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than from mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-32. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings with municipal solid waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the county. 
(c)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting or other handling; and yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or shipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96, § 1) 
Sec. 62-33. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96, § 1) 
Chapter 66 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(15); fowl or livestock running at large prohibited, § 14-4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; municipalities may permit enclosure of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 9-7-1 through 9-7-9 of the 1991 Code relating to parades and assemblies are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 
Sec. 66-2. - Park playing field lights; turn off times. 
Any lights used to illuminate any playing field located in any park shall be turned off at 9:30 p.m. on any school night, defined as the night before any day in which the Cherokee County Schools are open. The lights shall be turned off at 10:00 p.m. on all other nights. 
(Ord. of 12-21-98) 
Sec. 66-3. - Gated community access. 
(a)  Management or property owners' associations of any gated community within the city limits which operate a coded/locked control entrance gate are required to provide security access codes/keys to the chief of police or his/her designee and the fire chief or his/her designee. It shall be the responsibility of management to notify the city of any changes and/or updates to any (codes) security-gated communities. 
(b)  This article shall be enforced, including by the issuance of citations, by the police department, by the office of the building inspector, or by such other agents acting on behalf of the city. 
(c)  Any person violating this article shall be tried before any court of law having jurisdiction. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days for a first violation and a more severe punishment determined by the municipal judge for any subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. of 7-18-05) 
Secs. 66-4—66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

Sec. 66-36. - Maintenance and repair of public streets. 
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the streets and roads commissioner, which officer shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this article and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 66-37. - Defacing sidewalks, streets, curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 66-38. - Obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way except as may be provided in this article or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-3) 
Sec. 66-39. - Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any rubbish or any material that may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article that may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or to allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk, or other organic material. It shall be unlawful for anyone to wash autos on the city sidewalks. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-4) 
Sec. 66-40. - Report of defects, obstructions, deposits, discharges. 
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public way of the city to report the same to the streets and roads commissioner as soon as possible. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-5) 
Sec. 66-41. - Private use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale, or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-6) 
Sec. 66-42. - Encroachments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure that encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way without having first secured a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-7) 
Sec. 66-43. - Openings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the streets and roads commissioner. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-8) 
Sec. 66-44. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Planting and removing. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, parkway or other public place without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(c)  Dangerous trees. 
(1)  Any tree or shrub that overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. 
(2)  Any tree or limb of a tree likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. 
(3)  The commissioner of streets and roads may cause to be trimmed or removed any such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(d)  Poles and wires. Any person who maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the commissioner of streets and roads, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-9) 
Sec. 66-45. - Burning of leaves and rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-10) 
Sec. 66-46. - Street construction and improvements. 
(a)  Council resolution. Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the city council, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(c)  Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley or other public way shall be required to file a bond in an amount set by contract with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by or resulting from the work undertaken. 
(d)  Specifications. 
(1)  In general. All streets and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the city council. 
(2)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the sidewalks for physically handicapped persons. 
(e)  Barricades. Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-11) 
Sec. 66-47. - Driveways and curbs. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any driveway, curb or curb cut on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  Bond. The city shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit under this section to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the proposed alteration work. 
(c)  Standards for issuance of permit. The city clerk shall issue a permit under this section when he finds that the: 
(1)  Plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the streets and roads commissioner, or the county zoning administrator for matters within that official's jurisdiction, to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the city clerk within a reasonable time after receipt thereof; 
(2)  Work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(3)  Operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties; and 
(4)  Health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(d)  Supervision. All work for which a permit is granted under this section shall be under the direction and supervision of the streets and roads commissioner or county zoning administrator. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-12) 
Sec. 66-48. - Procedure for the issuance of permits. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article or any ordinance or law of this city relating to the subject matter of this article shall submit a written application for such permit to the city clerk. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted. 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person who is to do such work. 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work. 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other data or plans as may reasonably be required by the city clerk or the county zoning administrator. 
(b)  Review of application. Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this article, the city clerk shall forward such application to the county zoning administrator where the matter is within that official's jurisdiction. The county zoning administrator shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the county zoning administrator shall return the same to the city clerk. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of an approved application from the county zoning administrator, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk. 
(d)  Display of permit. It shall be the duty of any permittee to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(e)  Limitation on issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-13) 
Sec. 66-49. - Taking streets into city limits. 
No streets are to be taken into the city limits prior to inspection and approval of the gravel base by the city streets and roads commissioner. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-14) 
Sec. 66-50. - Use of the city's rights-of-way. 
Editor's note— State Law Reference, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 telephone services, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2 regulation of utilities by municipalities, O.C.G.A.; § 25-9-11 blasting and excavating operations by utilities, and Chapter 672 of the Department of Transportation Rules. 
Sec. 66-50.1. - Definitions. 
The following words shall carry the following meanings: 
Municipal governing authority means the governing authority of the City of Holly Springs. 
Person means a natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation, or any other similar establishment. 
Public necessity means the works or improvements required for the protection of the health, welfare, and safety of the public for which no other reasonable alternative exists. 
Right-of-way means that property located within and adjoining the streets, roads and highways within the city, which rights-of-way are owned by the city, county or the state or are otherwise maintained by the city, county or the state. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 66-50.2. - Use of city's rights-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a franchisee, to install, construct, move, or relocate pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way located within the municipality without the approval of the municipal authorities in charge of such roads, highways, and rights-of-way. Such approval shall be obtained from the municipality via rights-of-way license and such license shall specify the name of the streets, roads or rights-of-way involved, the purpose for which the pipes, wire, cable or conduit is run, the type and length of pipe, wire, cable or conduit to be run, and the time allowed for performance of the work. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 66-50.3. - Due compensation for use of the city's rights-of-way. 
(a)  Such rights-of-way license shall provide for due compensation to the city in an amount equal to the maximum amounts specified or allowed by applicable state or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(b)  For purposes of computing due compensation relating to rights-of-way licenses obtained pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1, et seq., the term "retail end user customer" shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, firm, municipality, cooperative, organization, governmental agency, building owner, or other entity provided with a telecommunications service for its own consumption and not for resale in whole or in part. 
(c)  Any due compensation required to be remitted under this chapter shall be remitted to the City of Holly Springs on a quarterly basis. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 66-50.4. - Liability of holder of a rights-of-way license. 
The holder of a rights-of-way license shall at all times be responsible to the public and hold the city harmless for any property damage or personal injury caused or occasioned by the installation, maintenance or occupancy of any wire, cable or conduit under, upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way as permitted in this article. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 66-50.5. - Authority to require relocation. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall be authorized to require a holder of a rights-of-way license to relocate their pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances if such relocation is a public necessity as determined by the city manager or his or her designee. The city manager or his or her designee may also require an overhead wire or cable to be relocated underground if the street involved should convert from an overhead system to an underground system. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 66-50.6. - Insurance and bonding requirements. 
(a)  Any person seeking to obtain a rights-of-way license shall provide proof of insurance or self-insurance to the City of Holly Springs. Such insurance shall cover all work done by such person upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way located within the municipality and shall be maintained during all periods such work is being done. 
(b)  If deemed necessary, the city may require any person seeking to obtain a rights-of-way license to provide a surety bond before issuance of the license. Such bond shall cover all work done by such person upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way located within the municipality and shall be maintained during all periods such work is being done. 
(c)  In situations where the city requires the person to provide a surety bond, the person shall deposit with the city manager or his or her designee a surety bond in an amount determined by the city manager to be sufficient to ensure satisfactory completion of the work from a surety company authorized to do business in Georgia and fulfillment of the warranty provided for herein and in a form approved by the city attorney. Said bond shall guarantee completion to the satisfaction of the city of all excavation and street restoration work required by this chapter and by the conditions of the license within the time limits set on the license. Said bond shall further guarantee that all excavation and street restoration work shall be free from settling and defects in workmanship or materials for a period of two years after the date said work is completed and accepted by the city. The bond shall be conditioned to protect and save harmless the city and the city council from all claims and damages for cleaning or repairing any damage by the person and will be used to reimburse the city for any cost incurred to clean or repair city roads or rights-of-way, to re-ditch or repair existing ditch structures or for other damage caused as a result of the actions of the person after the issuance of the rights-of-way license. 
(d)  In instances where the city has required a surety bond under paragraph (b) of this section in an amount greater than $1,000,000.00, the person may opt to secure their rights-of-way license by providing an irrevocable bank letter of credit attesting to solvency to the city in an amount approved by the city manager to be sufficient to ensure satisfactory completion of the work. 
(e)  Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall protect the city against any damage caused by such person or firm, tendering the surety bond or letter of credit, or any agent, employee or contractor or said person or firm and will be used to reimburse the city for any cost incurred to clean or repair city roads or rights-of-way, to re-ditch or repair existing ditch structures or for other damage caused as a result of the actions of the person after the issuance of the rights-of-way license. The person responsible for operations under the rights-of-way license will be given notice of the damage and allowed 72 hours to restore the road and rights-of-way to a safe and operable condition as determined by the city engineer and the city manager or his or her designee. All repairs, material used and final releasing condition shall be approved and accepted by the city engineer and the city manager. 
(f)  The bond or letter of credit may be released by the municipal governing authority of the city upon notification of completion by the person or firm obtaining the rights-of-way license and only upon final inspection of the sites and all affected rights-of-ways and city roads. The bond or letter of credit may be retained against future or continuing operations by the person in the city. 
(g)  A surety bond shall be issued by a surety acceptable to the city, and shall contain the following endorsement: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse until 30 days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(h)  The municipal governing authority may require verification of continuing coverage as needed. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(1), § 1) 
Sec. 66-50.7. - Violations. 
(a)  Violation of the requirements of this article shall be prosecuted in the municipal court and upon conviction, the violator shall be subject to a fine. The schedule of fines for violations under this chapter shall be on file at the Holly Springs City Hall. 
(b)  Each day of operation without sufficient and legal notice or without a bond, insurance, letter of credit, or due compensation shall constitute a new and separate violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(1), § 1 ) 
Secs. 66-51—66-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 66-81. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-21) 
Sec. 66-82. - Surety bond. 
Each applicant for an excavation permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the city clerk in an amount set by contract. The required surety bond must be: 
(1)  With good and sufficient surety approved by the city council; 
(2)  Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance; and 
(3)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council, or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the streets and roads commissioner, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after the work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before the work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface with the two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and its surety. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-22) 
Sec. 66-83. - Inspections. 
The streets and roads commissioner shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-40) 
Sec. 66-84. - Drawings. 
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures, including abandoned installations, and shall provide the streets and roads commissioner with a copy of the same. Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-41) 
Sec. 66-85. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-42) 
Sec. 66-86. - Routing of traffic. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the streets and roads commissioner may recommend the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time if, in his opinion, it is necessary. 
(b)  The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the police department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the streets and roads commissioner and the police department. 
(2)  The permittee must notify the chief of the fire department of any street so closed. 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the streets and roads commissioner and police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made. 
(4)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the chief of police, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the streets and roads commissioner will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee; but if there are no existing highways, the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the streets and roads commissioner. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the operation of its equipment. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-23) 
Sec. 66-87. - Clearance for fire equipment. 
All excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fireplugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-24) 
Sec. 66-88. - Protection of traffic. 
A permittee under this article shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and blockings of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safety; pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate thickness, width and length, together with necessary blocking, to assure safe passage by pedestrians. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-25) 
Sec. 66-89. - Interference with utilities. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the streets and roads commissioner and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee or unless the permittee makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. 
(b)  The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, poles, wires or other apparatus that may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across the work. If any pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them; and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and the bond of the permittee shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit, or other utility, and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-26) 
Sec. 66-90. - Protection of adjoining property. 
A permittee under this article shall at all times, and at its own expense, preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out the work. Wherever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs that exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the streets and roads commissioner. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-27) 
Sec. 66-91. - Sidewalk excavations. 
Any excavation made in or under any sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over the excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over safely at all times. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-28) 
Sec. 66-92. - Protective measures. 
A permittee under this article shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the street or sidewalks; and such protective barrier shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon each place of excavation, and upon any excavated materials, structures, or other obstructions to streets, suitable and sufficient lights, which shall be kept burning throughout the night for the duration of such obstructions. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-29) 
Sec. 66-93. - Attractive nuisances. 
It shall be unlawful for a permittee under this article to allow to remain unguarded at the place of excavation any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-30) 
Sec. 66-94. - Care of excavated material. 
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-31) 
Sec. 66-95. - Damage to existing improvements. 
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable code provision or ordinance. If upon being ordered the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the streets and roads commissioner shall have the authority to cause the necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city, and the cost shall be charged against the permittee; and the permittee shall also be liable on its bond therefor. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-32) 
Sec. 66-96. - Cleanup. 
As excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the streets and roads commissioner. From time to time, as may be ordered by the streets and roads commissioner, and in any event immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall at its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work; and upon failure of the permittee to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the streets and roads commissioner, the work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided for under this article. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-33) 
Sec. 66-97. - Backfilling. 
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued under this article shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-34) 
Sec. 66-98. - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the streets and roads commissioner. The permittee may be required to place 
a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such temporary restorations to assure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(b)  Permanent restoration of streets shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the streets and roads commissioner. 
(c)  Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the streets and roads commissioner shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and its surety under the surety bond required under this article for incomplete or defective work if such defects are discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-35) 
Sec. 66-99. - City's right to restore surface. 
(a)  If a permittee under this article shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the streets and roads commissioner, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administration expenses. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-36) 
Sec. 66-100. - Prompt completion of work. 
A permittee under this article shall prosecute with diligence and expediency all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-37) 
Sec. 66-101. - Emergency work. 
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this article, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of next succeeding day during which the city clerk's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as provided in this article. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-38) 
Sec. 66-102. - Noise, dust, debris. 
Each permittee under this article shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable noise, dust and unsightly debris, and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the streets and roads commissioner or in case of an emergency as provided in this article, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1991, § 5-1-39) 
Secs. 66-103—66-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 21, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 66-3—66-14. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 66-121—66-132. 

Sec. 66-121. - Use of facilities. 
(a)  All park properties are to be used on a first come, first served, basis with no reservations being taken, with the exception of ball fields. 
(b)  Each person using the public parks and ground shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-122. - Hours of operation; overnight camping. 
(a)  No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose. 
(b)  The hours of operation for all parks and recreational facilities owned, operated and controlled by the city shall be from sunrise until sunset. No persons other than city personnel conducting city business shall occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. 
(c)  Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the city at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-123. - Prohibited acts generally. 
No person using the parks, ground, or facilities shall: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, inure, tamper with, displace or remove, any structures, equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances. 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird, or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any other animal. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottled, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. 
(6)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane, or obscene language. 
(7)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(8)  Commit any assault or batter, or engage in fighting. 
(9)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use. 
(10)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-124. - Motor vehicles. 
No person shall operate any motorized vehicle, including motorcycles, mopeds or any other similar vehicle, in any part of or upon any road in any park or recreational facility owned, operated or controlled by the city, except upon roads within such park or recreational facility and in designated parking areas. No motorized vehicle described in this section shall be parked or left standing ay any place in any park or recreational facility owned, operated or controlled by the city, except in areas designated for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-125. - Littering. 
No person shall litter, dump or otherwise dispose of household garbage or any other trash, waste, refuse or debris not connected with his use and enjoyment of the parks and recreational facilities of the city. Littering, dumping and other forms of prohibited disposition are defined in the general laws of this state. All garbage, trash, waste and other debris generated from the use by patrons of the parks and recreational facilities of the city shall be properly disposed of in containers provided for that purpose or at other such places where disposition or disposal may lawfully be made. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of the same, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-126. - Fire restricted. 
No open fires, except in picnic grills, shall be permitted at any time or at any place in any park or recreational facility owned, operated or controlled by the city. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes, or cigars, tobacco paper, or other inflammable material within any park area or any contiguous highway, road, or street. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-127. - Firearms and explosives. 
No person shall discharge any firearm or explosive, including firecrackers or fireworks, except with the express written permission of the director of the recreation and parks department of the city, in any park or recreational facility owned, operated or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-128. - Possession of alcoholic beverages or drugs. 
No person shall possess or use any alcoholic beverage, as defined in the laws of this state, in any park or recreational facility owned, operated or controlled by the city, nor shall any person use or possess any drug or any other controlled substance, as defined in the laws of this state, except when given expressed permission by city council as a lawfully permitted use by the laws of this state, in any park or recreational facility owned, operated or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-129. - Unleashed dogs. 
No dog may be in any park unless such dog is on a leash not more than ten feet long. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-130. - Sales prohibited. 
No person shall vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park unless given expressed permission by the Holly Springs City Council. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-131. - Signs prohibited. 
No person shall paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
Sec. 66-132. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Holly Springs. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be denied any park permit or other permission to utilize the facilities of any park or recreational facility owned, operated or controlled by the city for a period of 60 days following any conviction for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-04(2)) 
ARTICLE V. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 66-133. - Structure defined. 
For the purposes of this article, a structure shall be defined as any building, the width of which cannot be confined within the travel lane of vehicular traffic, but shall not include mobile homes. 
( Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 3-16-15 ) 
Sec. 66-134. - Permit required. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to move any house, structure or other building over roads in the city shall apply to and obtain a written permit from the community development director. 
( Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 3-16-15 ) 
Sec. 66-135. - Application. 
(a)  The community development director shall provide an application for a permit to move any house, structure or other building over roads located within the city limits. The application shall be designed to elicit, among other information, the following: 
(1)  The name of the person, firm or corporation performing the moving. 
(2)  The origin and destination of the operation. 
(3)  The name and consent of the owner of the property from which the structure was removed and of the property to which the structure is moved and a detailed outline of the route to be followed and facilities to be used, including off-street parking. 
(4)  An estimate of the time involved, including the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. when the operation shall be conducted. 
(b)  Application for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one location to another shall be accompanied by a fee as approved by the city council, and no application shall be received unless the necessary fee is paid simultaneously therewith. 
( Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 3-16-15 ) 
Sec. 66-136. - Structure standards. 
No application shall be approved which proposes to move a structure upon property in the city, which structure does not meet the technical code standards set out in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 3-16-15 ) 
Sec. 66-137. - Permit processing. 
(a)  When an application for a permit to move any house, structure or other building over roads in the city has been received, the community development director shall confer with the city police and any other applicable city or county department to determine whether or not the proposed moving operation may be carried out without danger to adjacent property, existing utilities and to the traveling public. After such determination, the community development director may approve the application and issue the permit upon such conditions as may be necessary to ensure the safety of the operation. 
(b)  Any application approved may provide conditions, which conditions may include, but not be limited to, the route of travel, the time of travel, the destination or number of employees and/or authorized police personnel for the safe completion of the move, the type and necessary equipment so as to prevent breakdown during such removal; and other conditions, rules or requirements to ensure a safe and speedy removal of any building and structure upon city streets. 
(c)  If the community development director determines from his investigation that the operation cannot be undertaken with safety or results in technical code or zoning violations, he shall reject the application, furnishing to the applicant the reasons why the application was denied. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by such rejection of an application may come before the city council at the next regular meeting to review the decision of the community development director. 
( Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 3-16-15 ) 
Sec. 66-138. - Responsibility. 
Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person, firm or corporation engaged in the operation of moving a house or other structure from his responsibility therefor or from the requirement imposed upon him by law to take all due precaution during the moving operation. 
( Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 3-16-15 ) 
Sec. 66-139. - Police escort. 
Upon approval of any application and issuance of a permit for the removal of a house or structure, the applicant, at least 24 hours before commencing with the moving of a house or structure, shall notify the police department of the time, date and route of such move. Such applicant shall further request of the police department the assignment of an officer to escort such move, which officer shall be paid for such duties by the city. Within 24 hours after such move, the officer shall file a report to the community development director showing the time the move was completed, any deviation in route and any incidents where property was damaged or personal injury occurred. 
Sec. 66-140. - Insurance. 
Before issuing a permit to move a house, structure or other building over roads in the city, the community development director shall require satisfactory evidence that the applicant has liability insurance coverage with a reputable company during such proposed moving operation in the following amounts: 
(1)  For bodily injury to each person, a minimum of $100,000.00; 
(2)  For bodily injuries from each occurrence, $500,000.00; and 
(3)  Damage to property, $100,000.00. 
( Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 3-16-15 ) 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-246 et seq.; fees and taxes for alcoholic beverages, § 6-126 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-36 et seq.; financial institutions business license tax, § 22-226 et seq. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-19-12, § 1, adopted November 19, 2012, repealed § 70-1, which pertained to collection of delinquent taxes. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Secs. 70-2—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1, the city has contracted with the county tax commissioner to prepare the city's tax digest. Collection of ad valorem taxes is carried out by the city. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-19-12(3) , §§ 2—6, adopted November 19, 2012, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, § 70-31, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 70-31. - Annually set. 
The ad valorem tax rate shall be set annually by the city council. 
The city shall levy and collect ad valorem taxes based upon tax records provided by the county. These records shall include, but not be limited to, owner's name, address, property assessment, valuation, and exemptions (if any). 
All property subject to the ad valorem tax shall be assessed at 40 percent of its full fair market value as established by the county for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(3), § 2 ; Ord. No. 11-2017, § 1, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 70-32. - Due date. 
The ad valorem taxes due the city shall be due no later than December 20 of each year. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(3), § 3 ) 
Sec. 70-33. - Penalty and interest for delinquent returns. 
(a)  Pursuant to state law (O.C.G.A. 48-2-44) penalties will be added to the unpaid balances beginning 120 days after the due date. 
(b)  Pursuant to state law (O.C.G.A. 48-2-40) interest will be added to unpaid balances monthly if not paid by the due date. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(3), § 4 ; Ord. No. 11-2017, § 2, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 70-34. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exempted property. 
(1)  The following property shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes in the city: 
1.  All public property; 
2.  All places of religious worship; 
3.  All places of burial; 
4.  Educational Institutions as provided by state law; 
5.  Each person 65 years of age or over as of January 1 of the year of filing shall be exempt $1,000 of the assessed value for land on which their home is located, plus 100 percent of the assessed value for improvements if occupied by the owner. Any such owner shall not receive the benefits of such exemption unless the said owner files an affidavit with the city, giving his/her age; 
6.  Qualified disabled veteran in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48 (2012); 
7.  Personal property tax exemption for property valued at $7,500 or less in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-42.1 (2012); 
8.  Conservation exemptions in the same manner in which they are exempt from Cherokee County taxes; 
9.  Freeport exemptions in the same manner in which they are exempt from Cherokee County taxes. 
10.  Homestead freeze exemptions in accordance with HB 1271 (2008). 
(b)  Filing for exemptions. 
1.  Applications. 
a.  An applicant seeking an exemption shall file a written application on or before April 1 of a calendar year. In addition, the city may require an affidavit as to the age of the owner to determine eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
b.  The failure to file the application properly on or before April 1 of a calendar year in which the taxes are due shall constitute a waiver of the exemption on the part of the applicant failing to make the application of such exemption for that year. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(3), § 5 ; Ord. No. 11-2017, § 3, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 70-35. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
(a)  The city clerk shall serve as tax collector. 
(b)  As soon as the last day for the payment of taxes has passed, the city clerk shall notify in writing the taxpayer of the fact that taxes have not been paid and that, unless paid, an execution shall be issued. 
(c)  The city clerk shall issue executions for nonpayment of taxes in the form of a tax fieri facias (Fi Fa) at any time after 30 days after the date of the written notice given pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The executions shall be directed to all and singular sheriffs and constables of the state. 
(d)  The city clerk shall execute the tax fieri facias (Fi Fa) and shall be authorized to conduct a sale of any real and personal property. Such sale shall be conducted in the time, place and manner as provided by law for sheriff's sales for state and county taxes. The sale may be held in the city council meeting room. 
(e)  The city clerk or the mayor, with the approval of the city council, may purchase any property being sold for taxes on behalf of the city. Any property acquired at a tax sale may be divested only by public sale to the highest bidder, except that the city council may by unanimous vote quitclaim the property to the owner, or to the owner's administrators, executors, heirs or assigns upon payment of all taxes and costs due by reason of the tax sale. 
(f)  Any action required pursuant to this section may be taken in either the superior court, the state court or the municipal court. 
( Ord. of 11-19-12(3), § 6 ; Ord. No. 11-2017, § 4, 5-15-17 ) 
Secs. 70-36—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY FRANCHISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

Sec. 70-61. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  There is hereby created and granted unto public utilities, their successors, lessees and assigns, and to such other companies as may be granted these franchise rights in the future, the non-exclusive authority, right, permission and consent to use the streets, alleys, and public places of the city. The franchise granted hereunder shall be extended to territories that are annexed by grantor upon the same terms and conditions herein, subject to the approval of the council, if any such approval is required. 
(b)  The franchise rights granted in this section are for a period of 15 years and may be extended for a successive period of 15 years, provided each franchisee remains in compliance with the provisions of the franchise. 
(Ord. of 3-20-95, § 9-11-1; Ord. of 11-19-12(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 70-62. - Use by franchisees. 
(a)  The companies granted franchises pursuant to this article may occupy the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the city limits as from time to time the companies may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electric utility services, and re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as the companies deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the companies, to ensure safe and efficient service. 
(b)  The future use by the companies of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the city is expressly conditioned upon payment of franchise fees pursuant to this article; and continued use and occupancy of such city property for that purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful. The city shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this article by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 3-20-95, § 9-11-2) 
Sec. 70-63. - Franchise tax amount. 
(a)  The companies granted franchises under this article shall pay to the city on or before February 1 of each year a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the customers served within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of products, shall operate to reduce to the extent of such tax, fee, charge or imposition the amount due from the percentage of gross sales as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-20-95, § 9-11-3) 
Sec. 70-64. - Indemnification of city. 
The companies granted franchises under this article shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or existence of the companies' equipment, buildings or service, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the city would otherwise be liable. 
(Ord. of 3-20-95, § 9-11-4) 
Sec. 70-65. - Use subject to police powers. 
The companies granted franchises under this article shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending their poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall require the companies to surrender or limit their property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
(Ord. of 3-20-95, § 9-11-5) 
Sec. 70-66. - Failure to pay tax. 
The grant of the rights, permission and consents by the city to the companies contained in this article are specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the city in accordance with the rates, conditions and payment dates; and failure by the companies to timely pay the franchise fees required shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted by this article to the company who has failed to pay. From and after April 1, 1995, the use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the city by each company shall evidence the acceptance of the franchise granted in this article by that company and shall render the company liable for payment of all taxes required in this article. In the event of a forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the companies shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the streets are vacated due to such forfeiture. 
(Ord. of 3-20-95, § 9-11-6) 
Sec. 70-67. - Grants to other utilities. 
The city council may grant franchises to any company in the future by amendment to this article or by separate agreement. Nothing contained in this article shall operate to prohibit the city from entering into separate franchise agreements with any company, provided that such agreements shall not be inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. of 3-20-95, § 9-11-7) 
Secs. 70-68, 70-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-19-12(2) , §§ 2, 3, adopted November 19, 2012, repealed §§ 70-68, 70-69, which pertained to due compensation for companies with end user retail customers within the city, and authorized designee. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Secs. 70-70—70-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2017 , § 5, adopted May 15, 2017, repealed art. IV, §§ 70-81—70-84 which pertained to historic properties tax credit and derived from Ord. of February 18, 2003. 

Secs. 70-81—70-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 70-91. - Authority. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1), there is levied an excise tax upon hotels and motels as provided in this article. This article shall be known as the "Hotel-Motel Excise Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Holly Springs and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Holly Springs is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1). 
City clerk means the duly appointed City Clerk of the City of Holly Springs or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any loading house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of a guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefore whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-93. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of three percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 70-95. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-94. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of three percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 70-95, the operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable, This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-95. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from a permanent resident; the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or any official or employee of the state, or of its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-96. - Registration of operator; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance from which this article is derived becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information, which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner, in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of taxes when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(3)  Return; time of filing; person required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk showing the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(4)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-97. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine that amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three months after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three months after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-98. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 70-97(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-99. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three months after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three months after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three months from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the city clerk approves the claim, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-100. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require, Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-101. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishes as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Sec. 70-102. - Effective date. 
This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective on the first day of the second month following its adoption. 
(Ord. of 4-18-05(1)) 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices; schedule. 
(a)  The police chief or his designee, upon approval by ordinance of the city council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The police chief or his designee is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) of this section, this schedule and any amendments thereto shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the city council; and this schedule is hereby incorporated in this section, and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this section for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 10-1-4) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 
Sec. 74-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
If traffic upon the streets of the city becomes congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts; and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 10-1-2) 
Sec. 74-3. - Vehicle cover required. 
(a)  No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(b)  This shall be applicable to all vehicles transporting concrete loads. Loads must be secured and equipped with safety catch devices in order to ensure that no part of the load is dropped, escapes or shift in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. Failure to place safety catch devices on all outlets will result in a minimum fine of $500.00 in addition to repairs and maintenance that are needed as a result of the violation. 
(Code 1991, § 10-1-3; Ord. of 7-19-04) 
Sec. 74-4. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1991, § 10-1-5) 
Sec. 74-5. - Limited parking hours for city-designated parking areas. 
Parking in city-designated public parking spots shall be limited to a maximum of two hours. 
(Ord. of 5-19-03(2)) 
Editor's note— Ordinance (2) of May 19, 2003 enacted provisions intended for use as § 74-102. For purposes of classification, and to preserve the style of the Code, this section has been included herein as a new § 74-5, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 74-6. - Right-of-way regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, or maintain within the right-of-way of any public road any sign, signal, or other device except as authorized by subsection (d) of this section or as required or authorized by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 or any other state or city law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, or maintain in a place or position visible from any public road any unauthorized sign, signal, device, or other structure which: 
(1)  Imitates, resembles, or purports to be an official traffic-control device; 
(2)  Hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device; 
(3)  Obstructs a clear view from any public road to any other portion of such public road, to intersecting or adjoining public roads, or to property abutting such public road in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to traffic on such roads; or 
(4)  Because of its nature, construction, or operation, constitutes a dangerous distraction to or interferes with the vision of drivers of motor vehicles. 
(c)  Any sign, signal, device, or other structure erected, placed, or maintained on the right-of-way of any public road in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is declared to be a public nuisance, and the city may remove or direct the removal of the same. Where any sign, signal, device, or other structure is erected, placed, or maintained in violation of subsection (b) of this section, but not on the right-of-way of any public road, the city may order the removal of such structure by written notice to the owner of the structure or the owner of the land on which the structure is located. If such structure is not removed within 30 days after the giving of such order of removal, the city is authorized to remove or cause to be removed such structure and to submit a statement of expenses incurred in the removal to the owner of the structure or to the owner of the land on which the structure is located. If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within 60 days after the receipt of said statement, the city may punish violators in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  The following signs, signals, or other devices are authorized to be maintained within the right-of-way of any public road: 
(1)  Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties, including but not limited to: public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, and historical markers; 
(2)  Signs as authorized by section 74-1 of the Official Code of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia; and 
(3)  Signs as authorized by Section 10.13, Article 10, of the Zoning Regulations and Enabling Act of the City of Holly Springs, Georgia. 
(e)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 and upon conviction shall be fined for each offense in an amount to be established by the judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 9-19-05) 
Secs. 74-7—74-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 

Sec. 74-36. - Adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-396, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 10-1-1; Ord. of 3-24-97) 
Secs. 74-37—74-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEIGHT LIMITS 

Sec. 74-71. - Weight limits on roads. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street in excess of the weight limit set for that street and as posted by sign. 
(b)  No weight limit shall be imposed on a street until it has been approved by the city council. 
(c)  Any person who violates the weight limits on streets shall be presumed to have damaged the city streets by reason of the overloading, and the fine for violation of this section shall be on the schedule as follows in order to recompense the city: 

 
(d)  Prohibition against through traffic on certain roads. It shall be unlawful for any truck or vehicle to travel upon, over, across the public roadways within residential subdivision streets, which are over two axles, six wheels, or trucks with trailers over one-ton hauling capacity. 
(Ord. of 2-17-92, § 10-2-10; Ord. of 3-15-04(1)) 
Secs. 74-72—74-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED ZONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 74-106. - Established. 
The following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation: 
ON SYSTEM 
* Interstate I-575  State Route 5 
From mile point 5.21 (C.R. 779, Sixes Road, Holly Springs city limits) to mile point 5.92 (C.S. 565, Rabbit Hill Road), a distance of 0.71 mile, the speed limit shall be 65 miles per hour. 
From mile point 5.92 (C.S. 565, Rabbit Hill Road) to mile point 8.07 (mile post 14.10) (north city limits) (station number 434+00), a distance of 2.86 miles), the speed limit shall be 70 miles per hour. 
**Interstate I-575  State Route 417 
From mile point 11.22 (CR 779 Sixes Road south Holly Springs city limits) to mile point 14.10 (0.04 mile south of north bound off ramp to CR 1061 Joeseph E. Brown Memorial Highway north Holly Springs city limit) a distance of 2.88 miles, the speed limit will be 65 miles per hour. 
*This section of roadway shall not be covered under the city speed detection device permit. Speed control will remain with the department of public safety. 
** School zone hours effective 
A.M. from 30 minutes prior to commencement times to 30 minutes after commencement time—School days only. 
P.M. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time—School days only. 
Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
OFF SYSTEM 
Hickory Street 
From Palm Street to Sequoyah Circle (West), a distance of 0.83 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From Sequoyah Circle (West) to the east city limits at Morgan Road, a distance of 0.56 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
** Hickory Street 
From CR 351 Palm Street to CR 680 Sequoyah Circle, a distance of 0.85 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From CR 680 Sequoyah Circle to 0.18 mile east of CR 2289 Bradshaw Estates Drive (East Holly Springs City Limit), a distance of 2.02 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Holly Lane 
From Morgan Road to Sequoyah Circle, a distance of 0.77 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
** Holly Lane 
From CS 566 Morgan Road to CR 680 Sequoyah Circle, a distance of 0.76 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
** Holly Springs Parkway 
From 0.15 mile north of CS 618 Bell Parkway (South Holly Springs City Limit) to 0.20 mile south of CR 778 Hickory Street, a distance of 4.01 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From 0.20 mile south of CR 778 Hickory Street to CS 590 Pinecrest Road, a distance of 0.71 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From CS 590 Pinecrest Road to 0.01 mile south CR 402 Lakeside Drive (North Holly Springs City Limit), a distance of 0.49 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
* Holly Street 
From Main Street (Old State Route 5) to the west city limits, a distance of 0.76 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Main Street - Old State Route 5 
From Rabbit Hill Road, south city limits, to D. & D. Manufacturing, old city limits, a distance of 0.95 mile, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From 550 feet south of Hickory Street to Pinecrest Drive, C.S. 335, a distance of 0.62 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From Pinecrest Drive to 1,320 feet north of Pinecrest Drive, C.S. 335, a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From 1,320 feet north of Pinecrest Drive, C.S. 335 to north city limits, a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From 300 feet south of Hickory Road to 100 feet north of Rachel Drive, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From 150 feet north of Rachel Drive to the northern city limits, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From Little River, south city limits, to 300 feet south of Hickory Road, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Marble Quarry Road 
From Holly Street to Sixes Road, a distance of 1.68 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
** Marble Quarry Road 
From CS 593 Holly Street to CR 779 Sixes Road, a distance of 1.70 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Morgan Road 
From Hickory Street to Toonigh Road, a distance of 1.02 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
** Morgan Road 
From CR 778 Hickory Street to CR 352 Toonigh Road, a distance of 1.02 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Palm Street 
From Hickory Street to the south city limits, a distance of 1.89 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
** Palm Street 
From CR 778 Hickory Street to 0.01 mile south of CS 607 Palm Lake Drive (South Holly Springs City Limit), a distance of 1.96 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Pinecrest Drive 
From Main Street (Old State Route 5) to Univeter Road, a distance of 1.18 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
** Pinecrest Drive 
From CR 1061 Holly Springs Parkway to CR 309 Univeter Road, a distance of 1.18 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Rabbit Hill Road 
From South Main Street (Old State Route 5) to Marble Quarry Road, a distance of 1.05 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
** Rabbit Hill Road 
From CR 1061 Holly Springs Parkway to CS 593 Marble Quarry Road, a distance of 1.04 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Sixes Road 
From Interstate I-575 northbound ramp to Marble Quarry Road, a distance of 1.00 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
** Sixes Road 
From CR 1061 Holly Springs Parkway to 0.13 mile west of CS 593 Marble Quarry Road, a distance of 1.35 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
*  This street shall not be included in the city speed detection device permit. 
** School zone 
School zone speed limit on all "off system" roads shall be 30 MPH from 30 minutes prior to commencement to 30 minutes after commencement am and from 30 minutes prior to dismissal to 30 minutes after dismissal pm on school days only . 
Signs to be erected by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-24-97; Ord. of 3-15-04(2); Ord. of 4-20-09) 
Sec. 74-107. - Residential speed limits generally. 
All streets lying within a platted, residential subdivision shall have a 25 miles per hour speed limit, unless otherwise set by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-18-04(2)) 
Secs. 74-108—74-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING 

Sec. 74-121. - Time limit for public parking spots. 
Parking in city designated public parking spots shall be limited to a maximum of two hours. 
(Ord. of 5-19-03(3)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 19, 2003, set out provisions intended for use as § 74-102. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 74-121. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— "Off-road vehicle" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-3; Operating restrictions; "perennial stream" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-4; Enforcement and penalties, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-6. 

Sec. 74-122. - Definitions. 
Off-road vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. It includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles, amphibious machines, ground effect or air cushion vehicles, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind, except that such term shall exclude any motorboat; any military, fire, law enforcement, or other government vehicle being used for official purposes; any vehicles used exclusively on airports; all farm machinery, farm tractors, and other vehicles used exclusively for agricultural purposes; any self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction, or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, snowblowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
( Ord. of 7-16-12, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-123. - Operating restrictions; "perennial stream" defined. 
Any person operating an off-road vehicle under any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Without operative brakes or without mufflers or other silencing equipment; 
(2)  On any private property without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his or her agent; or 
(3)  Within any perennial stream, except when directly crossing such stream. As used in this paragraph, the term "perennial stream" means a stream: 
a.  That under normal circumstances has water flowing year round; 
b.  That has the channel located below the ground-water table most of the year; 
c.  For which ground water is the primary source of water; and 
d.  For which runoff from rainfall is a supplemental source of water flow. 
( Ord. of 7-16-12, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-124. - Enforcement and penalties. 
All peace officers shall enforce the provisions of this section. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall not thereby be guilty of a criminal act but shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $25.00. 
( Ord. of 7-16-12, § 1 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC CALMING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 74-140. - Intent. 
These policies are intended for the uniform application of traffic control devices within the City of Holly Springs, Cherokee County, Georgia. The contents of this document will address the procedures and standards as related to procurement and installation of traffic control devices. 
The procedures and standards shall apply to all publicly maintained rights-of-way and public and private development. 
The city's public works director or designee shall have the responsibility to maintain, review, update, and enforce the standards and regulations contained in this document. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-141. - Definitions. 
Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) —State agency empowered by the state legislature to adopt standards and regulate traffic control devices within the State of Georgia. 
Manual on uniform traffic control devices (M.U.T.C.D.) —The latest edition of the M.U.T.C.D. published by the Federal Highway Administration and adopted by the GDOT, governing the uniform application of traffic calming devices are also included under this item. 
Non-resident traffic —Traffic, usually commuter traffic, that cuts through a neighborhood to avoid congestion on main arteries or intersections. 
Public works director —City official responsible for the public works department. 
Specialty signs —Any sign other than a traffic control sign. 
Traffic calming —Traffic measures designed to regulate driver behavior in neighborhoods and on residential streets. 
Traffic control device —Any traffic signal, flashing devices, sign, pavement marking; speed regulation devices intended to regulate the movement of vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
Traffic laws —The requirements of the Georgia Statutes governing the traffic control devices and City of Holly Springs Traffic Ordinances and Regulations. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-142. - Procedures. 
The following section outlines the method in which traffic calming device applications will be processed by the city staff based on the various circumstances surrounding the request. Applications will reviewed internally by the public works department with correspondence with other relevant departments including police, community development, and engineering with the goal of completing a comprehensive and thorough analysis of the traffic control device request. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-143. - Service requests. 
All requests repair and/or replacement of existing traffic control devices shall be directed to the public works department customer service. 
Routine repair or replacement requests for traffic control devices are processed in the order of priority within 48 hours of the request unless the malfunctioning traffic control device presents a significant public safety hazard, in which case it will be corrected as soon as possible. While the city allows 48 hours to respond to requests, in many cases requests will be handled within several hours. Notice of malfunctioning traffic signals or bulb burnouts can also be directed to the public works department customer service. In an effort to be proactive, the public works department will make periodic sweeps of the city checking for repairs and maintenance needs on the city's traffic control devices. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-144. - New traffic control device requests. 
Applicants requesting a new traffic control devices must complete the appropriate application approved by city council. Procedures to submit a request for evaluation and implementation of a traffic control device are as follows: 
(a)  A written request is submitted. E-mail and fax requests are acceptable. This is in addition to the "Request for Traffic Control Device" application. If the request is within a platted subdivision, which has an HOA, the request must be from the HOA board on their official letterhead. Requests must be submitted to the public works department. Anonymous requests will not be considered. The written request must clearly contain the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of requester; 
(2)  Location of the concern; 
(3)  Type of concern (speeding, cut-through, street parking, etc.). 
(b)  A preliminary evaluation will be conducted by the city to determine the root cause and the significance of the issue, as well as a review of the crash history if applicable. This evaluation may include a traffic study and on-site inspections. The public works director will forward a preliminary recommendation to the original requester and appropriate city departments depending on the nature of the recommendation. 
(c)  If the recommendation includes anything other than education, non-standard/specialty signing, enforcement, and/or speed trailers, the neighborhood HOA shall submit the following to the public works director within 30 days: 
(1)  A petition as outlined under "Petition Drive Procedures;" 
(2)  Concurrence and evidence of approval by the HOA board (In neighborhoods with no formal HOA, a petition drive will be requested after a preliminary study has determined that permanent traffic control devices are warranted.); 
(3)  Commitment of funding to cover any costs above what is currently appropriated in the budget for the given subdivision or neighborhood in question; 
(4)  Upon recommendation by the public works director, the city council shall approve or deny the request during their regular session; 
(5)  Upon council approval and completion of the design of the traffic calming devices and supplemental funding commitment, if required; the public works director will issue a work order to complete the required improvements. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-145. - Petition drive procedures. 
It shall be the responsibility of the requester to conduct the petition drive in accordance with the following criteria: 
(a)  Wording of the petition shall be approved by the public works director or designee prior to circulation; 
(b)  Eighty percent approval from homeowners of dwellings with driveways directly connected to the affected street; 
(c)  Eighty percent approval from homeowners on intersecting streets with no other outlets; 
(d)  Only one voter per household. If the dwelling is owned by two or more persons, they all must sign the petition and vote the same way. Signature of multiple owners with opposing views will be disregarded. A copy of [the] tax bill shall be included for each homeowner; 
(e)  Each name on the petition must include the signature, printed name, address, and tax map and parcel number (aka parcel ID); 
(f)  The petition shall clearly state the costs of the improvements to the homeowners on the affected street; 
(g)  It is the responsibility of the petitioner to collect all signatures and deliver the petition to the public works department within 30 days of the request by the public works director. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-146. - Non-standard and specialty signs. 
Requests for new non-standard and specialty signs shall be approved by the public works director after passing the internal staff review. These types of signs include, but are not limited to "Children at Play", "Neighborhood Watch", school athletic championship signs, and other non-essential road signs. The city will provide the sign installation at no charge to the citizens, so long as funding is provided to cover the cost of the materials of the sign and the design is approved by the public works director. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-147. - Policies and standards. 
(a)  Prohibited signs: 
(1)  The City of Holly Springs does not permit business signs, advertising signs, or any other non-compliant sign within the public right-of-way; unless otherwise provided in the Holly Springs Development Regulations, City Code or Zoning Ordinance; 
(2)  The City of Holly Springs does not fabricate, install or maintain "Children at Play" and "No Dumping" signs. However, if funding is provided their use is encouraged with approval of the public works director; 
(3)  Unauthorized signs will be removed by the public works department under direction of the public works director and code enforcement officer. 
(b)  Design standards: All traffic control devices must adhere to the standards of design set forth in the most recently adopted version of the City of Holly Springs Development Regulations, now and as amended. 
(c)  Signing in new developments: All traffic control devices in new developments must be installed by the developer per the City of Holly Spring Development Regulations, now and as amended. 
(d)  Signing in private subdivisions: Signing in private developments is the responsibility of the community's property management company or homeowners association (HOA). 
(e)  Decorative signs and sign posts: Use of non-standard and decorative sign material and sign posts within the public rights-of-way may be allowed if the design is approved by the public works director, provided certain conditions are met. Subdivisions should apply for decorative signs and sign posts through their HOA. The conditions for approval are as follows: 
(1)  The signs conform to the M.U.T.C.D. and GDOT standards; 
(2)  The design of the structural support for the decorative signs meets and exceeds the AASHTO requirements as determined by the manufacturer or by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia; 
(3)  The HOA agrees to provide all material or funds to cover cost of materials for the initial installation; 
(4)  Upon damage, the HOA will provide material or funds to cover the cost above and beyond the cost of replacement with standard material for the replacement; 
(5)  During an emergency, i.e. downed STOP sign, the city will only replace the installation with standard (non-decorative) material; 
(6)  HOA agrees in writing to waive any liabilities incurred by the City of Holly Springs. This agreement will be provided by the city attorney for the HOA to sign. 
(f)  Traffic calming measures: Traffic calming measures are intended to modify a driver's behavior to adhere with the safe operating regulations. They may be considered for residential subdivisions to combat unsafe speeding and non-resident cut-through traffic when warranted. Caution must be exercised to carefully evaluate the reported traffic problems to ensure satisfaction of the minimum warrants and to ensure implementation of the correct traffic calming scenario. Based on experience, implementation of physical changes such as street closing, speed humps and tables often result in relocation of traffic problems to other parallel roadways. Traffic calming solutions with physical restrictions are only considered for subdivision or local streets. They will not be considered for roadways with a collector or higher classification without major review of the impact on the transportation system on local and regional level. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-148. - Traffic calming solutions. 
It is recognized that an array of traffic calming solutions exists. An incremental approach that involves identification of the most effective/least costly solution is necessary to select the appropriate measures. The solution array may include, but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Neighborhood education; 
(b)  Consistent enforcement; 
(c)  Additional signage; 
(d)  Speed trailers; 
(e)  Permanent speed displays; 
(f)  Turn restrictions; 
(g)  Median chokers; 
(h)  Speed tables and humps; 
(i)  Street narrowing; 
(j)  Traffic circles; 
(k)  Street closures. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
Sec. 74-149. - Speed humps and speed tables. 
(a)  Speed humps and speed tables should only be considered if other less restrictive measures have been employed and were not effective. In order to consider implementation of speed humps and speed tables, all of the following minimum warrants must be satisfied: 
Warrant Threshold: 
(1)  Distance over 800 feet in length; 
(2)  Volume less than 1,600 vehicles per day (24-hour period); 
(3)  Posted speed 30 mph or less; 
(4)  Speed 30 percent over posted speed or ten percent over ten miles per hour over limit. 
(b)  In considering speed humps and speed tables, it is critical to note the following issues that generally are resultants of poor planning: 
(1)  A significant portion of traffic is diverted elsewhere often relocating the problem; 
(2)  Consistent opposition from the neighborhood; 
(3)  May hinder movement of emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Funding. There is no budget established or authorized by the city council for traffic calming. Full or partial funding by HOA or neighborhood may expedite projects. Ultimately, funding is subject to approval by the city council. 
( Ord. of 8-17-09, § 1 ) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES 

Sec. 74-150. - Definitions. 
All-terrain vehicle (ATV) means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator. 
Personal transportation vehicles (PTV) means any powered motor vehicle having not less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 25 miles per hour, including golf carts and similar types of self-propelled vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 74-151. - Operation regulations; equipment regulations. 
(a)  A license is not required for the operation of an EPAMD within the city. PTVs may be operated within the city only by: 
(1)  Those persons who are 16 years of age and older and have a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(2)  Those persons who are 15 years of age, who have in his or her possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-24, as may be amended, and has not had his or her instructional permit suspended or revoked, if accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(3)  No person under the age of 15 years of age shall be permitted to operate a PTV on any public street within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Before any PTV may be operated within the city, the PTV must be registered and receive a decal from the city clerk signifying its registration. A person desiring to register a PTV shall bring documentation setting forth a description of the cart to the clerk's office and complete an application for registration of the PTV as provided by the city clerk. 
(c)  PTVs and EPAMDs shall be equipped with, at a minimum, all factory installed safety systems and a charge indicator for low battery. 
(d)  Upon registration, the clerk shall issue a decal to be applied to the front of such cart so as to be plainly visible. The registration application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner. 
(2)  Model, make, name and PTV serial identification number. 
(3)  Such other information which the city may require so long as such information is also required to register a motor vehicle pursuant to state law. 
The registration application shall be accompanied by a fee pursuant to the City of Holly Springs Municipal Services Master Fee Schedule in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-331(b), as may be amended. The issued registration shall be nontransferable from the PTV for which it is issued. 
(e)  Before any PTV may be operated within the city, the PTV must have affixed thereto an emblem for slow moving vehicles as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4, as may be amended. 
(f)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the city streets and other areas accessible to such PTVs by the public in the city, including the uniform rules of the road contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-397, as may be amended. 
(g)  PTVs and EPAMDs which are in compliance with this section may be operated on any street within the city which is not specifically within the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Transportation and having a posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less, and may only cross streets or roads within the state highway system at intersections or crossings designated for that purpose by the department of transportation. PTVs shall not be operated on sidewalks or multiuse trails, unless a portion of a sidewalk or multiuse trail is specifically designated for such use by the City of Holly Springs. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 74-152. - Operation of all-terrain vehicles. 
No person shall operate or drive any ATV upon any portion of the right-of-way of any public road, street or highway within the City. ATVs shall be operated only on private property with the written consent of the owner of such property to be carried by the riders at all times and displayed to law enforcement officials upon request. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 74-153. - Hazardous activities prohibited; special rules. 
(a)  No individual or group utilizing PTVs or EPAMDs shall engage in any dangerous, reckless, or hazardous activities on the city streets or other areas accessible by the public. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to, racing in any form, except for special events approved by the city, blocking of any public access, except for special events approved by the city, reckless or aggressive driving, loitering or parking on roads, bridges or underpasses, and not issuing an audible warning when approaching pedestrians from the rear. 
(b)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city shall also apply to drivers and occupants of PTVs, ATVs and EPAMDs. 
(c)  The number of occupants in a PTV shall be limited to the number of persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided for. 
(d)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the movement and/or operation of the PTV and EPAMD. No parts of the bodies of any operator or passenger shall extend outside the perimeter of the vehicle while it is being operated. 
(e)  No driver shall operate a PTV or EPAMD between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of vehicles. 
(f)  All PTVs operated on city streets shall be equipped with two operating headlights, tail lights, brake lights and turn signals which are visible from a distance of 500 feet, a flashing amber light or rotating light on the roof and a horn. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 74-154. - Liability. 
Every person using PTVs and EPAMDs on city streets is liable for his or her own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person owning or operating a PTV or EPAMD on the city streets or in those areas accessible by the public should verify coverage. The city does not require mandatory liability coverage in order to operate any of the vehicles authorized in this article. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 74-155. - Penalties. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation of the City of Holly Springs Code of Ordinances. An owner, lessee or operator may be cited to appear in the Holly Springs Municipal Court. Upon finding by such court that an owner, lessee, or operator of any motorized vehicle authorized by this article has violated any provision of this article, such person shall be subject to a fine or court costs. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 74-156. - Revocation of permit. 
Permits will be revoked if it is found that: 
(a)  The permit holder no longer has a valid driver's license. 
(b)  Failure to abide by the rules and regulations of this Article. 
(c)  Failure to grant right-of-way to pedestrians and bicyclists. 
(d)  The holder of the permit cannot safely operate the PTV or EPAMD on the designated path or roadway or poses a threat to the safety of others. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 74-157. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(a)  Public safety officials while in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  The use of such vehicles in a safe and reasonable manner in a parade which has been approved by city officials. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 8-15-16 ) 
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city's streetlight ordinance and water and sewer specifications are incorporated by reference in the city's zoning ordinance. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utility franchise tax, § 70-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-09 , § 1, adopted July 15, 2013, repealed article II, §§ 78-31—78-42, which pertained to water service. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 78-31—78-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 78-43. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate fees and charges for stormwater utility services, define the scope of responsibility, establish an enterprise fund, credit and appeal policies, billing and collection policies, and other policies and procedures related to establishing the stormwater utility. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-44. - Findings. 
The city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  The Federal Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act emphasize the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater management programs which address water quality impacts of storm water runoff. 
(2)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities will assist the city in meeting the regulatory obligations imposed by its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit by reducing pollution and increasing water quality within the city. 
(3)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities will assist the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare and the environment. Providing stormwater management services, systems, and facilities renders both service and benefit to individual parcels, parcel owners, citizens and residents of the city. 
(4)  The area of impervious surface on each parcel is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities provided by the city or to be provided by the city in the future, and the area of impervious surfaces on each parcel is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a stormwater service charge. 
(5)  A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city and surrounding areas. 
(6)  Stormwater runoff is associated with all developed properties, whether residential or non-residential, and the impacts of runoff from individual properties are directly related to the amount of impervious surface on a property. 
(7)  A dedicated funding mechanism in the city, dedicated specifically for generating consistent, stable and adequate revenue to fund stormwater management services, will ensure that the City of Holly Springs has resources available to address stormwater issues as they arise. 
(8)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the city limits of the City of Holly Springs. While specific service and facility demands vary from location to location, a service area that encompasses all lands and water bodies within the geographic limits of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(9)  The city is responsible for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community as well as the environment and finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and the community at large and the environment to proceed with the development, implementation, and operation of a utility for stormwater management accounted for in the city budget as a separate enterprise fund dedicated solely to stormwater management and to institute funding methods associated therewith. 
(10)  Considering these findings, the city council finds that a stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities, and the city council finds that a stormwater service fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding stormwater management services in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-45. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The basis of such credits, if granted, will be defined by a specific written agreement at the determination of the stormwater utility manager in accordance with the stormwater utility credit policy. 
Customer means all persons or entities to whom the stormwater service charge is billed. 
Detached dwelling unit means developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar non-residential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by other than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
Developed land means real property which has been altered from its "natural" state by addition of any improvements, such as grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures or impervious surfaces greater than 200 square feet, or drainage works so that hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped conditions. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this article upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the statistical average impervious surface area of a detached single-family residential property within the city. An ERU will be determined through professional analysis and will be adopted by city council with resolution from time to time. This unit may be used in the rate study evaluation to determine and compute the service charge for all developed land served by the Holly Springs Stormwater Utility. An alternative unit of measure for impervious surface may be used for the rate structure. The methodology and basis for the stormwater service charge will be adopted by city council with resolution from time to time. 
Hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surfaces mean those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. The following types of surfaces will be considered "impervious surfaces" for purposes of the stormwater utility: the projected area of buildings; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; gravel surfaces; compacted soil surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
Parcel means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Private stormwater management system means those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality which are not public. 
Public stormwater management system means those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, public streets, curbs and gutters, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence either the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are either owned by the city or over which the city has accepted an offer of dedication of an easement or other legally binding permanent right of use for stormwater drainage, and for which the city has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes. 
Service charges mean the stormwater management service charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city. The charge shall be used to fund the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and systems. Stormwater service charges shall be based on the relative contribution of each parcel to the demand for stormwater management services, shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. The cost of operating expenses, capital investments and reserve accounts may be included in the stormwater service charges. Service charges are based on measurable parameters that influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by the city. 
Single-family residential means a developed lot containing one dwelling structure with its principal use being a residential dwelling. 
Stormwater management system means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or conveyance of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, lakes, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, streams, culverts, pipes, catch basins inlets; collection, or drainage. 
Stormwater utility manager means the city manager or his/her appointee that has direct responsibility for the management of the city stormwater utility. The stormwater utility manager will report to the public works director. 
Undeveloped land is land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or gravel surfaces or structures in excess of 200 square feet which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-46. - Establishment of a stormwater utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility within the city which shall be responsible for providing stormwater management services throughout the city limits. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the Holly Springs Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses, as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the Holly Springs Stormwater Utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund, and all expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund (i.e. from state and federal grants, bonds, revenue bonds, etc.) may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(c)  The city may pledge all or any portion of all income and revenue of any nature derived from the operation of the stormwater management systems and facilities owned by the city or owned by another political subdivision of the State of Georgia and leased to the city, including periodic stormwater service charges and other charges for stormwater service, to the payment of principal of premium, if any, and interest on any revenue bonds or other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the city for stormwater management services, systems, and facilities as may be provided in any resolution authorizing such bonds or obligations or in any trust instrument relating to such bonds or obligations. 
(d)  An annual audit of the stormwater enterprise fund will be conducted to ensure that funds are properly accounted for and spent on all stormwater, operational, administrative, and capital expenses as specified in subsections 78-46(a), (b), and (c) and section 78-47. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-47. - Scope of responsibility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection, construction, and use of all stormwater management systems in the city. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the city and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. The stormwater utility shall provide services which relate to the: 
•  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the City of Holly Springs; 
•  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing city owned stormwater management systems; 
•  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
•  Maintenance and/or improvement of water quality in waterways throughout the City of Holly Springs; 
•  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems; 
•  Complying with the federal and state regulations related to stormwater management including the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) watershed management requirements; and 
•  Education of the public regarding stormwater issues. 
(b)  The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater systems and public stormwater systems not owned by the city. Design and construction of public or private stormwater management facilities will be governed by the criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of private stormwater systems only when such services have been agreed to, contracted for, and approved by city council. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private stormwater systems to ascertain that the stormwater systems are functioning as designed and approved. Property owners who fail to maintain their stormwater systems will be notified of the violation. If within 30 days (or 24 hours if there is an immediate danger to public safety), no actions are taken, the city may enter the property and correct the failure. The cost for the repair work may be billed to the owner. 
(d)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  On public land which is owned by the city, or other governmental entity, and to which the city has agreements for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system; 
(3)  On private property but within easements granted to and accepted by the city, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions; 
(4)  Operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of stormwater management systems which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state and the United States; and 
(5)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city has expressly reserved the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its directors, and employees arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(e)  The stormwater utility shall provide for effective management of a uniform stormwater plan and program throughout the City of Holly Springs and provide compliance with the municipal separate storm sewer system NPDES permit issued to the City of Holly Springs including but not limited to the following components: 
•  Public education and outreach on stormwater issues; 
•  Public involvement and participation; 
•  Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
•  Post-construction stormwater management; 
•  Pollution prevention; 
•  Floodplain management. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-48. - User fee charges. 
It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs and/or the level of service provided as a result of the provision of stormwater programs, services and facilities. Service charges for stormwater management shall be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing programs, services and facilities and acquiring property. The cost of stormwater programs, services and facilities may include operating, capital investment, and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management requirements. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees, tolls, or licenses. 
Service charge rates shall be designed to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management by the city, whether within or outside the stormwater utility, including but not limited to plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges, and special assessments. 
The rate structure will be adopted by city council with resolution from time to time. In order to fully recover the cost of providing stormwater management services and systems while fairly and reasonably apportioning the cost among developed properties throughout the city, the city will conduct an evaluation of rates. 
The service charge will be based on the amount of impervious surfaces on a particular property that is developed, while undeveloped properties will not be assessed a stormwater utility fee. Stormwater utility rates will be reviewed on an annual basis and any rate changes will be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-49. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. 
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no public or private property located in the City of Holly Springs shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in the stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Undeveloped land; 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges; and 
(3)  All public road rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-50. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
The stormwater service fee shall accrue once adopted by city council with resolution, and shall be billed annually thereafter. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec 78-51. - Credits. 
The City of Holly Springs Stormwater Utility Services Fee Credit Manual specifies the design and performance standards of on-site systems, facilities, activities and services which qualify for the application of a service charge credit and how such credit shall be calculated. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the City of Holly Springs Stormwater Utility Services Fee Credit Manual. The stormwater service charge credit may be up to 100 percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services and activities provided, operated and maintained by the property owner or owners reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned upon continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the City of Holly Springs Stormwater Utility Service Fee Credit Manual and/or upon continuing provision of the systems, facilities, services and activities provided, operated and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for non-compliance. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1); Ord. of 10-5-09(2); Ord. of 12-17-12(2), § 1 ; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 7-15-13 ) 
Sec. 78-52. - Stormwater service fee, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
(a)  The stormwater service fee may be billed at the city's sole discretion. Unpaid stormwater service fees may subject the customer to lawsuit. 
(b)  A stormwater service fee bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the City of Holly Springs may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency due to the failure to send a bill or an under billing. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-53. - Stormwater utility inspections and enforcement. 
(a)  Every owner of developed real property located in the city, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, treat, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
(b)  When the stormwater utility manager determines that a public nuisance exists, the stormwater utility manager shall send a notice of maintenance requirements by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or owners of the property described, as their name and address are shown on the latest ad valorem tax records of the county property appraiser. This notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepaid. The notice of maintenance requirements shall inform the property owner that a violation of this article exists on the identified property with the description of the public nuisance, that the property owner is responsible for maintaining the identified private storm water system, that the property owner may allow the city access to the property to abate the nuisance at the expense of the property owner, and that formal enforcement action will be taken if the violation is not corrected within the time period indicated on the notice. The stormwater utility manager shall determine a reasonable period of time for correction of the nuisance. In determining a reasonable period of time, the stormwater utility manager shall consider the following: practicality and ease of correction; the owner's ability to correct the violation; the severity of the violation; the nature, extent, and probability of danger to the public, and other relevant factors. 
Notice, as required under this provision, shall not be required: (a) when the stormwater utility manager determines that the public nuisance presents an imminent endangerment to persons or property; (b) when a notice of maintenance requirements has been sent to the same property owner or owners for the same violation within the previous three months; or (c) when notice by certified mail cannot be effected on the owners of record. 
The notice of maintenance requirements shall contain substantially the following information and may be in the following form or other appropriate form: notice of maintenance requirements: name of owner; address of owner; description of property; inspection date; determination made by the stormwater utility manager that the condition on the property is creating adverse conditions so as to constitute a violation of this article; describe the conditions that caused the property to be in violation and any recommended actions that may be necessary to remedy the nuisance; specify a reasonable time period to proceed and remedy the nuisance; or provide written permission to the city to enter the site and abate the nuisance at owner's expense. 
Within the reasonable period of time for compliance specified in the notice of maintenance requirements, the property owner shall either abate the nuisance or file a written request with the city for a hearing before the stormwater utility manager to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist or that such condition does not constitute a public nuisance in violation of the ordinance. 
(c)  Any failure to meet the obligation set forth in this section shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the city shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of city court. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Sec. 78-54. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the stormwater utility manager within 30 days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  The City of Holly Springs shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal Holly Springs may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  The appeal will be presented to the city council and all decisions by the city council shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the city court, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision of the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. of 10-5-09(1)) 
Chapter 82 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

Sec. 82-1. - Ordinance incorporated by reference. 
The zoning ordinance adopted September 19, 1994, as amended, is by this reference incorporated herein and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full herein. 
Editor's note— The city's zoning ordinance includes regulations pertaining to adult entertainment as set forth in section 10-31 et seq. of this Code. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1991 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1991 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1991 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1991 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1991 Code. Ordinances adopted since the 1991 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
_____ 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 