CODE OF THE HENRY COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS McDONOUGH, GEORGIA 
CONSISTING OF:  COMPILATION OF LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS  COMPILATION OF LOCAL ACTS  COUNTY ORDINANCES 
Ordained and published  by Order of the  Henry County Board of Commissioners 
Adopted  May 1, 1984 
Effective  July 2, 1984 

HENRY COUNTY  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
CHAIRMAN  Dave Crawford 
COMMISSIONERS 

 
COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR  Donald W. Norton 

 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
HENRY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
June Wood, Chair 
Johnny Wilson, District I 
Dee Clemmons, District II 
Gary Barham, District III 
Vivian Thomas, District IV 
Bruce Holmes, District V 
County Commissioners 
____________ 
Cheri Hobson-Matthews 
County Manager 
____________ 
Stephanie Braun 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
The Henry County Code of Laws consists of three parts: Part I, Local Constitutional Amendments, being a compilation of local amendments to the Georgia Constitution relating to Henry County which were deemed advisable to be included; Part II, Local Acts, being a compilation of local acts adopted by the General Assembly relating to Henry County which were deemed advisable to be included; Part III, County Ordinances, being a codification of legislation adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners which is of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the adopting ordinance, the Henry County Code of Ordinances supersedes all legislation adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners not included therein or recognized as continuing in force. 
As this volume contains three (3) distinct parts, each chapter is preceded by an arabic number designating the part. Thus, the second chapter of Part II (Local Acts) is Chapter 2-2, and the second chapter of Part III (County Ordinances) is Chapter 3-2. Section numbers are keyed to chapters so the first section of Chapter 1-2 is section 1-2-1 and the first section of Chapter 3-1 is section 3-1-1. 
Under this system each section is identified with its part and chapter number and any additions can be inserted in their proper place by the use of the decimal system. New material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 3-3-2 and 3-3-3 would be designated as sections 3-3-2.1, 3-3-2.2 and 3-3-2.3, respectively. Sections have been reserved at the end of articles and divisions for future expansion. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 2-4 and 2-5 it will be designated as 2-4.5. New articles and new divisions may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Footnotes which tie related sections of this volume together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within this volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables, any local constitutional amendment, local act or ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by county officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The publication of this Code was under the supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Supervising Editor of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Philip T. Keen, Attorney for the Board of Commissioners, Mr. Ron Rabun, County Administrator and to other county officers and employees too numerous to mention, for their invaluable cooperation and assistance in the preparation of the manuscript of this publication. 
May, 1984 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE  ORDINANCE NO. 84-07 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A COMPREHENSIVE HENRY COUNTY CODE; ESTABLISHING THE SAME: PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN LEGISLATION NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OR ORDINANCES; AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of the same: 
Section 1.  That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 3-1 to 3-17, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Henry County Code," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supercede all other general and permanent ordinances of the County passed on or before December 12, 1983, to the extent provided for in Section 2 of this adopting ordinance. 
Section 2.  That all provisions of such new Code shall be in full force and effect from and after July 2, 1984, and all legislation of a general and permanent nature enacted by the Board of Commissioners on final passage of this new Code of Ordinances, on or before December 12, 1983, and not included in this new Code or are not specifically recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after July 2, 1984 effective date, except as provided in Section 3 below. 
Section 3.  That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  Any legislation promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the County, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the County, or any evidence of the County's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the County. 
(c)  Any right or franchise granted by the County to any person, firm or corporation. 
(d)  Any legislation dedicating, naming, defining, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the County. 
(e)  Any appropriation of any legislation authorizing appropriations or gifts. 
(f)  Any legislation providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(g)  Any legislation establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating or accepting plat or subdivision in the County. 
(h)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(i)  Any legislation which is temporary, although general in nature. 
(j)  Any legislation which is special, although permanent in nature. 
(k)  Any legislation levying or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(l)  Any ordinance enacted after December 12, 1983. 
Nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any legislation which has been repealed by subsequent legislation which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Henry County Code" shall be understood and intended to include all such additions and amendments. 
Section 5.  That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized by her, to insert in their designated places all amendments, ordinances, resolutions or motions which indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Board of Commissioners. Such copy shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
BE IT ORDAINED, that all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
BE IT ORDAINED, that the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners be authorized to sign this ordinance on behalf of the Board of Commissioners. 
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that this ordinance shall become effective on July 2, 1984. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED, by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, Georgia, this the 1st day of May, 1984. 
HENRY COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
BY: Edward H. Whiddon, Sr. Chairman 
ATTEST: 
Beverly P. McLeod, Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
Ordinances listed as "Omitted" are listed and described in Appendix BB. 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I consists of amendments to the various Georgia Constitutions which are applicable only to Henry County. Local amendments to the Constitution of 1945 are recognized as continuing in full force and effect by Art XIII, § 1 (para. II) of the 1976 Constitution. Article XI, § I para. IV of the 1983 Georgia Constitution provides for the repeal effective July 1, 1987 of certain local constitutional amendments unless they are reenacted prior to such date Provisions in the act which proposed a constitutional amendment which provide for approval by the General Assembly and/or the electorate (generally section 2 of such an act) are not printed. 

CHAPTER 1-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1-1. - Authority of county governing authority to regulate traffic and animals. 
Article VI, Section I of the Constitution is hereby amended to add at the end thereof a new paragraph to read as follows: 
"The governing authority of Henry County is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to traffic and animal control regulations, for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of said county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens thereof as it may deem advisable, not in conflict with the general laws of this state and of the United States, and for the implementation and enforcement of all duties and powers now or hereafter vested in said governing authority; and to provide penalties for violations of such ordinances, setting the nature and amount of such penalties or punishments; and to have same enforced in the court which shall have jurisdiction in Henry County over such offenses." 
(Ga. Laws 1980, P. 2303, Act. No. 258, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 4, 1980 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
CHAPTER 1-2. - BOARD OF EDUCATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Exemption from ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, § 1-4-3; publication of financial statement of school systems, § 2-2-2. 

Sec. 1-2-1. - Size, election districts, terms of office, organization, etc. 
Article VIII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution, relating to county boards of education, is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"The Board of Education of Henry County shall be composed of five (5) members, to be elected by the voters of their respective districts as hereinafter provided. For the purposes of electing such members, Henry County is hereby divided into five (5) education districts. 
"Education district No. 1 shall be composed of militia district #498 (McDonough) and militia district #1477 (Flippen). 
"Education district No. 2 shall be composed of militia district #641 (Lowes), militia district #723 (Hampton) and militia district #486 (Sixth). 
"Education district No. 3 shall be composed of militia district #775 (Stockbridge), militia district #888 (Shakerag) and militia district #622 (Brushy Knob). 
"Education district No. 4 shall be composed of militia district #491 (Loves), militia district #611 (McMullens) and militia district #638 (Beersheba). 
"Education district No. 5 shall be composed of militia district #576 (Locust Grove) militia district #489 (Tussahaw) and militia district #767 (Sandy Ridge). 
"The Board of Education of Henry County shall be composed of one member from each education district. Any person offering as a candidate to represent an education district on the board must reside in the district from which he offers and each member shall be elected by the voters within his district. 
"In the event this amendment is ratified, it shall be the duty of the Ordinary of Henry County to issue the call for an election, which call shall be issued at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such election. The ordinary shall set the date for such election for either December 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, or 20, 1958. Such election shall be for the purpose of electing the first members of the Board of Education of Henry County created under this amendment, and it shall be the duty of the ordinary to publish the date of the election and the purpose thereof at least once preceding the date of the election, in the official organ of Henry County. The members elected at such election shall take office January 1, 1959, and shall serve for a term of two (2) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Future elections shall be held every two (2) years, at the same time as elections for members of the General Assembly from Henry County are held, and the members elected shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. All future members shall likewise serve for a term of two (2) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
"At the first meeting in January, 1959, and at the first meeting in January each two (2) years thereafter, the members of the board shall elect a chairman for the next two (2) years. Any member of the board shall be eligible to succeed himself as chairman. 
"In the event of a vacancy on the board for any reason other than the expiration of a term of office, the remaining members of the board shall elect a person from the education district in which the vacancy occurs, who shall serve for the unexpired term. In the event a person who represents an education district moves his residence from such district, a vacancy shall exist from such district, and shall be filled in the same manner as other vacancies. 
"The Board of Education of Henry County in office at the time of the ratification of this amendment is hereby abolished effective at the end of December 31, 1958, and the terms of all members of such board shall expire at that time. 
"The compensation of the members of the Board of Education of Henry County shall be fixed by the General Assembly of Georgia in a local act for that purpose. 
"The Board of Education of Henry County as provided for herein and the county school superintendent of Henry County shall be subject to all constitutional provisions and all statutory provisions relative to county boards of education and county school superintendents, respectively, unless such provisions are in conflict with the provisions of this amendment." 
(Ga. Laws 1958, P. 436, Act. No. 77, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 4, 1958 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. In McRae v. The Board of Education of Henry County, Civ. Action No. C-79-2064A, the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia ruled that a 1966 amendment (Ga. Laws 1966, pp. 919—922) to the act compiled above violated the pre-clearance requirements of Section 5 of the Voting Acts Rights Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 1973(c)). Finding that the districts as set out in the act compiled above also violated such act, the court entered a redistricting order; such districts are now identical to the districts for the board of commissioners as compiled in Section 2-2-17. 
CHAPTER 1-3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Local acts relating to development authority, § 2-2-111 et seq.; salary of development authority, § 3-2-56. 

Sec. 1-3-1. - Created, organization, etc. 
Article V, Section IX, Paragraph I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the 'Henry County Development Authority' which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced within the limits of Henry County. The County and any municipality located therein may contract with the Authority as a public corporation as provided by the Constitution of Georgia. 
"The members of the authority, their qualifications, terms and method of election or appointment, shall be prescribed by law by the General Assembly. The authority shall have such duties, powers, and authority as shall be prescribed by law and the General Assembly may pass all other necessary legislation for the implementation of this amendment. 
"The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and the interest of the obligations of Henry County. The exemptions from taxation herein provided shall not include exemptions from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use by the authority. 
"All lands and improvements thereon, the title to which is vested in the authority, and all debentures and revenue bonds issued by the authority, shall be exempt from state and local taxation. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants nor lessees of the authority. 
"Said authority is created for the purpose of developing, promoting and expanding for the public good and general welfare, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources, and vocational training and for the making of long range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion within its territorial limits. The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia or Henry County. The authority is created for nonprofit purposes and all property acquired by the authority and any funds realized by the authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the authority is created. 
"No building or facility acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than thirty (30) years from the day of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all cost of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all indebtedness, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking." 
(Ga. Laws 1966, P. 853, Act No. 58, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 8, 1960 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
CHAPTER 1-4. - LICENSES, TAXATION AND BUSINESS REGULATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Tax for support of water and sewer systems authorize, § 1-5-2; special acts relating to licenses and taxation, Ch. 2-4, tax commissioner, § 2-2-81, ordinances relating to licenses and taxation generally, Ch. 3-3, excise tax on malt beverages and wine, § 3-14-17, licensing of malt beverages and wine, § 3-14-46 et seq. 

Sec. 1-4-1. - Authority of county governing authorities or municipal corporations to grant ad valorem tax exemptions to certain tangible personal property (Freeport amendment). 
Article VII, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following paragraph: 
"In order to encourage and enhance overall economic development, increase employment, promote industry and commerce, provide incentives for the location of new (or expansion of existing) manufacturing, processing, storage or transshipment facilities, the governing authority of Henry County or any municipal corporation within Henry County shall have the authority to provide for the exemption from all ad valorem taxation by such governing authority of tangible personal property transported into the territorial jurisdiction of such governing authority from outside the state in transit to a final destination outside the state and of tangible personal property grown, harvested, manufactured, processed or refined in Henry County and stored therein for shipment outside the state. Property shall not cease to be in transit within the exemption granted pursuant to this provision by virtue of the fact that while held, or while in storage, in Henry County such property is assembled, bound, joined, processed, disassembled, divided, cut, broken in bulk, packaged, labeled, repackaged or relabeled. Such tangible personal property shall not be exempt from State ad valorem taxation." 
(Ga. Laws 1976, P. 1900, Act No. 216, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 2, 1976 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
Sec. 1.4.1.A. - Filing deadlines. 
Persons desiring to obtain exemption from ad valorem taxation for tangible personal property as defined in section 1-4-1 shall timely file an application for such exemption on forms provided by the Henry County Board of Tax Assessors. Such application shall include a schedule of inventory for which the exemption is sought. In order to be qualified for the exemption, applications shall be filed on or before April 1 of the tax year for which such exemption is sought. Applications filed after April 1 shall allow the applicant to exempt only a portion of qualified tangible personal property from taxation as follows: 

 
An application will be considered filed on the date shown by the official postmark affixed by the United States Postal Service (not a private or commercial postage meter) or the date shown on the commercial carrier's transmittal form on the envelope or package containing the application, if the envelope or package is property addressed, postage prepaid, and the postmark or transmittal date is legible. Otherwise, the document will be deemed filed on the date the document was physically received in the office of the Henry County Board of Tax Assessors. 
( Ord. No. 17-18, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 1-4-1.1. - Homestead exemption generally. 
Article VII, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding after the following paragraph: 
"The homestead of each resident of Georgia actually occupied by the owner as a residence and homestead, and only so long as actually occupied by the owner primarily as such, but not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) of its value, is hereby exempted from all ad valorem taxation for state, county and school purposes, except taxes levied by municipalities for school purposes and except to pay interest on and retire bonded indebtedness, provided, however, should the owner of a dwelling house on a farm, who is already entitled to homestead exemption, participate in the program of rural housing and obtain a new house under contract with the local housing authority, he shall be entitled to receive the same homestead exemption as allowed before making such contract. The General Assembly may from time to time lower said exemption to not less than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00). The value of all property in excess of the foregoing exemptions shall remain subject to taxation. Said exemptions shall be returned and claimed in such manner as prescribed by the General Assembly. The exemption herein provided for shall not apply to taxes levied by municipalities", 
a new paragraph to read as follows: 
"For purposes of the application in Henry County of the exemption granted in the immediately preceding paragraph from ad valorem taxation for state, county, and school purposes, except taxes levied by municipalities for school purposes and except taxes to pay interest on and retire bonded indebtedness, the amount of the exemption is hereby increased to four thousand dollars ($4,000.00)." 
(Ga. Laws 1982, Act No. 124, P. 2517, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 2, 1982 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
Sec. 1-4-2. - Homestead exemption for elderly—For state and county ad valorem taxes. 
Article VII, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding after the following paragraph: 
"Each person who is sixty-five (65) years of age or over is hereby granted an exemption from all state and county ad valorem taxes in the amount of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) on a homestead owned and occupied by him as a residence if his net income, together with the net income of his spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, as net income is defined by Georgia law, from all sources, except as hereinafter provided, does not exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) for the immediately preceding taxable year for income tax purposes. For the purposes of this paragraph, net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor or disability benefits under the Federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and his spouse under the Federal Social Security Act, and income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this paragraph. The value of the residence in excess of the above exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. Any such owner shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he, or through his agent, files an affidavit with the tax commissioner or tax receiver of the county in which he resides, giving his age and the amount of income which he and his spouse received during the last taxable year for income tax purposes, and such additional information relative to receiving the benefits of such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner or tax receiver to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner or tax receiver shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. Such applications shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for homestead exemption, and the provisions of law applicable to the processing of homestead exemptions, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall apply thereto. Provided, that after any such owner has filed the proper affidavit, as provided above, and has been allowed the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he make application and file the said affidavit thereafter for any year and the said exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any such owner, however, to notify the tax commissioner or tax receiver in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. The General Assembly may provide by law for the proper administration of this exemption including penalties necessary therefor. The increased exemption provided for herein shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1974.", 
a new paragraph to read as follows: 
"Each person who is sixty-five (65) years of age or over or who is disabled is hereby granted an exemption from Henry County ad valorem taxes in the amount of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) on a homestead owned and occupied by him as a residence if his net income, together with the net income of his spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, as net income is defined by Georgia law, from all sources, except as hereinafter provided, does not exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for the immediately preceding taxable year for income tax purposes. For the purposes of this paragraph, net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the Federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and his spouse under the Federal Social Security Act, and income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this paragraph. The value of the residence in excess of the above-exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. In order to qualify for the exemption provided for herein as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than two (2) physicians licensed to practice medicine under the laws of Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. Any such owner shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he or she or his or her agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Henry County, giving his or her age, or if disabled the certificate or certificates provided for herein, and the amount of income which he or she and his or her spouse received during the last taxable year for income tax purposes, and such additional information relative to receiving the benefits of such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. Such applications shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for homestead exemption, and the provisions of law applicable to the processing of homestead exemptions, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall apply thereto. Provided, that after any such owner has filed the proper affidavit, and certificate or certificates if disabled, as provided above, and has been allowed the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he or she make application and file the said affidavit and certificate thereafter for any year and the said exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any such owner, however, to notify the tax commissioner in the event he or she becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. The General Assembly may provide by law for the proper administration of this exemption, including penalties necessary therefor. The homestead exemption provided for herein shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1982." 
(Ga. Laws 1980, P. 2255, Act No. 238, § 1; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 2519, Act No. 125, § 1) 
Editor's note— The 1980 amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 4, 1980 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. The 1982 amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 2, 1980 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
Sec. 1-4-3. - Same—or ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
Article VII, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding after the following paragraph: 
"The homestead of each resident of each county school district who is sixty-two (62) years of age or over and who does not have an income from all sources, including the income of all members of the family residing within said homestead, exceeding six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per annum, may be exempt by law from all ad valorem taxation for educational purposes levied for and in behalf of such school system, including taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. No such exemption shall be granted unless an affidavit of the owner of the homestead is filed with the tax receiver or tax commissioner of his county giving his age, the amount of income which he received for the immediately preceding calendar year, the income which the members of his family residing within the homestead received for such period, and such other additional information relative to receiving the benefits of the exemption granted by this paragraph as will enable the tax receiver or tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to said exemption. The tax receiver or tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. The exemption granted to the homestead within this paragraph shall extend to and shall apply to those properties, the legal title to which is vested in one or more title holders, if actually occupied by one or more such owners as a residence, and one or more such title holders possesses the qualifications provided for in this paragraph. In such instances, such exemptions shall be granted to such properties, if claimed in the manner herein provided by one or more of the owners actually residing on such property. Such exemptions shall also extend to those homesteads, the title to which is vested in an administrator, executor or trustee, if one or more of the heirs or cestui que uses residing on such property shall possess the qualifications provided for herein and shall claim the exemptions granted by this paragraph in the manner herein provided. The exemption provided for herein shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1972.", 
a new paragraph to read as follows: 
"Any other provision of this Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, the homestead of each resident of the Henry County School District who is sixty-two (62) years of age or over or disabled and who does not have an income from all sources, including the income of all members of the family residing within said homestead, exceeding twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per annum, may be exempt by law from all ad valorem taxation for educational purposes levied for and in behalf of such school system, including taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. The exemption shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) of the homestead's assessed value. The value of the residence in excess of the above-exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. No such exemption shall be granted unless an affidavit of the owner of the homestead is filed with the tax receiver or tax commissioner of his county giving his age, the amount of income which he received for the immediately preceding calendar year, the income which the members of his family residing within the homestead received for such period, and such other additional information relative to receiving the benefits of the exemption granted by this paragraph as will enable the tax receiver or tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to said exemption. The tax receiver or tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. In order to qualify for the exemption provided for herein as being disabled, a disabled person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain and submit with such affidavit a certificate from not more than two (2) physicians licensed to practice medicine under the laws of Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. Provided, that after any such owner has filed the proper affidavit, and certificate or certificates if disabled, as provided above, and has been allowed the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he make application and file the said affidavit and certificate thereafter for any year and the said exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any such owner, however, to notify the tax commissioner in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. The exemption granted to the homestead within this paragraph shall extend to and shall apply to those properties, the legal title to which is vested in one or more title holders, if actually occupied by one or more such owners as a residence, and one or more such title holders possesses the qualifications provided for in this paragraph. In such instances, such exemptions shall be granted to such properties, if claimed in the manner herein provided by one or more of the owners actually residing on such property. Such exemptions shall also extend to those homesteads, the title to which is vested in an administrator, executor or trustee, if one or more of the heirs or cestui que uses residing on such property shall possess the qualifications provided for herein and shall claim the exemptions granted by this paragraph in the manner herein provided. The General Assembly may provide by law for the proper administration of this exemption, including penalties necessary therefor. The homestead exemptions provided for herein shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1982." 
(Ga. Laws 1980, P. 2257, Act No. 239, § 1; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 2515, Act No. 123, § 1) 
Editor's note— The 1980 amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 4, 1980 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. The 1982 amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 2, 1982 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
Sec. 1-4-3.1. - Exemption of capital improvements of new manufacturing establishments from county. 
Paragraph IV of Section I of Article VII of the Constitution is amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph to read as follows: 
"All capital improvements of each new manufacturing establishment located in Henry County, Georgia, shall be exempt from all county ad valorem taxes, except for school purposes, for three (3) years from the time of its establishment provided such establishment has capital improvements of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more. For the purpose of this exemption, the term 'manufacturing establishment' shall mean and include every person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in making, fabricating, or changing things into new forms for use or in refining, rectifying, or combining different materials for use. The term 'capital improvements' shall mean and include buildings, machinery, and equipment directly connected with the manufacturing process." 
(Ga. Laws 1982, P. 2609, Act No. 161, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 2, 1982 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
Sec. 1-4-4. - Authority of General Assembly to authorize license tax or regulatory fee; authority of board of commissioners to regulate businesses and penalty for violation of business regulations. 
Article XI, Section I, Paragraph VI of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"The General Assembly is authorized to empower the Board of Commissioners of Henry County with the right and power, for regulatory and revenue purposes, to levy, assess, and collect a license fee from any person, firm, or corporation, except those subject to regulation by the state public service commission, who may maintain a place of business or who may in any manner engage in any type of business in any area of Henry County outside the incorporated limits of municipalities and to levy and collect excise taxes in connection with any activity at any racetrack in any area of Henry County. To provide for public welfare, health and security of the people of Henry County, the board shall have the right to regulate and exercise police powers over any businesses operated within the unincorporated areas of said County, except those subject to regulation by the State Public Service Commission, and to prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the powers herein granted. Violation of any regulations adopted by the Board shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction thereof as prescribed by the general laws of the State of Georgia." 
(Ga. Laws 1970, P. 1044, Act No. 193, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 3, 1970 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations authorized, § 2-4-26, business licenses, § 3-3-21 et seq; regulation of amusements, Ch. 3-15; peddlers, § 3-3-46 et seq. 
Sec. 1-4-5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1-4-6. - Authority of General Assembly to authorize tax on mobile home rental sites and units. 
Article VII, Section IV of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following paragraph: 
"Any other provisions of this Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, the General Assembly is hereby authorized to provide by law that the Board of Commissioners of Henry County may levy and collect a tax, subject to the exemptions and graduations as may be provided by such law, on mobile home rental units and mobile home rental sites located within said county not to exceed a rate of two (2) percent of the total amount annually collected as rent for such units and sites." 
(Ga. Laws 1970, P. 1119, Act No. 218, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 3, 1970 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. A 1976 amendment to Art. VII, § 1 of the Georgia Constitution repealed Ga. Code Ann. § 23-2307, which was similar to the act passed pursuant to the above amendment. See also Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 48-5-441. 
Cross reference— Tax on mobile homes and mobile home rental sites authorized, § 2-4-16, ordinances relating to mobile homes, § 3-9-141 et seq. 
CHAPTER 1-5. - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Special acts relating to water and sewage systems, Ch. 2-10; board of commissioners to audit water and sewerage authority, § 2-2-33; ordinances relating to water, sewers and sewage disposal, § 3-5-216 et seq. 

Sec. 1-5-1. - Authority to issue bonds; authority to levy taxes to pay for bonds; authority to improve systems. 
Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"Anything in this Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, Henry County is hereby authorized to incur an additional indebtedness for water and sewerage purposes and evidence the same by the issuance, from time to time, of its direct general obligation water and sewerage bonds, but the aggregate principal amount of such general obligation bonds outstanding at any one time shall not exceed seven (7) per centum of the assessed value of all taxable property within the County subject to taxation for bond purposes. Said debt limitation shall be in addition to and separate from the seven (7) per centum debt limitation now imposed by Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution. Nothing herein contained shall limit or otherwise affect the amount of bonds Henry County may issue under said Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution for other purposes. Said County is hereby authorized to levy taxes without limitation as to rate or amount sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on said bonds as same mature. The issuance or non-issuance of said water and sewerage bonds shall be submitted to the registered, qualified voters of the County for their determination as provided under Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution and the laws of this State. In addition to the foregoing, the governing authority of Henry County is hereby authorized to levy taxes to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing or otherwise improving the water and sewerage system of said County. The provisions of this amendment are cumulative and are in addition to all other rights and authority which have heretofore been conferred or may hereafter be conferred upon Henry County, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to, the right and authority of said County to issue its water and sewerage revenue bonds under the Constitution and the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36 et seq., as amended) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law (Georgia Laws 1937, p. 761 et. seq., as amended). This amendment is self-enacting and does not require any enabling legislation for it to become effective; provided, however, the General Assembly may by law grant further and additional powers to the County not inconsistent with the provisions of this amendment." 
(Ga. Laws 1968, P. 1774, Act No. 248, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 5, 1968 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. 
References in the above amendment to a seven (7) per centum debt limitation are obsolete, as Article IX, Section VII, Paragraph I of the 1976 Constitution provides for a ten (10) per centum debt limitation. All references in the above section to Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph I are to the 1945 Constitution; its successor provision in the 1976 Constitution is Article IX, Section VII, Paragraph I. The Revenue Bond Law is Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 36-82-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-5-2. - General authority to tax for support. 
Article VII, Section IV, Paragraph II of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"The governing authority of Henry County is hereby authorized to levy a tax, in addition to any other tax authorized to be levied, not to exceed two (2) mills per dollar on all taxable property located in said County. The proceeds of such tax shall be appropriated and used for water or water and sewerage purposes and to guarantee payment, in whole or in part, of water or water and sewerage revenue bonds issued, from time to time, by the County and the Henry County Water Authority and to otherwise support and maintain the operations of a water or water and sewerage system of Henry County." 
This amendment is self-enacting and does not require any enabling legislation for it to become effective; provided, however, the General Assembly may by law grant further and additional powers to Henry County and the Henry County Water Authority not inconsistent with the provisions of this Amendment. 
(Ga. Laws 1968, P. 1739, Act No. 238, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment was ratified by the electors at the November 2, 1976 election as required by section 2 of the act proposing the amendment. References in the above amendment to the Henry County Water Authority should be interpreted as referring to the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority, as the act created the water authority was amended to change the name to the water and sewerage authority. See § 2-10-21. 
Cross reference— Special acts relating to licenses and taxation. 
PART II - LOCAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part II consists of acts of the General Assembly which are applicable only to Henry County. 

Chapter 2-2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendments relating to board of education, Ch. 1-2. 
State constitution references— Counties generally, Ga. Const., 1983, Art IX. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Unless indicated otherwise, the catchlines for the legislation compiled in this article have been supplied by the editor. 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Employment of assistants to board of commissioners. 
Be it further enacted that the Board of Commissioners of Road and Revenues [Board of Commissioners] of Henry County is hereby authorized to employ such clerks, assistants, or assistant clerks as said board of commissioners shall deem necessary, and to prescribe their duties and fix their salaries. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2007, Act No. 4, § 6) 
Editor's note— The Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Henry County is now known as the Board of Commissioners of Henry County. See Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-5-20. 
Sec. 2-2-2. - Publication of financial statements of school system. 
The Board of Education and the School Superintendent of Henry County on or before the fifteenth day of each month shall publish a monthly financial statement of their receipts and disbursements in the official organ of Henry County. The cost of such publication shall be paid by the fiscal authority from the funds of the Henry County Board of Education or the Henry County School Superintendent. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, P. 2813, Act No. 250, § 1; Ga. Laws 1975, P. 4129, Act No. 387, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-3. - E911; powers of governing authority. 
Pursuant to the authority of paragraph (1) of subsection (e) of Code Section 46-5-133 of the O.C.G.A., the governing authority of Henry County is authorized to implement and to exercise the powers conferred by Code Section 46-5-133 of the O.C.G.A., relating to the authority to require telephone companies to divide maintenance fees for the operation of enhanced emergency telephone number "911" systems among subscribers. 
(Ga. Laws 1990, P. 4708, Act No. 1011, § 1) 
Secs. 2-2-4—2-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Unless indicated otherwise, the catchlines for the legislation compiled in this article have been supplied by the editor. 
Cross reference— Ordinances relating to board of commission, § 3-2-16 et seq. 

Sec. 2-2-16. - Status of governing authority; general powers. 
The Board of Commissioners of Henry County shall be the governing authority of Henry County and shall be vested with the control and management of the affairs of said county. Said board shall exercise all of the powers, duties and responsibilities hereinafter provided for, as well as all other powers, duties and responsibilities which are vested in the governing authorities of the counties of this state by the Constitution and general laws of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 1) 
State constitution references— County home rule, Ga. Const., 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II. 
Sec. 2-2-17. - Membership—Generally; commissioner districts. 
For purposes of electing the membership of the board of commissioners, Henry County is divided into districts as follows: 
Commissioner District No. 1 shall consist of the following described area of Henry County: 
Beginning at the intersection of the center of Camp Creek and the center of Jonesboro Road; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of Jonesboro Road to the center of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; 
Thence in a South and Southeasterly direction along the center of right-of-way of Southern Railroad to the center of State Highway No. 20; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of State Highway No. 20 to the center of Brown Avenue; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of Brown Avenue to the center of Griffin Street; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Griffin Street to the center of College Street; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of College Street to the center of South Cedar Street; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of South Cedar Street to the Southeastern city limit of McDonough, Georgia; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction following the city limit of the City of McDonough, Georgia to the center of Tomlinson Street; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Tomlinson Street to the center of Lemon Street; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along center of Lemon Street to the center of McGarity Road; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of McGarity Road to the center of Russell Road; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Russell Road extended to the center of Tomlinson Street; 
Thence in an Easterly and Northerly direction along the center of Tomlinson Street to the center of McGarity Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of McGarity Road to the center of Kalves Creek; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Kalves Creek to the center of State Highway No. 81; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of State Highway No. 81 to the center of Austin Drive; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Austin Drive to the center of Maranatha Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Maranatha Road to the center of Snapping Shoals Road; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Snapping Shoals Road to the center of Honey Lane; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Honey Lane to the center of Honey Creek Road; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of Honey Creek Road to the center of Snapping Shoals Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Snapping Shoals Road to the center of River Road; 
Thence in a Northerly and Northeasterly direction along the center of River Road to the center of North River Road; 
Thence in a Northerly and Westerly direction along the center of North River Road to the center of Honey Creek; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Honey Creek to the center of Butler's Bridge Drive; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Butler's Bridge Drive to the center of Honey Creek Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Honey Creek Road to the center of North Ola Road; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of North Ola Road to the center of Butler's Bridge Road; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Butler's Bridge Road to the center of South River (which is the boundary line between East Henry County and West Newton County); 
Thence in a generally Southeasterly direction along the center of the South River and following the meanderings thereof to the common corner formed by the boundary line of East Henry County, North Butts County and Western Newton County; 
Thence in a generally Southwesterly direction following the boundary line dividing Southeastern Henry County and Northwestern Butts County to the common corner formed by the boundary lines dividing South Henry County, North Butts County and Northeastern Spalding County; 
Thence in a generally Northwesterly direction along the boundary along the boundary line dividing North Spalding County and South Henry County to the center of Rocky Creek Road; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Rocky Creek Road to the center of Hampton-Locust Grove Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Hampton-Locust Grove Road to the center of Simpson Mill Road; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Simpson Mill Road to the center of State Highway No. 20; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of State Highway No. 20 to the center of Interstate Highway No. 75; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of Interstate Highway No. 75 to the center of Long Branch, extended; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of Long Branch to the center of Bridges Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Bridges Road to the center of Camp Creek; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of Camp Creek to the center of Jonesboro Road and the point of beginning. 
Commissioner District No. 2 shall consist of the following described area of Henry County: 
Beginning at the intersection of the high water mark at the Southern edge of Lake Spivey and the common boundary line dividing the Western part of Henry County and the Eastern part of Clayton County; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the high water mark of Lake Spivey to the center of Rum Creek; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Rum Creek to the center of Interstate Highway No. 75; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of Interstate Highway No. 75 to the center of Walnut Creek; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Walnut Creek to the center of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of the Southern Railroad right-of-way to the center of Camp Creek; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Camp Creek to the center of Bridges Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Bridges Road to the center of Long Branch; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Long Branch extended to the center of Interstate Highway No. 75; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of Interstate Highway No 75 to the center of Georgia Highway No. 20; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Georgia Highway No. 20 to the center of Simpson Mill Road; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Simpson Mill Road to the center of Hampton-Locust Grove Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Hampton-Locust Grove Road to the center of Rocky Creek Road; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Rocky Creek Road to the common boundary line separating the Southern part of Henry County from the Northern part of Spalding County; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the common boundary line separating the Southern part of Henry County from the Northern part of Spalding County to the common boundary line separating the Western part of Henry County from the Eastern part of Clayton County; 
Thence in a Northerly, Easterly and Northerly direction along the common boundary line separating the Western part of Henry County from the Eastern part of Clayton County to the high water mark at the Southern edge of Lake Spivey and the point of beginning. 
Commissioner District No. 3 shall consist of the following described area of Henry County: 
Beginning at the intersection of the center of Camp Creek and the center of Jonesboro Road; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Camp Creek to the center of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of the Southern Railroad right-of-way to the center of Walnut Creek; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Walnut Creek and following the meanderings thereof to the center of Interstate Highway No. 75; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Interstate Highway No. 75 to the center of Eagle's Landing Parkway; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of Eagle's Landing Parkway to the center of U.S. Highway No. 23 and State Highway No. 42; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of U.S. Highway No. 23 and State Highway No. 42 to the center of State Highway No. 138; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of State Highway No. 138 to the center of Miller's Mill Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Miller's Mill Road to the center of State Highway No. 155; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of State Highway No. 155 to the center of Hemphill Road; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of Hemphill Road to the center of Bentley Hill Drive; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Bentley Hill Drive to the center of Camp Creek, said point also being the common boundary between Northeast Henry County and Southwest Rockdale County; 
Thence in a generally Southeasterly direction along the center of Camp Creek and following the meanderings thereof (which Camp Creek forms the common boundary line dividing Northeastern Henry County from Southwestern Rockdale County) to its intersection with the South River; 
Thence in a generally Southeasterly direction along the center of the South River, also being the common boundary line dividing Southeastern Rockdale County and Western Newton County and Northeastern Henry County, to the center of Butler's Bridge Road; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Butler's Bridge Road to the center of North Ola Road; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of North Ola Road to the center of Honey Creek Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Honey Creek Road to the center of Butler's Bridge Drive; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Butler's Bridge Drive to the center of Honey Creek; 
Thence in a generally Southeasterly direction along the center of Honey Creek and following the meanderings thereof to the center of North River Road; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of North River Road to the center of River Road; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of River Road to the center of Snapping Shoals Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Snapping Shoals Road to the center of Honey Creek Road; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of Honey Creek Road to the center of Honey Lane; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Honey Lane to the center of Snapping Shoals Road; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Snapping Shoals Road to the center of Maranatha Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Maranatha Road to the center of Austin Drive; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Austin Drive to the center of State Highway No. 81; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of State Highway No. 81 to the center of Kalves Creek; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of Kalves Creek to the center of McGarity Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of McGarity Road to the center of Tomlinson Street; 
Thence in a Southerly and then Westerly direction along the center of Tomlinson Street to the center of Russell Road, extended; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Russell Road to the center of McGarity Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of McGarity Road to the center of Lemon Street; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of Lemon Street to the center of Tomlinson Street; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Tomlinson Street to the Eastern city limit of the City of McDonough, Georgia; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction following the city limit of the City of McDonough, Georgia, to the center of South Cedar Street; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of South Cedar Street to the center of College Street; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of College Street to Griffin Street; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the center of Griffin Street to the center of Brown Avenue; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of Brown Avenue to the center of State Highway No. 20; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of State Highway No. 20 to the center of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of the Southern Railroad right-of-way to the center of Jonesboro Road; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of Jonesboro Road to the center of Camp Creek and the point of beginning. 
Commissioner District No. 4 shall consist of the following described area of Henry County: 
Beginning at the intersection of the high water mark at the Southern edge of Lake Spivey with the common boundary line dividing the Western part of Henry County from the Eastern part of Clayton County; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the common boundary line dividing the Western part of Henry County from the Eastern part of Clayton County to the center of Rex Road; 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the center of Rex Road to the center of East Atlanta Road; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of East Atlanta Road to the center of Flat Rock Road; 
Thence in an Easterly and Southeasterly direction along the center of Flat Rock Road to the center of West Hemphill Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of West Hemphill Road to the intersection of West Hemphill Road, State Highway No. 138 and Hemphill Road; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the center of Hemphill Road to the center of Moseley Road; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the center of Moseley Road to the center of State Highway No. 155; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of State Highway No. 155 to the center of Miller's Mill Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Miller's Mill Road to the center of State Highway No. 138; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of State Highway No. 138 to the center of U.S. Highway No. 23 and State Highway No. 42; 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the center of U.S. Highway No. 23 and State Highway No. 42 to the center of Eagle's Landing Parkway; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Eagle's Landing Parkway to the center of Interstate Highway No. 75; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of Interstate Highway No. 75 to the center of Rum Creek; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Rum Creek to the high water mark at the Eastern edge of Lake Spivey; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the Southeastern high water mark of Lake Spivey to the common boundary line dividing Eastern Clayton County and Western Henry County and the point of beginning. 
Commissioner District No. 5 shall consist of the following described area of Henry County: 
Beginning at the intersection of the center of Rex Road with the common boundary line dividing Eastern Clayton County and Western Henry County; 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the common boundary line dividing Western Henry County and Eastern Clayton County to the common boundary line of Northern Henry County and Southern DeKalb County; 
Thence in an Easterly direction along the common boundary line dividing Northern Henry County and Southern DeKalb County to the common corner formed by the boundary line dividing Northern Henry County from Southern DeKalb County and the boundary line dividing Northeastern Henry County from Western Rockdale County; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the common boundary line dividing Northeastern Henry County and Southwestern Rockdale County to Bentley Hill Drive; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Bentley Hill Drive to the center of Hemphill Road; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Hemphill Road to the center of State Highway No. 155; 
Thence in a Southeasterly and Southerly direction along the center of State Highway No. 155 to the center of Moseley Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Moseley Road to the center of Hemphill Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of Hemphill Road to the intersection of Hemphill Road, State Highway No 138 and West Hemphill Road; 
Thence in a Westerly direction along the center of West Hemphill Road to the center of Flat Rock Road; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of Flat Rock Road to the center of East Atlanta Road; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center of East Atlanta Road to the center of Rex Road; 
Thence in a Southwesterly direction along the center of Rex Road to the common boundary line dividing Western Henry County and Eastern Clayton County and being the point of beginning. 
In addition to the five (5) members of the board of commissioners, there shall be a chairman of the board of commissioners who shall be elected by a majority of the voters of Henry County voting on a county-wide basis. In order to be eligible to qualify as a candidate for the office of chairman of the board of commissioners, a person must have been a resident of Henry County for at least six (6) months prior to the date of qualifying as a candidate, must be at least twenty-five (25) years of age as of the date of qualifying as a candidate, and must possess a high school diploma or its equivalent. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 2; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 3638, Act No. 880, § 1; Ga. Laws 1984, P. 4415, Act No. 1000, § 1; Ga. Laws 1990, P. 5232, Act No. 1180, § 1; Ga. Laws 1992, P. 4671, Act No. 619, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3009, Act No. 679, proposed an amendment to the above section. Such amendment was subject to approval at referendum and failed to receive such approval. 
Sec. 2-2-18. - Same—Initial election, terms, etc. 
Notwithstanding those changes in descriptions of commissioner districts which become effective under Section 2 of this Act [2-2-17] at the same time this section becomes effective, the elections and terms of the initial and subsequent members of the Board of Commissioners of Henry County under said Section 2 [2-2-17] shall not be changed but shall remain as follows: 
(a)  (1)  Effective January 1, 1983, the commissioners representing commissioner districts 1, 2, and 3 under Section 2 [Section 2-2-17] shall be the former commissioners representing commissioner districts 1, 2, and 3 who were elected at the general election of 1980 under previously existing provisions of the act [article], and said commissioners so elected shall serve for the terms of office to which they were elected, which terms shall expire at the end of December 31, 1984, and upon the election and qualification of their successors. Their successors shall be elected at the general election of 1984 and shall take office on January 1, 1985, for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of the terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)  The members of the board of commissioners serving on July 1, 2011, shall continue to serve the remainder of their terms and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The successor to the commissioner from Commissioner District 3 shall be elected at the general election in 2012 and shall take office on January 1, 2013, to serve a term of two (2) years. His or her successors shall be elected quadrennially thereafter to serve terms of four (4) years. The terms of office of the remaining commissioners shall be unaffected by the provisions of this paragraph. 
(b)  The commissioners representing commissioner districts 4 and 5 shall be elected at the general election of 1982 and shall take office on January 1, 1983, for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of terms and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 2A; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 3638, Act No. 880, § 1; Ga. Laws 2011, Act No. 43, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-19. - Same—Qualifications, filling vacancies, etc. 
(a)  The first members of the board of commissioners of Henry County provided for by Section 2 of this Act shall be elected at the general election of 1980 and shall take office on the first day of January, 1981, for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of the terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. The heretofore existing board of commissioners of Henry County shall stand abolished effective on January 1, 1981, when the board of commissioners elected at the 1980 general election, as provided herein, take office. 
(b)  The initial chairman of the board of commissioners provided by Section 2 of this Act shall be elected at the general election in 1992 and shall take office on January 1, 1993, for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of their terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  Vacancies occurring in the membership of the board shall be filled in the following manner: 
(1)  If, at the time the vacancy occurs, there are less than three hundred sixty (360) days until the date of the next general election, a qualified successor from the district in which the vacancy occurred shall be elected by the remaining members of the board to serve until the first day of January following the next general election. A qualified successor shall be elected at the next general election to serve for the balance of the unexpired term or for the next term, whichever shall be applicable, and shall take office immediately upon the results of such election being certified by the election superintendent. If the vacancy is in the office of chairperson, the vice chairperson shall serve as chairperson until a successor shall be elected as provided herein and, during such period, the board of commissioners shall be composed of five (5) members. 
(2)  If, at the time the vacancy occurs, there are more than three hundred sixty (360) days until the next general election, a qualified successor from the district in which the vacancy occurred shall be elected at a special election called for such purpose. Only the qualified electors of Henry County residing within the commissioner district wherein the vacancy occurred shall be eligible to vote at such election. The election superintendent of Henry County shall call each such election to be held not later than sixty (60) days from the creation of the vacancy. Each such election shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," relative to special elections for the filling of vacancies. All persons so elected to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. If the vacancy is in the office of chairman, the special election provided for herein shall apply to filling such vacancy, except that the qualified electors of Henry County voting on a county-wide basis shall be eligible to vote at said special election. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680; Act No. 1323, § 3; Ga. Laws 1979, P. 4186, Act No. 3, § 1; Ga. Laws 1987, Act No. 279, § 1; Ga. Laws 1990, P. 5232, Act No. 1180, § 1; Ga. Laws 2011, Act No. 43, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws, 1980, P. 3009, Act No. 679, proposed an amendment to the above section. Such amendment was subject to approval at referendum and failed to receive such approval. 
State constitution references— Terms of county officers, Ga. Const., 1976, Art. IX, Sec. 1, Para. III. 
Sec. 2-2-20. - Same—Terms of existing members. 
The members of the Board of Commissioners of Henry County serving as such upon the approval date of this act [article] shall continue to serve as such for the terms of office to which they were elected. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 18) 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3009, Act No. 679 proposed an amendment to the above section; such amendment was subject to approval at referendum and failed to receive such approval. 
Sec. 2-2-21. - Same—Terms after 1976 election. 
In the 1976 general election, candidates who are elected to Posts 1, 2 and 3 on the board shall serve for terms of office of four (4) years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Candidates who are elected to Posts 4 and 5 on the board in said election shall serve for terms of office of two (2) years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, all successors to members of the board of commissioners shall be elected for terms of office of four (4) years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 3A; Ga. Laws 1976, P. 3615, Act No. 1240, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3009, Act No. 679 repealed the above section. Such repealer was subject to approval at referendum and failed to receive such approval. 
Sec. 2-2-22. - Same—Oath and bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the chairman, and other members of the board shall subscribe an oath before the Ordinary [Judge of the Probate Court] of Henry County for the true and faithful performance of their duties and that they are not the holders of any unaccounted for public funds. Their chairman shall give a satisfactory surety bond to be approved by the Ordinary [Judge of the Probate Court] of Henry Conty, payable to the Ordinary [Judge of the Probate Court] or his successor in office and filed in the office of the Ordinary [Judge of the Probate Court], in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. In addition, each of the other members of the board shall give a satisfactory surety bond to be approved by the Ordinary [Judge of the Probate Court] of Henry County, payable to the Ordinary [Judge of the Probate Court] or his successor in office and filed in the office of the Ordinary [Judge of the Probate Court], in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices. The premiums for said bonds shall be paid out of the county treasury. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 7) 
Editor's note— The position of ordinary is now known as the judge of the probate court. See Ga. Const. of 1976, Art. IV, Sec. VI, Para. III. 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 45-3-1 et seq.; official bonds, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 45-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-23. - Compensation and allowances. 
The chairman of the board shall receive an annual salary in an amount equal to forty (40) percent of the annual salary provided by general law for the sheriff of Henry County. The vice-chairman of the board shall receive an annual salary in an amount equal to thirty-five (35) percent of the annual salary now or hereafter provided by general law for the sheriff of Henry County. The other members of the board shall receive an annual salary equal to thirty (30) percent of the annual salary now or hereafter provided by general law for the sheriff of Henry County. Said salaries shall be payable in equal monthly installments out of the general funds of Henry County. The chairman and each other member of the board shall also receive an expense allowance for in-county travel, of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per annum, payable in equal monthly installments out of the funds of Henry County. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 5; Ga. Laws 1979, P. 4186, Act No. 327, § 1; Ga. Laws 1983, P. 3958, Act No. 138, § 1; Ga. Laws 1987, P. 4462, Act No. 278, § 1; Ga. Laws 1990, P. 5236, Act No. 1180, § 4) 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of House Bill 554 states: "The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall receive an annual salary in the amount of $45,000.00. Each district commissioner shall receive an annual salary in the amount of $35,000.00. Such salaries shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the general funds of Henry County. The chairperson and each district commissioner shall also receive an expense allowance for in-county travel of $2,400.00 per annum, payable in equal monthly installments out of the funds of Henry County." Sec. 3 of said House Bill states: "Section 1 of this Act shall become effective on January 1, 2017." 
Sec. 2-2-24. - Officers, organizational meeting and general function of chairman. 
At the first meeting of the board in January after the election of the members, the board shall organize by electing one of its members chairman, and another person, not a member of said board, as clerk of said board. Said chairman shall preside at all meetings of the board when he is present and shall be the executive officer of said board. He shall sign, as chairman thereof, all contracts and county warrants, when so ordered by the board. Such instruments shall also be countersigned by the clerk of the board. The chairman shall, when deemed necessary, call special meetings of the board, and shall, through the clerk of said board, give to the other members thereof, sufficient notice. At the meeting in which the chairman shall be elected, there shall also be elected, a vice-chairman, who shall, in the absence of the chairman, preside over the meetings of the board, and discharge all other duties required of the chairman. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 4) 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3009, Act No. 679 proposed an amendment to the above section. Such amendment was subject to approval at referendum and failed to receive such approval. 
Sec. 2-2-24.1. - Additional duties of chairman. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia, in addition to such power and authority granted to it by local law, general statute, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, or by the now existing ordinances of Henry County, Georgia, shall have the exclusive power to: 
(1)  Appoint, from time to time, a non-elected individual to serve as county manager and individuals to serve as assistant county managers as necessary and appropriate; 
(2)  Delegate to such county manager and assistant county managers such duties and responsibilities as are deemed necessary and appropriate; 
(3)  Establish the qualifications, compensation, and job description of the county manager and assistant county managers; 
(4)  Appoint, at least annually, an individual to serve as county clerk and individuals to serve as assistant county clerks; 
(5)  Delegate to such county clerk such duties and responsibilities as are deemed necessary and appropriate; 
(6)  Establish the qualifications, compensation, and job description of the county clerk; provided, however, that, in addition to any additional duties and responsibilities, the county clerk shall be the official custodian of records for Henry County and shall keep and maintain the minutes of meetings of the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, and after consultation with the board of commissioners, chairperson, county attorney, and county manager, the clerk shall establish the agenda for each meeting of the board of commissioners; 
(7)  Appoint and retain, from time to time, an attorney or attorneys to serve as county attorney for Henry County; 
(8)  Establish the qualifications and compensation of such attorney or attorneys designated to serve as county attorney who shall serve as legal counsel to the chairperson and the board of commissioners; provided, however, where there is a conflict between the chairperson and members of the board of commissioners, and unless otherwise provided by the board of commissioners, the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct for attorneys in Georgia, or by order of court, the county attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the board of commissioners. Unless otherwise provided by the board of commissioners, the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct for attorneys in Georgia, or by order of court, the county attorney in all legal proceedings shall serve as the attorney of record for Henry County, Georgia, and the chairperson and the board of commissioners in their official capacities; 
(9)  Establish rules of order and procedure to govern meetings of the board of commissioners; 
(10)  Establish personnel policies and organizational charts for the personnel of Henry County government; 
(11)  Appoint, from time to time, one or more individuals to serve as executive assistant to the board of commissioners; 
(12)  Establish the qualifications, compensation, and job description of such executive assistant or assistants; and 
(13)  Hire, fire, discipline, suspend, or demote such executive assistant or assistants. The power and authority to hire, fire, discipline, suspend, or demote the county manager, county clerk, and county attorney shall rest exclusively with the board of commissioners of Henry County. In the absence of any such positions, the board of commissioners shall have the power to hire, fire, discipline, suspend, or demote any employee of Henry County or delegate such power to one or more non-elected employees. Any such action shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the board of commissioners. Assistant county managers may be hired, fired, disciplined, suspended, or demoted by the county manager as well as the board of commissioners of Henry County. Assistant county clerks may be hired, fired, disciplined, suspended, or demoted by the county clerk as well as the board of commissioners of Henry County. 
(b)  The chairperson shall: 
(1)  Serve as a voting member of the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Serve as presiding officer over meetings of the board of commissioners; 
(3)  Execute such documents and instruments as are approved by the board of commissioners; 
(4)  After consultation with the county manager, submit to the board of commissioners an annual budget for consideration and adoption by the board of commissioners; 
(5)  See that the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the board of commissioners and the laws of the state are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(6)  Coordinate intergovernmental activity between the county and municipalities, other counties, other political subdivisions, and state and federal agencies; 
(7)  With the other members of the board of commissioners, initiate the assessment of the needs of the county, evaluate county services, and develop the policies of the county; 
(8)  Represent or designate an individual to represent Henry County at ceremonial functions; and 
(9)  Have the power to delegate in writing to a member of the board of commissioners who accepts any of the powers of chairperson. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 3942, Act No. 156, § 2; HB554, § 2, 3-27-15 ) 
Sec. 2-2-26. - Meetings. 
The board shall hold regular meetings at a place designated by the board on the first and third Tuesday in each month, unless such Tuesday falls on a legal holiday. In such event, the regular meeting shall be held on the following Tuesday. The board may hold special meetings whenever, in its opinion, public necessity requires. Any meeting, regular or special, may adjourn from time to time and from day to day. A majority of members of said board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 10; Ord. No. 91-01, 4-2-91; Ord. No. 03-05, § I, 5-19-03) 
State Law reference— Public meetings required, Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 36-80-1, 5-14-1, 50-14-3) 
Sec. 2-2-27. - County employees not to hold public office. 
Effective January 1, 1985, no employee of the county shall serve as an elected local, state, or federal public official, and no employee shall serve as an appointed member of any county board or authority. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 8.1; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4094, Act No. 995, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-28. - Clerk generally. 
The clerk of the board of commissioners, before entering upon his duties as such clerk, shall give a bond with good security, to be approved by said board of commissioners, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as such clerk. It shall be the duty of such clerk to keep the commissioners' office open the greater portion of every day of each week. Such hours and days shall be set by the board of commissioners. It shall be the duty of said clerk to attend all meetings of said board; to file and preserve all records and papers; to countersign officially all warrants, orders and contracts; to record all papers required to be recorded; and to keep full and fair minutes of all the proceedings of said board including the assessment taxes; he shall also keep a full financial record of all county receipts and expenditures and of the county funds and of any obligation which said county may owe; and shall keep a faithful account of all public work done under the authority of said board or its chairman, and of the expense of the same, and shall likewise keep an inventory of county property, including machinery, livestock, tools, etc., and the disposition of same, as well as the location thereof; he shall keep an itemized statement of all accounts ordered paid by the said board and shall show what funds are liable for the payment of same. He shall perform such other duties and keep such other duties and keep other books and records as the board may direct. Said books and records shall be open to inspection of any citizen of the county. Salary or compensation of said clerk shall be at the discretion of the board of commissioners. It shall be the special duty of the chairman of the board to see that the clerk faithfully performs all the duties imposed upon him by the terms of this act [article] or by said board. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 9) 
Sec. 2-2-29. - Deputy clerk. 
There is created the position of deputy clerk of the board of commissioners. The deputy clerk shall assume the duties and powers of the clerk in the absence of the clerk when empowered to so act by the board of commissioners. The powers, duties, and compensation of the deputy clerk shall be as provided by the board of commissioners. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 9.1; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4094, Act No. 995, § 2) 
Sec. 2-2-30. - Annual budget. 
Not later than sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, each department of county government shall submit to the board a budget to cover the cost of operating said department for the ensuing fiscal year. Not later than thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the board shall adopt a budget governing the expenditure of all county funds for the ensuing year. The budget, when so adopted or amended by the board, shall constitute the board's appropriation of all funds for such year. The budget so adopted may be revised during the year only by formal action of the board in a regular meeting, and no increase shall be made therein without provision also being made for financing same. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 13) 
State Law reference— County budget, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-81-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-31. - Publication of statement of expenditures or disbursements, periodic financial reports. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall have made out and published in the official organ of the county on a monthly basis a summarized financial statement showing revenues and expenditures. The board of commissioners shall also publish in the official organ of the county at the end of the fiscal year for the information of the general public a summarized audit statement of revenues and expenditures as prepared by a certified public auditor. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the said board of commissioners to require the county treasurer to make to it such statements as it deems necessary or appropriate disclosing the financial condition of the county, which statements shall include, but not be limited to, showing the amount of money in the treasury, the amount apportioned for each of the purposes for which taxes may be levied under the law, and the amount of money paid out during the preceding quarter, to whom paid, and for what purpose. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 14; Ga. Laws 1985, P. 3942, Act No. 156, § 1) 
State Law reference— Annual financial reports, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-81-8. 
Sec. 2-2-32. - Annual audit of county affairs; inspection of records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to have conducted an annual audit of the financial affairs of the county, and of the county water and sewerage authority, in accordance with the provisions of this section. The board of county commissioners shall select a certified public accountant or a firm of certified public accountants and employ such certified public accountants or firm so selected as the auditor of the county to conduct an audit of the county books and records and of the books and records of the county water and sewerage authority at the close of each fiscal year of said county. 
(b)  The auditor so appointed shall make the audits provided for in this section in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and principles and shall submit a complete and final report and audit to the board of commissioners as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year of the county. All audits provided for in this section shall be certified and include an opinion from the auditor on such financial statements, and same shall contain, but not be limited to, a balance sheet, profit and loss statement, a statement of all receipts and disbursements, and a statement showing all indebtedness of whatever kind of the county, its departments and agencies, and the county water and sewerage authority. The auditors shall issue a separate report on the financial condition of agencies or authorities where such statement is required by bond indentures, contracts or otherwise. Should the auditor discover any violations of the laws of Georgia or any irregularities in any of the finances or the accounts of the county, its departments and agencies, and the county water and sewerage authority, it shall be the duty of the auditors to immediately report such violations or irregularities to the board of commissioners and to the grant jury then in session, or if no grand jury is in session, then the first grand jury convened after such violations or irregularities are discovered. 
(c)  The office of the board of commissioners and the records maintained therein shall be open to inspection by the public at all times during normal office hours, but such inspection shall not interfere with the orderly conduct of business. Records shall not be removed from the board of commissioners' office except by court order or when accompanied by an appointed custodian representing the office of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The compensation of the auditor shall be fixed by agreements between the board of commissioners and the auditor selected to make such audit. The compensation of the auditor, as determined pursuant to this subsection, shall be payable from the funds of the county, except the cost attributable to the audit of the water and sewerage authority shall be paid from the funds of the water and sewerage authority. 
State Law reference— Audits, Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 36-1-10, 36-60-8, 36-81-7. 
Sec. 2-2-33. - County purchases, bids, etc.—Generally. 
(a)  Purchasing agent. The county manager shall be designated as the purchasing agent in said county. The purchasing agent shall execute purchase orders for the purchase of all goods and services for the use of said county. The purchasing agent will utilize the established authority to execute all purchases up to forty-nine thousand, nine hundred, ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($49,999.99). The purchasing agent shall retain the right to delegate purchasing authority to the purchasing department employees for all purchase orders up to forty-nine thousand, nine hundred, ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($49,999.99). Purchases that equal or exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) will be solicited through the sealed bid/proposal process or through a valid contract and shall require the approval of the Henry County Board of Commissioners, and the authority to execute the subsequent agreement can be delegated to the county manager. All sealed bid/proposal requests must be submitted by the user department to the purchasing director for a compliance review, vendor notification and solicitation management. All sealed bid/proposal award recommendations must be submitted to the purchasing director for compliance review before being submitted to the Henry County Board of Commissioners for their consideration. 
(b)  General purchasing methods. 
(1)  Competitive sealed bids. Henry County utilizes the competitive sealed bid method when the costs of goods and services are greater than or equal to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). All goods and services greater than or equal to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) are required to be purchased through the sealed bid process, unless the items are purchased by using an existing contract or an approved sole source agreement. All sole source purchases that meet or exceed the sealed bid threshold must be approved by the director of purchasing before being presented to the board of commissioners for approval. There must be clear and defined specifications available and contracts will be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. It will be the responsibility of the user department to develop comprehensive specifications that do not hinder competition. Competitive sealed bids will not be accepted via facsimile or email. The bids will always be posted on the Henry County website and advertised for a minimum of two (2) consecutive weeks in the legal organ of Henry County, if required, with the exception of bids and proposals that result from HCBOC approved short-lists. The director of purchasing reserves the right to procure goods or services from a previous bid that has been approved by the board of commissioners within a reasonable amount of time, as long as the specifications are identical and the purchase price remains the same or has been reduced. The Henry County Board of Commissioners has the final award approval for all sealed bids. 
(2)  Competitive sealed proposal. The competitive sealed proposal method is used when the competitive sealed bid method is neither practical nor advantageous and when cost is not the primary consideration. The director of purchasing shall determine the most appropriate, formal solicitation method (bid or proposal) based on the nature of the project and the needs of the respective user department. The primary consideration in the competitive sealed proposal method is best value. The competitive sealed proposal method will be used when the costs of goods and services are greater than or equal to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). All goods and services greater than or equal to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) are required to be purchased through the sealed proposal process, unless the items are purchased by using an existing contract or an approved sole source agreement. All sole source purchases that meet or exceed the sealed proposal threshold must be approved by the director of purchasing before being presented to the board of commissioners for approval. Henry County typically utilizes the competitive sealed proposal method for purchasing professional services, service contracts or highly technical equipment and systems. It will be the responsibility of the user department to develop a comprehensive scope of work that does not hinder competition. Competitive sealed proposals will not be accepted via facsimile or email. The bids will always be posted on the Henry County website and advertised for a minimum of two (2) consecutive weeks in the legal organ of Henry County, if required, with the exception of bids and proposals that result from HCBOC approved short-lists. An evaluation committee, which will be established by the purchasing director, will review the proposals by using pre-determined evaluation criteria, with the award going to the proposal with the highest score. The director of purchasing reserves the right to procure goods or services from a previous proposal that has been approved by the board of commissioners within a reasonable amount of time, as long as the scope of work is identical and the purchase price remains the same or has been reduced. The Henry County Board of Commissioners makes the final award for all sealed proposals. 
(3)  Best and final offers. The Henry County Purchasing Department may elect to solicit best and final offers from vendors under consideration for award after the initial evaluation of proposals. Best and final offers can only be utilized when evaluating requests for proposals (RFPs) and should never be used in the competitive sealed bid process. Best and final offers should only be requested once during the RFP process and should not be used as a matter of routine. The development of a clearly defined, detailed scope of work and evaluation criteria, the selection of a qualified evaluation committee and the removal of all biases and conflicts of interests from the process should minimize the need for best and final offers. If the best and final offer procedure is to be used, then this must be stated in the RFP for the vendor's notification and consideration. When soliciting best and final offers, the Henry County Purchasing Department will establish a common date and time for the submission of best and final offers, and will only allow the submission of information related to pricing. No changes will be allowed with any technical information submitted unless it is in the best interest of Henry County to change requirements and require another submission of best and final offers. The proposals will be rescored to combine and include the information included in the best and final offer. The decision to award will be based on the final evaluation, including the best and final offer. Vendors must be informed that if they do not submit a notice of withdrawal or a best and final offer as requested, then their immediate previous offer will be construed as their best and final offer. The county retains the right to enter into additional negotiations with the highest scored firm. 
(4)  Informal written quotation. The informal written quotation method is used for all purchases that range in price from one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to forty-nine thousand, nine hundred, ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($49,999.99). Buyers are required to solicit quotations and receive written responses from vendors. The buyers can utilize quotes supplied by the user departments, but reserve the right to validate the quotes or seek additional sources, if deemed necessary. The submitted quotes must be retained in a manner that is compliant will all county and state requirements. All reasonable efforts will be made to obtain three (3) written quotations for each item solicited and a clearly documented explanation will be recorded if three (3) quotes are not obtained. Informal written quotations do not require advertising. Facsimiles and e-mails are acceptable forms of written quotations. Informal written quotations must be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. 
(5)  Informal verbal quotation (single source). The informal verbal quotation method is used for all purchases that range in price from one cent ($.01) to nine hundred, ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($999.99). Buyers are required to solicit informal quotes over the telephone and receive responses via telephone, facsimile or e-mail. The submitted quotes must be retained in a manner that is compliant will all county and state requirements. The approved purchasing staff is authorized to procure commonly purchased goods and services by utilizing a single source for this category of purchase. Informal verbal quotations do not require advertising. Informal verbal quotations must be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. P-Card purchases that are in compliance with the approved P-Card policy can be an accepted form of a single source purchase. 
(6)  Contract purchases. Henry County has developed annual contracts for frequently used items and services. These contracts are established through the formal sealed bid or formal sealed proposal process. The contract allows the county to order goods and services directly from the awarded suppliers through the use of an annual contract document. Should the awarded supplier be unable to provide the contract item or service by the requested delivery date, or should the terms of the contract cause unreasonable financial strains on the county, items may be obtained in the open market through the competitive process. This determination shall be made by the director of purchasing, after consulting and reviewing the agreement with the respective user department. The purchasing director, or his designee, has the authority to purchase unlimited quantities of goods and services utilizing active annual contracts and to execute renewal agreement within the specified term limits, not to exceed the established contract length contained in the bid documents. 
O.C.G.A., § 50-5-100 states, "The Department of Administrative Services is authorized to permit local political subdivisions, on an optional basis, to purchase their supplies through the state." This section of the state code allows the purchasing director to utilize statewide contracts when this practice serves the best interests of Henry County. 
The purchasing director shall also be authorized to utilize pricing obtained from cooperative purchasing agreements, from eligible cooperative purchasing programs that Henry County has obtained membership. 
Annual contract purchases that equal or exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and ongoing annual maintenance agreements that do not exceed a ten-percent increase from the previous year, but have the required, designated funding established in the fiscal year budget adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, or a clearly designated budget amendment approved by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, do not require the approval of the Henry County Board of Commissioners, and the purchase can be approved and executed by written approval of the budget director and the county manager. The Henry County Board of Commissioners makes the final award for annual, state and cooperative contract purchases that equal or exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for all requests that do not meet the above requirements. 
(7)  Emergency purchases. An emergency purchase is handled outside the normal competitive process because of the urgency of the situation. The department requesting an emergency purchase must contact their assigned buyer to begin the purchasing process. The buyer will give instructions as to what actions must be taken, and in what order, to properly execute an emergency purchase. The buyer will also instruct the department on what documentation is required to verify the purchase and to authorize invoice payment. The requesting department is responsible for determining that the purchase is an emergency and that the necessary budget is available. Purchases made outside of these provisions and that have not met the qualifications of an emergency purchase, must be presented to and approved by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
The county manager, in conjunction with the purchasing director, budget director and user department director, can approve the emergency repair of equipment that equals or exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) before receiving the approval of the board of commissioners when it is deemed beneficial to the county and expediency is required. This form of clearly defined emergency purchase must be presented to the board of commissioners at the next available board meeting as a point of notification and to perfect the record. 
(8)  Sole source purchases. Before making a determination of sole source, research must be conducted by the purchasing department to determine if other products or service providers exist that can satisfy the procurement requirements. Sound procurement practice requires that sole source purchases be used when it is the only option and not as an attempt to contract with a favored service provider for a favored product. The purchasing director requires all sole source providers to supply a letter stating that they are the sole source for a given product or service and why they are considered to be the sole source (technology, patents, authorized dealer for a geographic region, etc.). All sole source purchases will be clearly identified and documented in the resulting purchase order or when presented to the Henry County Board of Commissioners, if the sole source purchase equals or exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). All sole source purchases that meet or exceed the sealed bid/proposal threshold must be approved by the director of purchasing before being presented to the board of commissioners for approval. 
(9)  The Henry First Initiative: Local vendor preference. There is established in Henry County, a local vendor privilege. Bids or proposals awarded to local vendors contribute to the local tax base and will therefore, be given special consideration when bidding against out of jurisdiction (out-of-county) vendors. Bids or proposals received from local vendors will be given preference if such bid or proposal is responsive and within five (5) percent of the low bid submitted by any out-of-county bidder. In such instance, the local vendor will be given the opportunity to match the low bid offered by the out-of-county vendor. If such local vendor agrees to match the lowest bid received from the out-of-county vendor within the time specified by the county, the bid shall be awarded to the local vendor. 
A local vendor shall only be eligible to receive the benefit of this privilege if it meets each of the following requirements, as verified by the purchasing department, prior to any award of a contract or purchase: 
a.  The business or supplier must operate and maintain a regular place of business within the geographical boundaries of Henry County; and 
b.  The business or supplier must provide a copy of a current occupational tax certificate; and 
c.  The business or supplier must have paid all real and personal taxes owed the county; and 
d.  The business or supplier must certify its compliance with the Georgia Security and Immigration Act. 
This policy shall not apply to any bid or proposal for material, equipment or services in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). In such cases, the bid award shall be subject to the competitive bidding requirements as otherwise provided herein or general law. 
(c)  How to be placed on the bidder's list. The Henry County Purchasing Department now uses the Georgia Department of Administrative Services' Procurement Registry to obtain prospective bidders. By registering as a sourcing bidder with the State of Georgia, vendors may receive additional bid opportunities from other state, county and city entities that also use this registry. Please reference the link below to register as a sourcing bidder: 
https://saofn.state.ga.us/psp/sao_1/SUPPLIER/ERP/c/PORTAL_COMPONENTS_AU.AUC_LOGIN.GBL 
The format and methodology of how Henry County chooses to register vendors is subject to change, pending technology advancements and directives from the board of commissioners. The current method for vendor registration can always be located on the Henry County website at: 
http://co.henry.ga.us/Purchasing/BiddersListApplication.shtml 
(d)  Methods for soliciting bids and proposals. 
(1)  County website. All active bids and proposals will be posted on the Henry County website, at: 
http://co.henry.ga.us/Purchasing/Bids.shtml#open. 
It is the responsibility of the vendor to monitor the website for sealed bid and sealed proposal opportunities. 
(2)  Georgia local government access marketplace website. All active bids and proposals will be posted on the Georgia Local Government Access Marketplace website, at: 
http://www.glga.org/Listing.aspx?  METHOD=CAT&CRITERIA=3eed7b66-  22fa-dd11-99ac-005056af7e1c 
It is the responsibility of the vendor to monitor the website for sealed bid and sealed proposal opportunities. The format and methodology of how Henry County chooses to post and advertise sealed bid and proposal opportunities is subject to change, pending technology advancements and directives from the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Newspaper. If required by law or financing terms, certain sealed bid and sealed proposal opportunities will be advertised in the legal organ of the county for the prescribed frequency and length of time. 
It is the responsibility of the vendor to monitor the periodical for sealed bid and sealed proposal opportunities. 
(4)  Other. Henry County reserves the right to alter the methods of sealed bid and sealed proposal solicitation, without offering public notice. 
It is the responsibility of the vendor to monitor updates to the solicitation delivery method. 
(e)  Pre-bid and pre-proposal conferences. Certain types of bids and proposals facilitate the need for pre-bid and pre-proposal meetings. These meetings are held in order to clarify specifications and expectations, to answer supplier questions specific to a certain bid or proposal or to allow suppliers to conduct an on-site review and inspection. Some pre-bid and pre-proposals are mandatory and some are non-mandatory. The bid document will state whether a pre-bid meeting is mandatory or non-mandatory. Failure to attend and sign in for a mandatory conference will result in vendor disqualification for that particular project. 
(f)  Addendums. For every sealed bid and sealed proposal, there will be a time and date deadline, clearly stated on the bid or proposal cover sheet, for questions and requests for clarification to be submitted to the county by interested vendors. Failure to meet the time and date deadlines will result in removing the submitted questions or requests for clarification from consideration. Vendors are strictly prohibited from initiating contact with Henry County employees outside of the purchasing department and outside of the required communication format and will be removed from consideration for that particular project if this occurs. No verbal communication with any county employee will be legally binding, or otherwise, as it relates to consideration for award for a project. Henry County will respond to any questions or requests for clarification in the form of an addendum. All addenda will be posted to the Henry County website and will be the responsibility of the vendor to include in their submitted bid or proposal and to ensure that any changes to the scope or specifications are reflected in their submitted bid or proposal. Failure to submit the required addendum or modify the scope as required may result in vendor disqualification. Henry County reserves the right to waive any and all technicalities if it is determined that the bid or proposal was not materially affected by the exclusion of the addendum. 
(g)  Site requirements. 
(1)  Codes, permits, fees, etc. All permits, fees, arrangements for inspections, licenses, and costs incurred for the same project shall be the responsibility of the successful vendor. All work materials and construction must comply with all applicable rules and regulations of local, state and/or national codes, laws and ordinances. 
(2)  Site examination. It shall be the responsibility of each bidder to visit the site of the proposed project to examine the conditions as they exist. Mandatory site visit requirements will dictate when the site is available for inspection and are a requirement for consideration for award. 
(h)  Bonding, insurance and document requirements. 
(1)  Insurance requirements. Insurance requirements, if applicable, will be included in the body of each sealed bid or sealed proposal. Insurance requirements are considered a minimum requirement for a particular sealed bid or sealed proposal and failure to provide as required will result in vendor disqualification. Minimum insurance requirements will not be negotiated or amended after the issuance of a formal addendum. Henry County will make every reasonable effort to include insurance requirements that minimize the costs to the vendors, while providing adequate coverage from risk to the county. Any questions or requests for clarification related to the insurance requirements must be addressed in the question phase for that project. A formal, published addendum is the only method by which insurance requirements will be amended by Henry County. Compliance with the county's insurance requirements is mandatory, with no exceptions. 
(2)  Bonding requirements. The bonding requirements will vary from project to project. Certain bonds are required as a prerequisite for a sealed bid or sealed proposal submitted, such as a bid bond. Other bonds will be stipulated as a minimum requirement for the successful contractor selected for award, such as payment and performance bonds. 
Bid bonds guarantee that the bidder will actually enter into the contract at the submitted price during the sealed bid or sealed proposal process. Additionally, the bid bond sets the requirements for performance and payment bonds as necessary. Bid bonds are drafted during the sealed bid or sealed proposal process. 
Performance bonds protect the county from financial loss caused by the vendor who fails to deliver goods or services in accordance with the terms, conditions and specifications of the contract. 
Payment bonds protect most providers of material and labor to a job. It guarantees that the vendor will pay bills in accordance with the contract terms. 
A fidelity bond provides financial reimbursement to the county for the wrongful taking of county property by a vendor's employees. Typically, fidelity bonds are required when vendors have employees involved in county work with little or no supervision present and have easy access to county property and/or monies. Examples: vendors who provide after hour janitorial services, security services or concessionaire contracts. 
The value and deadline for bond submittal to the county will be established and published in each sealed bid or sealed proposal. 
(3)  Terms, conditions and specifications/scope of work. The terms, conditions and specifications/scope of work will be included in the body of each sealed bid or sealed proposal. All of these items are considered a minimum requirement for a particular sealed bid or sealed proposal and failure to provide as required will result in vendor disqualification. The terms, conditions and specifications/scope of work will not be negotiated nor amended after the issuance of a formal addendum, unless said negotiation or amendment represents the best interests of the county. Any questions or requests for clarification related to these items must be addressed in the question phase for that project. A formal, published addendum is the only method by which the terms, conditions and specifications/scope of work will be amended by Henry County. Compliance with these items is mandatory, with no exceptions. 
(4)  Documentation requirements. The following documents are minimum requirements for consideration for award for most formal sealed bids or RFP's: 
Solicitation Form (Signed) 
Addenda (If required, signed) 
Proposer's Qualification Sheet 
W9 Form 
Corporate Status with Secretary of State Active and in Compliance 
Proof of Insurance 
Name of Authorized Officer for Contract Execution 
Non-Conflict of Interest Form 
M/WBE Data Sheet 
Corporate Certificate 
Georgia Security and Immigration Compliance Act Affidavit and Agreement 
The list of required documentation for each individual sealed bid or sealed proposal is subject to change over the course of time. The previous documentation list is included as an example of standard documentation requirements and may be altered by addition or deletion, depending on the individual project. 
(i)  How to submit a bid. 
(1)  Follow the instructions set forth in the bid or proposal. All bids and proposals include a copy of "Instructions to Bidders" that list certain instructions pertaining to all solicitations. In addition, there are specific instructions included in the bid and proposal documents that are unique to that particular bid. 
(2)  Any questions regarding the bid or proposal should be directed to the appropriate contact listed in the solicitation, in the prescribed contact method. 
(3)  In order to submit a bid or proposal, the supplier must be able to responsibly meet the minimum requirements set forth in the solicitation. 
(4)  Suppliers who are unable to meet the requirements of the solicitation should complete the appropriate form included in the bid package indicating a "No Bid". The form should be returned to the Henry County Purchasing Department. 
(5)  Henry County reserves the right to make an award determined to be in its best interest, which could include splitting a multi-item bid between suppliers, awarding a bid based on overall low cost of categories or not issuing an award for individual items or categories. 
(6)  Each bidder shall certify in writing that such bidder has not engaged in any collusive or anti-competitive practices in responding to a solicitation for bids or proposals. A declaration of non-collusion is simply a statement made by the supplier which states that the bid submitted is a legitimate, good faith bid that has been prepared independent of other bidders, and is in all respects fair and without collusion or fraud. 
(7)  All bids or proposals must be submitted in a sealed envelope clearly marked as a "Sealed Bid" and with the solicitation number and description and company name and address in the upper left corner of the envelope. The envelope should be addressed to the 140 Henry Parkway; McDonough, Georgia 30253. Documents must be submitted via hand-delivery, mail or express delivery service. Henry County will not accept facsimile or emailed copies as a valid form of sealed bid. 
(8)  Henry County reserves the right to reject any and all bids if it is in the best interest of the county. 
(j)  How bids are received. Bids and proposals must be in a sealed envelope or package before they will be eligible for consideration. The Henry County Purchasing Department must receive all bids and proposals on or before the date and time specified in the document. Late bids will not be accepted and will be returned unopened to the supplier. There are no circumstances that will allow a late bid or proposal to be accepted. The envelope or package containing the sealed bid will be time and date stamped and placed in a secure location until the date and time of the bid opening. The full responsibility of submitting a responsive and responsible bid in compliance with all deadlines falls with the vendor. 
If the Henry County offices are closed for inclement weather or other reasons not considered in the formation of the solicitation calendar, a new bid opening date and time will be determined and published on the county's website as soon as the office closing information is received. It shall be the responsibility of the interested party to monitor the county's website for these important updates. 
(k)  How bids and proposals are opened. 
(1)  Bids and proposals shall be opened publicly in the presence of one (1) or more witnesses by the purchasing department on the date and at the time and place specified in the specification documents. Suppliers and interested parties are invited to attend. 
(2)  During the opening of the bid, the following information will be read aloud: The name of each supplier submitting a sealed bid, pricing information and any other relevant information. Sealed bid results are not subject to the Open Records Act until after board of commissioners' award or the sealed bid is formally closed. 
(3)  During the opening of proposals, only the name of each supplier shall be announced. No other information will be disclosed. Sealed proposal results are not subject to the Open Records Act until after Board of Commissioners' award or the sealed proposal is formally closed. 
(4)  Once the bid or proposal is opened, copies of the documents are forwarded to the user department for their evaluation and recommendation. The main focus of the user department evaluation will be to determine whether or not each submittal is responsive and responsible. Written recommendations will be solicited from the relevant user department, but their recommendation must comply with the requirements for the solicitation. All sealed bid recommendations will be determined by the lowest responsive and responsible bid. All sealed proposal recommendations will be determined by the highest scored responsive and responsible proposal. 
(l)  Late bids, withdrawals and corrections to bids. 
(1)  Late bids. Bids or proposals received after the date and time stated in the solicitation will not be accepted, opened or reviewed. 
(2)  Withdrawals. A bidder wishing to withdraw their bid prior to the bid opening must submit a letter or email from an authorized employee to the Henry County Purchasing Department requesting to withdraw. No bidder will be allowed to withdraw their bid subsequent to the bid opening. Any clerical errors should be reported to the purchasing agent, who has the authority to reject any and all bids if it serves the best interests of the county. 
(3)  Modification/correction. If an error is discovered prior to the opening, the supplier can submit a corrected sealed bid or proposal. The corrected document should be clearly marked that it supersedes the bid or proposal originally submitted. No corrections will be allowed subsequent to the bid opening. Any clerical errors should be reported to the purchasing agent. 
(m)  How bids and proposals are evaluated. 
(1)  Sealed bid evaluation. Sealed bids are opened by the purchasing department and copies of all bids are forwarded to the user department for a compliance review of the specifications and minimum requirements. The user department is responsible for a providing a recommendation letter to the purchasing department that verifies that the lowest bid is both responsive and responsible and should be recommended for award to the board of commissioners. The purchasing department will conduct an audit to ensure the accuracy of all submitted, tabulated data and documentation requirements. All sealed bids will be awarded on the basis of the lowest cost responsive and responsible bid. The award recommendation will be presented to the Henry County Board of Commissioners by the user department. 
(2)  Sealed proposal evaluation. Proposals will be reviewed and scored by an evaluation committee that will be established by the director of purchasing. The proposals are scored based on the criteria set forth in the document. The evaluation committee may choose to create a short list of proposers after the initial evaluation phase. The short-listed firms would then typically be interviewed and evaluated based on the quality and conformance of their oral presentation. After all evaluation is completed, the sealed price proposals will be opened and evaluated based on the pre-determined price evaluation method. All evaluation committee members will record the same score for price for each firm, based on the pre-determined price evaluation method. The price submitted is typically the only objective evaluation criteria and therefore, the score is not subject to the individual opinion of each evaluator. After the price component is scored, each evaluator will compile the total score for each firm and the calculations will be audited by the purchasing department for accuracy. The proposer with the highest aggregate score will be submitted for recommendation by the user department to the purchasing department. The award recommendation will be presented to the Henry County Board of Commissioners by the user department. 
(n)  Responsibility of bidders. An apparent low bidder or highest scored proposer may not be recommended for award if their submittal is determined to be non-responsible. The director of purchasing, setting forth the reasons for non-responsibility, shall inform the "non-responsible" bidder via written letter. Reasons that a supplier may be deemed non-responsible are as follows: 
(1)  Previous supplier performance problems as documented in the supplier performance file, maintained by the purchasing department. 
(2)  Failure to meet contractual obligations after the award has been made, maintained in the performance file by the purchasing department. 
(3)  Failure to conform to required delivery, specifications or detailed requirements, maintained in the performance file by the purchasing department. 
(4)  Failure to submit pricing in the prescribed format and on the required forms. Also submitting pricing that is subject to market changes, when not allowed in the solicitation, and minimum order requirements. 
(5)  Submission of a bid that is contingent upon receiving the award of another bid. 
(6)  Failure to provide a bid surety or meet insurance requirements, when specifically required in the bid. 
(7)  Submission of solicitation exceptions, when not acceptable to Henry County. 
(8)  Failure to submit and comply with the minimum requirements of the solicitation. 
(9)  Failure to submit and comply with the terms of all addenda. 
The previous list represents the most common issues related to non-responsible bids and proposals and shall not be considered a comprehensive list for such a determination. Henry County reserves the right to waive any and all technicalities, if such technicalities do not represent a material change to the minimum requirements of the sealed bid or sealed proposal. 
(o)  Disqualification of bids. Bids may be disqualified by the director of purchasing as a result of, but not necessarily limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to follow Henry County's bid schedule. 
(2)  Failure to return applicable compliance and/or specification sheets. 
(3)  Failure to return applicable addenda. 
(4)  Failure to provide information on alternates or equivalents, when allowed. 
(5)  Failure to provide bid bond when specifically stated will result in automatic rejection. 
(6)  Failure of bidder to sign all requested documents. 
(7)  Failure to submit bid by deadline. 
(8)  Failure of supplier to extend prices. 
(9)  Failure to hold firm pricing. 
(10)  Failure to meet specified delivery requirements. 
(11)  Prices for services or items that exceeds the budgeted amount. 
The previous list represents the most common issues related to sealed bid and sealed proposal disqualification and shall not be considered a comprehensive list for such a determination. Henry County reserves the right to waive any and all technicalities, if such technicalities do not represent a material change to the minimum requirements of the sealed bid or sealed proposal. 
(p)  Tie bids. Bids received from two (2) or more suppliers that are identical in price, delivery and meet the requirements of the bid specifications shall be awarded on the following basis: 
(1)  The bid submitted by a supplier who does not have a documented negative supplier performance record contained in the vendor file. 
(2)  The bid submitted by a local vendor that meets all the requirements in the previously listed local vendor preference section. 
(3)  If the tie bids meet all the above criteria, and it is not in the county's best interest (at its sole discretion) to split the award, the bid award is based on the toss of a coin by the purchasing staff in a public session. The bidders involved will be invited to attend the coin toss at a stated date and time. One (1) or more witnesses from purchasing and the user department may be present. A simple coin toss (called by the company listed first in the alphabet) will break the tie and decide the award. 
(q)  Proceeding after the award. After the board of commissioners approves a sealed bid or sealed proposal recommendation for award, the purchasing department will begin the process of preparing an agreement that reflects the terms and conditions of the solicitation. Once a mutually agreed upon, executed agreement is produced, purchasing will execute a purchase order and issue a notice of award to the vendor. For some commodity purchases, the purchase order may serve as the contract and notice of award. The required contractual steps will be evaluated and communicated for each individual solicitation. 
(r)  Penalties for non-compliance and non-performance. It shall be the responsibility of the user department to communicate all contract compliance and non-performance issues to the purchasing department in an extremely timely and well-documented manner. The purchasing department will officially inform the vendor of the contract compliance or non-performance claim submitted by the user department and will make every reasonable effort to rehabilitate the vendor's performance. However, from time to time a performance issue may arise that cannot be corrected through the intervention of the purchasing department. For these issues, vendors can be placed on the ineligible source list, and will not be eligible for any sealed bid or sealed proposal awards during the time they remain on the list. Placement on the ineligible source list requires approval from the board of commissioners and shall not exceed three (3) years. The purchasing department will present a detailed report of the vendor's noncompliance and/or non-performance to the board of commissioners in order to facilitate their decision. Vendors will be notified via registered mail of the county's decision to place their firm on the ineligible source list. 
(s)  Purchasing-supplier relationships. 
(1)  Meetings. Suppliers are encouraged to meet with purchasing staff members to introduce their line of products and services and establish points of contact within the county for procurement opportunities. There are several times during the year in which the busy schedule of staff members may not allow them to meet with suppliers, or the time allotted for meetings may be very limited. Information such as catalogs and new product information is always helpful and welcome. 
(2)  Requested research. From time to time user departments may request suppliers to perform specific research prior to the official request for purchase. In these situations, the supplier has no guarantee of receiving the award as a result of providing research or other information. The commodity or service may be required to be bid, which would result in the award being given to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. At the conclusion of the review process, the purchasing department will notify the user department of the prescribed procurement method and the estimated time of completion. 
(3)  Conflicts of interest. Section 3-2-4, Conflicts of interest, of the Henry County Code establishes the Henry County Board of Commissioners' position related to conflicts of interest as they relate to purchasing and financial activities. 
(4)  Gratuities and gifts. Section 3-2-5, Code of ethics, of the Henry County Code establishes the Henry County Board of Commissioners' position related to the required ethical business practices. Specifically, subsection (d) addresses the Henry County Board of Commissioners' position related to what form of gratuities and gifts are allowed per the Henry County Code. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 11; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4094, Act No. 995, § 3; Res. No. 09-64, Exh. A, 3-16-09; Ord. No. 15-06, Exh. A, 12-15-15 ; Ord. No. 17-10 , §§ 1, 2, 6-20-17) 
State Law reference— County contracts, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-2-390 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-34. - Same—Violations. 
The failure of any member of the board of commissioners to comply with section 11 of this act [section 2-2-33] shall constitute malpractice in office and, upon conviction thereof, such officer shall be removed from office. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 15) 
Sec. 2-2-35. - Disposal of obsolete equipment. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power to declare any equipment belonging to the county which is no longer feasible to have maintained or repaired as a trade-in additional equipment, or if no trade can be obtained, said equipment shall be declared as "junked" and action of same shall be spread upon the minutes of the board of commissioners. Any equipment not traded or junked shall be sold at public auction, after advertisement, at a time and place as may be set forth by the commissioners. All proceeds realized from such sales shall be deposited into the county treasury. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 12) 
Sec. 2-2-36. - Authority to furnish transportation to county officers and employees and reimburse for certain expenses. 
The board of commissioners is authorized to furnish transportation to county officials and employees while conducting official county business, and the board of commissioners may, by resolution, establish a mode and means of providing such transportation. The board of commissioners is further authorized to reimburse county officials and authorized county employees, for expenses incurred in attending short courses, seminars, conferences and any other meeting which may benefit Henry County, such reimbursement to include cost of meals, lodging, transportation, and payment of registration fees. Each such request for reimbursement must be in writing, with documentation receipts attached for each item, from the department head for which department such expenses were incurred and shall be approved by the chairman of the board of commissioners before reimbursement is made. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 6) 
Sec. 2-2-37. - Road maintenance. 
It shall be the duty of the board to maintain the public roads of the entire county. Said board shall have the authority to hire a superintendent of roads and such other persons as may be necessary for the proper working of the roads and building of bridges and keeping the same in repair, and to pay the same out of county funds. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 16) 
Sec. 2-2-38. - Repealer—Acts enumerated. 
An act creating a Board of Commissioners of Henry County, approved July 28, 1924 (Ga. L. 1924, p. 490), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 19) 
Sec. 2-2-39. - Same—Laws in conflict. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act [article] are hereby repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 20) 
Secs. 2-2-40—2-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The title "county administrator" was changed to "county manager" throughout this article by Ord. No. 92-12, adopted Dec. 1, 1992. 

Sec. 2-2-51. - County manager. 
There is created in Henry County, the position of county manager. The county manager shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the board. No person shall be chosen as county manager before he shall have attained his/her twenty-first birthday. Such person shall be of good character and of proven executive ability and experience. The county manager shall be chosen by the board of commissioners solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to such person's actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the duties of the office as may be prescribed by the board of commissioners by way of job description, contractual agreement or both. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3680, Act No. 1323, § 8.2; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4094, Act No. 995, § 1, Ord. No. 92-12, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 03-04, § 1, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 12-07, exh. A, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 2-2-52. - Change orders and contract modifications. 
(1)  The county manager shall have the authority to approve change orders in special purpose local option sales tax (SPLOST), capital projects, public works and road construction contracts up to five (5) percent of the total contract, not to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(2)  For purposes of these provisions, "change order" means an alteration, addition or deduction from the original scope of work as defined in the contract documents to address changes or unforeseen conditions necessary for project completion. 
(Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 08-02, § 2, 3-3-08) 
Secs. 2-2-53—2-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER COUNTY OFFICERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Unless indicated otherwise, the catchlines for the legislation compiled in this article have been supplied by the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-2-61. - Abolishment of fee system for compensation of sheriff, superior court clerk and probate judge; handling of fees. 
The compensation of the sheriff, the clerk of the superior court and the ordinary [judge of the probate court] of the county, which is now based on a fee system, is hereby abolished, and the officials herein named shall hereafter be paid salaries as herein provided. All fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances, and all other perquisites of whatever kind, as are now or may hereafter be allowed by law to be received or collected as compensation for service by any official named herein, shall be received and diligently collected by all of said officials for the sole use of the county, and shall be held as public moneys belonging to the county and accounted for and paid over to the county treasurer on the fifth day of each month (or on the sixth day of the month, if the fifth day falls on Sunday), at which time a detailed itemized statement shall be made by the officer under oath showing such collections and the sources from which collected, and the county treasurer shall keep a separate account showing such collections and the sources from which they are paid. However, all such fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances, or other perquisites accrued, due or owing before January 1, 1961, may be collected by said officers and need not be accounted for or paid over to the county treasurer. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, P. 3127, Act No. 345, § 1; Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2007, Act No. 4, § 1) 
Editor's note— The position of ordinary is now known as the judge of the probate court. See Ga. Const. 1976, Art. VI, Sec. IV, Par. III. Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 15-16-19 removed all sheriffs from the "fee system." 
Sec. 2-2-61.1. - Cost-of-living increase. 
(a)  Whenever the employees in the classified service of the state merit system receive a cost-of-living increase of a certain percentage of a certain amount, the base annual salary of the sheriff, the clerk of the superior court, the judge of the probate court, and the tax commissioner shall be increased by the same percentage or same amount applicable to such state employees. If the cost-of-living increase received by state employees is in different percentages or different amounts as to certain categories of employees, the base annual salaries shall be increased by a percentage or an amount not to exceed the average percentage or average amount of the general increase in salary granted to the state employees. The county governing authority shall use the average percentage increase or average amount increase as calculated by the office of planning and budget. The periodic changes in the base annual salaries as authorized by this subsection shall become effective six (6) months following the date that the cost-of-living increase received by state employees becomes effective. 
(b)  The amounts provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be increased by five (5) percent for each four-year term of office served by the sheriff, clerk of the superior court, judge of the probate court, or tax commissioner figured at the end of each such period of service. The increase shall not have retroactive effect, except that the term of the sheriff, clerk of the superior court, judge of the probate court, or tax commissioner in office on July 1, 1989, shall be counted for determining the appropriate salary under this subsection. 
(Ga. Laws 1989, P. 4824, Act No. 303, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-62. - Compensation of sheriff; employment, etc., of chief deputy. 
(a)  Generally. The base annual salary of the sheriff shall be thirty-eight thousand five hundred twenty-five dollars ($38,525.00), to be paid in equal monthly installments out of county funds. 
(b)  Employment of deputy sheriffs. 
(1)  The sheriff shall be authorized to employ one chief deputy. The salary of the chief deputy shall be fixed by the governing authority of Henry County and paid in equal monthly installments from county funds. 
(2)  In addition to the chief deputy, the sheriff is hereby authorized to employ other deputies and assistants and to set their salaries, but the number of such deputies and assistants and the salaries thereof shall be subject to the final approval of the governing authority of Henry County. 
(3)  The governing authority of Henry County shall furnish suitable vehicles to the sheriff and chief deputy sheriff and pay the expenses of operation of same, for the use of said sheriff and chief deputy sheriff in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, P. 3127, Act No. 345, § 1; Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2007, Act No. 4, § 1; Ga. Laws 1964 (Ex.s.), P. 2278, Act No. 60, § 1; Ga. Laws 1969, P. 2446, Act No. 184, § 1; Ga. Laws 1973, P. 3521, Act No. 642, § 1; Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3057, Act No. 1120, § 1; Ga. Laws 1975, P. 4131, Act No. 388, § 1; Ga. Laws 1977, P. 4124, Act No. 604, § 1; Ga. Laws 1979, P. 4189, Act No. 328, § 1; Ga. Laws 1981, P. 4006, Act No. 363, § 1; Ga. Laws 1983, P. 4518, Act No. 467, § 1; Ga. Laws 1984, P. 4698, Act No. 1066, § 1; Ga. Laws 1986, P. 4171, Act No. 986, § 1; Ga. Laws 1989, P. 4824, Act No. 303, § 2) 
Cross reference— Law enforcement generally, § 3-4-201 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-63. - Compensation of superior court clerk; employment, etc., of assistants. 
The clerk of the Superior Court of Henry County shall be paid a base annual salary of thirty-six thousand six hundred dollars ($36,600.00), to be paid in equal monthly installments out of county funds. The clerk of the superior court is authorized to employ such deputies and other assistants as he deems necessary and to prescribe their duties and to set their salaries, but the number of such deputies and assistants and the salaries thereof shall be subject to the final approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, P. 3127, Act No. 345, § 3; Ga. Laws 1968, P. 3392, Act No. 1099, § 1; Ga. Laws 1969, P. 2246, Act No. 184, Ga. Laws 1973, P. 3521, Act No. 642, § 2; Ga. Laws 1977, P. 4124, Act No. 604, § 2; Ga. Laws 1979, P. 4189, Act No. 328, § 2; Ga. Laws 1981, P. 4006, Act No. 363, § 2; Ga. Laws 1983, P. 4518, Act No. 467, § 2; Ga. Laws 1984, Act No. 1066, P. 4698, § 2; Ga. Laws 1986, P. 4171, Act No. 986, § 2; Ga. Laws 1989, P. 4824, Act No. 303, § 3) 
State Law reference— Salary of clerk of superior court, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 15-6-88 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-64. - Salary of probate judge; employment, etc., of clerks, etc. 
The judge of the Probate Court of Henry County shall be paid a base annual salary of thirty-six thousand six hundred dollars ($36,600.00), to be paid in equal monthly installments out of county funds. The judge of the probate court is authorized to employ such clerks and other assistants as he deems necessary and to prescribe their duties and to set their salaries, but the number of such clerks and assistants and the salaries thereof shall be subject to the final approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, P. 3127, Act No. 345, § 4; Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2007, Act No. 4, § 3; Ga. Laws 1968, P. 3392, Act No. 1099, § 2; Ga. Laws 1969, P. 2446, Act No. 184, § 3; Ga. Laws 1973, P. 3521, Act No. 642, § 3; Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3248, Act No. 1166, § 1; Ga. Laws 1977, P. 4130, Act No. 607, § 1; Ga. Laws 1979, P. 4189, Act No. 328, § 3; Ga. Laws 1981, P. 4006, Act No. 363, § 3; Ga. Laws 1983, P. 4518, Act No. 467, § 3; Ga. Laws 1984, P. 4698, Act No. 1066, § 3; Ga. Laws 1986, P. 4171, Act No. 986, § 3; Ga. Laws 1989, P. 4824, Act No. 303, § 4) 
Sec. 2-2-65. - Compensation of treasurer. 
The Treasurer of Henry County shall receive an annual base salary of two thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00) payable in equal monthly installments from Henry County funds. Said annual salary shall be increased by three and one-half (3½) percent of the base amount on July 1, 1981, and on July 1 of each year thereafter. In addition to said salary, he shall also receive from county funds such sums as he may pay to a surety company as premiums for his official bond. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, P. 502, Act No. 51, § 1; Ga. Laws 1969, P. 2449, Act No. 185, § 1; Ga. Laws 1981, P. 4004, Act No. 362, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-66. - Expense allowance for sheriff, clerk of superior court, probate judge and tax commissioner. 
The sheriff, the clerk of the superior court, the ordinary and the tax commissioner shall each receive an annual expense allowance of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for travel and expenses while on official business. Such expense allowance shall be in addition to all other compensation and expenses authorized by law for such officers. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, P. 3127, Act No. 345, § 4B; Ga. Laws 1973, P. 3521, Act No. 642, § 4) 
Editor's note— The position of ordinary is now known as the judge of the probate court. See Ga. Const., 1976, Art. VI, Sec. VI, Para. III. The above section may be superseded by the other legislation compiled in this article. 
Sec. 2-2-67. - Investigator for district attorney. 
The district attorney of the Flint Judicial Circuit shall be authorized to employ an investigator for the Flint Judicial Circuit. It shall be within the full power and authority of the district attorney during his term of office to designate the person who shall be employed as the investigator, to prescribe his duties and assignments, and to remove or replace such investigator at will and within his sole discretion. The investigator shall have the same power to make arrests, to execute and return all criminal warrants and processes, to serve as a peace officer, and to perform such duties as may be performed by the sheriff. The salary and any expense allowance of the investigator shall be set by agreement of the governing authorities of all the counties comprising the Flint Judicial Circuit. 
(Ga. Laws 1983, P. 407, Act No. 124, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-68. - Coroner. 
The office of coroner is created as required by statute. The coroner shall have the functions provided by statute. 
State Law reference— Coroner required, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 45-16-1, et seq., functions of coroners, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 45-16-20 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2-69—2-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX COMMISSIONER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendment relating to licenses and taxation, Ch. 1-4; local acts relating to licenses and taxation, Ch. 2-4; ordinances relating to licenses and taxation, Ch. 3-3. 

Sec. 2-2-81. - Offices of tax receiver and tax collector abolished and consolidated. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that the offices of Tax Receiver and Tax Collector of Henry County, Georgia, are hereby abolished, and the duties of the two (2) offices aforesaid are hereby consolidated into one (1) office. 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-82. - Office of tax commissioner created. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the office of County Tax Commissioner of Henry County, Georgia, is hereby created in lieu of said abolished offices, and the rights, duties and liabilities of the said office of County Tax Commissioner of Henry County shall be the same as the rights, duties and liabilities of the tax receiver and tax collector of said county so far as same are applicable. 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 2) 
Sec. 2-2-83. - Effect of act on current taxes. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all taxes that are due and payable at the time the provisions of this act [division] becomes effective, and all tax fi. fas. theretofore issued by the Tax Collector of Henry County, Georgia shall have full force and effect, and be collectible as issued. 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 3) 
Sec. 2-2-84. - Fees and commissions. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all fees, commissions and all other compensations allowed to the Tax Receiver and Tax Collector of Henry County, Georgia, at the time this act becomes effective, or that might legally be allowed to such officers thereafterward were it not for the provisions of this act, shall be collected by said county tax commissioner and paid into the treasury of the county. 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 4) 
Sec. 2-2-85. - Compensation, employment, etc., of assistants. 
The tax commissioner of the county shall receive a base annual salary of thirty-six thousand six hundred dollars ($36,600.00), to be paid in equal monthly installments out of county funds. All fees, commissions, costs, fines, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, and other perquisites of whatever kind received and collected by the tax commissioner shall be paid over to the fiscal authority of Henry County. All such funds collected by him for the county during the immediately preceding calendar month shall be remitted to the fiscal authority of Henry County with a detailed, itemized statement showing the collections and the sources from which such funds were collected. It is specifically provided that the salary provided herein for the tax commissioner shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, costs, fines, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, and other perquisites of whatever kind, including those commissions allowed by Code Section 48-5-180 of the O.C.G.A., relating to commissions of tax commissioners. The tax commissioner is authorized to employ such clerks and other assistants as he deems necessary and to prescribe their duties and set their salaries, but the number of such clerks and assistants and the salaries thereof shall be subject to the final approval of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, P. 3127, Act No. 345, § 4A; Ga. Laws 1969, P. 2761, Act No. 293, § 1; Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3060, Act No. 1121, § 1; Ga. Laws 1979, P. 4189, Act No. 328, § 4; Ga. Laws 1981, P. 4006, Act No. 363, § 4; Ga. Laws 1983, P. 4518, Act No. 124, § 4; Ga. Laws 1984, P. 4698, Act No. 1066, § 4; Ga. Laws 1986, P. 4171, Act No. 986, § 4; Ga. Laws 1989, P. 4824, Act No. 303, § 5) 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 5 provided for the compensation of the tax commissioner. The following acts amended the 1925 act but did not specifically amend § 5; Ga. Laws 1941, P. 873, Act No. 168, Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2007, Act No. 4. 
Sec. 2-2-86. - Oath and bond. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That before entering upon the duties of his office the said county tax commissioner shall take the oath now prescribed by law for the tax collector and shall give bond in double the amount of money reasonably estimated to pass through his hands annually which bond shall be signed as surety by a bonding company legally authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, and the fee or cost for the suretyship on said bond shall be paid by the tax commissioner of the county. 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 6) 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 45-3-1 et seq.; official bonds, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 45-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-87. - Election, term of office, etc. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the first election of County Tax Commissioner of Henry County shall be held at the same time and under the same laws as other county officers are now elected at the general election for county officers in the year 1928, and quadrennially thereafter, and that the person so elected shall enter upon the duties of the office hereby created on January 1, 1929, and shall serve a term of four (4) years. If a vacancy should occur then the office shall be filled in the same manner as vacancies are filled in other county offices. 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 7) 
Sec. 2-2-88. - Severability; purpose. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if for any reason any portion of this act [division] shall be held by the court of last resort of this state to be unconstitutional the whole of this act [division] shall not thereby become void, but only so much of the same as may be so held to be unconstitutional. 
The purpose of this act [division] being to put into effect the Constitution of this State as is contained in Article Eleven (11), Section three (3), Paragraph one (1). 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 8) 
Sec. 2-2-89. - Repealer. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act [division] be, and the same are hereby repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1925, P. 660, Act No. 277, § 9) 
Secs. 2-2-90—2-2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Except as indicated the catchlines for the legislation in this article are derived from the legislation contained in this article; the word "Section" in catchlines from such act is abbreviated as "Sec." 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendment relating to development authority, Ch. 1-3; salary of development authority, § 3-2-56. 

Sec. 2-2-111. - Short title. 
This act [article] shall be known and may be cited as the "Henry County Development Authority Act." 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-112. - Definitions. 
Unless clearly indicated otherwise by the context, the following words when used in this act [article], for the purpose of this act [article], shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
(a)  The word "authority" means the Henry County Development Authority, created hereby, and by an amendment to the Constitution of the State of Georgia (Ga. L. 1966, p. 853). 
(b)  The word "project" shall include: 
(1)  Any one or more buildings or structures to be used in the production, manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing or handling of any agricultural, manufactured, mining or industrial product, or any combination of the foregoing, in every case with all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery, equipment, parking facilities, landscaping and facilities for outdoor storage, all as determined by the authority, which determination shall be final and not subject to review. There may be included as part of any such project all improvements necessary to the full utilization thereof, including site preparation, roads and streets, sidewalks, water supply, outdoor lighting, belt-line railroad, railroad sidings and lead tracks, bridges, causeways, terminals for railroad, automotive and air transportation, transportation facilities incidental to the project, and the dredging and improving of harbors and waterways, none of which foregoing descriptive words shall be construed to constitute a limitation, but none of the improvements described in this sentence shall be the primary purpose of any project. 
(2)  The acquisition, construction, leasing or equipping of new industrial facilities or the improvement, modification, acquisition, expansion, modernization, leasing, equipping, or remodeling of existing industrial facilities located or to be located within the area of operation of the authority. 
(3)  The acquisition, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal, which any industrial concern might desire to use, acquire, or lease in connection with the operation of any plant or facility located or to be located within the area of operation of the authority. 
(4)  The acquisition, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal, used as air or water pollution control facilities which any federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction in the premises shall have certified as necessary for the continued operation of the industry or industries which the same are to serve and are necessary for the public welfare. For the purposes hereof, the term "air pollution control facility" shall mean any property used, in whole or in substantial part, to abate or control atmospheric pollution or contamination by removing, altering, disposing or storing atmospheric pollutants or contaminants, if such facility is in furtherance of applicable federal, state or local standards for abatement or control of atmospheric pollutants or contaminants. For the purpose hereof, the term "water pollution control facility" shall mean any property used, in whole or in substantial part, to abate or control water pollution or contamination by removing, altering, disposing or storing pollutants, contaminants, wastes or heat, including the necessary intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, pumping, power or other equipment, holding ponds, lagoons and appurtenances thereto, if such facility is in the furtherance of applicable federal, state or local standards for the abatement or control of water pollution or contamination. 
(5)  The acquisition, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal, used as, or in connection with, a sewage disposal facility or a solid waste disposal facility which any federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction in the premises shall have certified as necessary for the continued operation of the industries which the same are to serve and are necessary for the public welfare. If such facility is to be operated by a political subdivision of this state, or agency or instrumentality thereof, for its general constituency, said certification need only state that such facility is necessary for the public welfare. For the purposes hereof, the term "sewage disposal facility" shall mean any property used for the collection, storage, treatment, utilization, processing or final disposal of sewage. For the purposes hereof, the term "solid waste disposal facility" shall mean any property used for the collection, storage, treatment, utilization, processing or final disposal of solid waste; and the term "solid waste" shall mean garbage, refuse or other discarded solid materials, including solid waste materials resulting from industrial and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as salt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows; the word "garbage" shall include putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable matters, animal offal and carcasses, and recognizable industrial by-products, but excluding sewage and human wastes; and the word "refuse" shall include all nonputrescible wastes. 
(6)  The acquisition, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal or both, used as a peak shave facility. "Peak shave facility" shall have the meaning generally accepted and understood in the natural gas distribution industry as that term is generally understood to describe a storage facility for the purpose of avoiding undesirable consequences in the distribution system during peak periods of consumption. Any project involving a 'peak shave facility' may be undertaken as otherwise provided in this act [article]. 
(7)  The acquisition, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal, which shall be suitable for, used as, or in connection with: 
(A)  convention or trade show facilities; 
(B)  airports, docks, wharves, mass commuting facilities, parking facilities, or storage or training facilities directly related to any of the foregoing; 
(C)  facilities for the local furnishing of electric energy or gas; 
(D)  facilities for the furnishing of water, if available on reasonable demand to members of the general public; and 
(E)  facilities for lodging and for providing meals, provided that such facilities are acquired, constructed, improved or modified in connection with and adjacent to convention or trade show facilities acquired, constructed, improved or modified pursuant to subparagraph (A) above. 
(8)  The acquisition or development of land as the site for an industrial park. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term "development of land" includes the provision of water, sewage, drainage, or similar facilities, or of transportation, power, or communication facilities, which are incidental to use of the site as an industrial park but, except with respect to such facilities, does not include the provision of structures or buildings. 
(9)  The acquisition, construction, leasing, or financing of (i) an office building facility and related real and personal property for use by any business enterprise which will further the development of trade, commerce, industry, or employment opportunities in the State of Georgia and which will be adjacent to or used in conjunction with any other existing or proposed project now or hereafter defined in this subsection (b) (which existing or proposed project shall be located within the area of operation of the authority and which is used or intended to be used by such business enterprise), or (ii) a separate office building facility and related real and personal property for use by any business enterprise which will further the development of trade, commerce, industry, or employment opportunities in the State of Georgia. No such office building facility as herein defined shall be undertaken by the authority unless the authority shall have determined that the business enterprise to use such facility will be the primary tenant. 
(c)  The term "cost of project" shall include: all costs of construction, purchase or other form of acquisition; all costs of real or personal property required for the purpose of such project and of all facilities related thereto, including land and any rights or undivided interest therein, easements, franchises, water rights, fees, permits, approvals, licenses and certificates and the securing of such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses and certificates and the preparation of applications therefor; all machinery, equipment, initial fuel and other supplies required for such project; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and during such additional period as the authority may reasonably determine to be necessary for the placing of such project in operation; costs of engineering, architectural and legal services; fees paid to fiscal agents for financial and other advice or supervision; cost of plans and specifications and all expenses necessary or incidental to the construction, purchase or acquisition of the completed project or to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to the financing herein authorized. There may also be included, as part of such cost of project, the repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of such cost, including the interest thereon at rates to be determined by the authority, which loans are hereby authorized if made payable solely from the proceeds of such authority's bonds or notes or revenues to be received in connection with the leasing, sale or financing of the project. The cost of any project may also include a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, and such other reserves as may be reasonably required by the authority with respect to the financing and operating of its projects and as may be authorized by any bond resolution or trust agreement or indenture pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any such bonds may be authorized. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds or notes issued under the provisions of this act [article]. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 2; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-113. - Purpose. 
This act [article] is enacted and the Authority is created for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within Henry County and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and the provisions of this act [article] shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. The authority, in performing any of the public activities herein and in the constitutional amendment permitted, is declared to be performing an essential governmental function. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 13; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, § 6) 
Editor's note— The above section originally was section 14 of the 1967 act, section 6 of the amendatory act redesignated it section 13. 
Sec. 2-2-114. - Henry County Development Authority created. 
Pursuant to an amendment to Article V, Section IX, Paragraph I of the Constitution (Ga. L. 1966, p. 853), there is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Henry County Development Authority", which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by Henry County. The county may contract with the authority, as a public corporation, as provided by the Constitution of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 3) 
Sec. 2-2-115. - Membership. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County. One member shall be appointed from each commissioner district in Henry County. The first members of the authority appointed under this section shall be appointed at the first meeting of the board of commissioners held in January, 1983. The five (5) members so appointed shall serve for terms of office of two (2) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be appointed by the board of commissioners every two (2) years at the first meeting of the board held in January. Successors shall be appointed for terms of office of two (2) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The members of the authority who are in office on May 1, 1982, shall continue to serve until December 31, 1982, and until their successors are appointed and qualified as hereinabove provided. All members of the authority are eligible for reappointment if otherwise qualified. At the first meeting of the authority in January each year, the members of the authority shall select a chairman, a vice chairman, a secretary, and a treasurer. All officers of the authority shall be members of the authority. All members of the authority shall be citizens of the United States, shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, shall have been a resident of this state for two (2) years, and shall have been a resident of Henry County for one year. 
(b)  If a vacancy shall occur on the authority for any reason, the board of commissioners of Henry County shall appoint a member to fill such vacancy. The member so appointed shall serve for the unexpired term. 
(c)  Three (3) members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for conducting business; however, no action shall be taken by the authority unless approved by three (3) members of the authority. 
(d)  Each member of the authority shall receive as compensation for his services forty dollars ($40.00) per regular or special called meeting attended. Each member of the authority and the employees of the authority shall also be reimbursed in full for all reasonable expenses incurred in connection with the performance of activities that serve the purposes for which the authority was created. All such reimbursements shall be approved by the authority. The governing authority of Henry County shall approve all reimbursements to authority members once the aggregate total reimbursements exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a given month. 
(e)  Prior to taking office the members of the authority shall subscribe to the following oath: 
'I do solemnly swear that I will fully and fairly perform the duties as a member of the Henry County Development Authority, so help me God.' 
(f)  The authority shall have perpetual existence as provided in this act [article]. 
(g)  No action taken by the authority between January 1, 1985, and the effective date of this act shall be invalid or otherwise affected by the prior provisions of this subsection, relating to members of the authority holding other offices. All actions taken by the authority between January 1, 1985, and the effective date of this act are hereby ratified and confirmed to be valid and binding. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 2; Ga. Laws 1975, P. 2833, Act No. 132, § 1; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 2; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4078, Act No. 989, P. 4078, § 1; Ga. Laws 1985, P. 3549, Act No. 22, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-2-116. - Property; obligations. 
The income, property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the income, property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of Henry County. The exemptions from taxation herein provided shall not include exemptions from sale and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use by the authority. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 5) 
Sec. 2-2-117. - Powers. 
The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts; 
(2)  To borrow or lend money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue bonds, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
(3)  To contract with political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(4)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with the provisions of this act [article], including the power to appoint and hire agents and employees and to provide for their duties and compensation. Such agents and employees shall serve at the pleasure of the authority; however, the authority shall adopt as a guideline the personnel policies of equal employment opportunity and affirmative action presently used by the governing authority of Henry County. The authority shall also have the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(5)  To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in Henry County so as to relieve insofar as possible unemployment within its boundaries, and to that end: 
(a)  to acquire by purchase, gift or construction any real or personal property desired to be acquired as part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired, or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(b)  to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage or dispose of, or grant options for any such purposes, any real or personal property or interest therein; 
(c)  to mortgage, convey, pledge or assign any properties, revenues, income, tolls, charges or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(d)  to extend credit or make loans to any person, firm, corporation or other industrial entity for the planning, design, construction, acquisition or carrying out of any project, which credit or loans shall be secured by loan agreements, mortgages, security agreements, contracts and all other instruments or fees or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine reasonable in connection with such loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserves and insurance funds, and in the exercise of powers granted by this section in connection with a project for such person, firm, corporation or other industrial entity, to require the inclusion in any contract, loan agreement, security agreement or other instrument, such provisions for guaranty, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance and financing of a project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
(e)  to acquire, accept or retain equitable interests, security interests or other interest in any property, real or personal, by mortgage, assignment, security agreement, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement or other transfer in order to secure the repayment of any monies loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
(f)  to construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority or land owned or leased by others and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations or any other contribution, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use; 
(g)  to borrow money and issue its revenue bonds and bond anticipation notes from time to time and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued, and to otherwise carry out the purposes of this act [article] and to pay all other costs of the authority incident to, or necessary and appropriate to, such purposes, including the providing of funds to be paid into any fund or funds to secure such bonds and notes; provided that all such bonds and notes shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and subject to the limitations set forth in this act [article]; 
(h)  as security for repayment of authority obligations, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate or otherwise encumber any property, real or personal, of such authority and to execute any trust agreement, indenture or security agreement containing any provisions not in conflict with law, which trust agreement, indenture or security agreement may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such obligations either in payment of principal or interest or in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture; the State of Georgia on behalf of itself and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision or taxing district therein hereby waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority so mortgaged or encumbered, and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof; 
(6)  To receive and administer gifts, own, improve, expand, develop, maintain, sell, donate, lease as lessor or lessee, mortgage, pledge, convey to secure debt, or otherwise encumber or dispose of land, buildings, equipment, furnishings, or property of all kinds, real or personal, within Henry County, Georgia, and to make a contract or contracts and to execute any instrument or document for the accomplishment thereof, or other purposes; 
(7)  No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than thirty (30) years from the date of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking. 
(8)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(9)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(10)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 6; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 3) 
Sec. 2-2-118. - Debts not created. 
The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Henry County. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 7) 
Sec. 2-2-119. - Provisions and obligations; remedies of bondholders; limitations and procedures. 
Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this section, the obligations of the authority evidenced by bonds, bond anticipation notes, trust indentures, deeds to secure obligations, security agreements or mortgages executed in connection therewith may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by the board of directors of the authority, and the authority may provide in such instruments for the pledging of all or any part of its revenues, income or charges and for the mortgaging, encumbering or conveying of all or any part of its real or personal property; may covenant against pledging any or all of its revenues, income or charges; and may further provide for the disposition of proceeds realized from the sale of any bonds and bond anticipation notes, for the replacement of lost, destroyed, stolen, or mutilated bonds and notes, and for the payment and redemption of such bonds and notes. Similarly, subject to the limitations and procedures of this section, under-takings of the authority may prescribe the procedure by which bondholders and note holders may enforce rights against the authority and provide for rights upon breach of any covenant, condition or obligation of the authority, and bonds, resolutions, trust indentures, mortgages or deeds to secure obligations executed by the authority and bond anticipation notes executed by the authority may contain such provisions not otherwise contrary to law as the authority shall deem necessary or desirable. 
(a)  Use of Bond and Note Proceeds: The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds and bond anticipation notes issued by the authority shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly as permitted in this act [article], all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, financing, adding to or improving such project or for the purpose of refunding any bond anticipation notes issued in accordance with the provisions of this act [article] refunding any previously issued bonds of the authority. 
(b)  Revenue Obligations: All bonds and bond anticipation notes issued by the authority shall be revenue obligations of the authority, and may be made payable out of any revenues or other receipts, funds or monies of the authority, subject only to any agreements with the holders of other bonds or bond anticipation notes or to particular security agreements pledging any particular revenues, receipts, funds or moneys. 
(c)  Subsequent Series of Bonds or Notes: Issuance by the authority of one or more series of bonds or bond anticipation notes for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds or notes in connection with the same project or with any other projects, but the proceeding wherein any subsequent bonds or bond anticipation notes shall be issued shall recognize and protect any prior pledge or mortgage made in any prior security agreement or made for any prior issue of bonds or bond anticipation notes, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the authority to issue subsequent bonds or bond anticipation notes on a parity with such prior issue. 
(d)  Bond Anticipation Notes: The authority shall have the power and is hereby authorized, whenever revenue bonds of the authority shall have been validated as provided in this act [article], to issue, from time to time, its notes in anticipation of the issuance of such bonds as validated and to renew from time to time any such notes by the issuance of new notes, whether the notes to be renewed have or have not matured. The authority may issue notes only to provide funds which would otherwise be provided by the issuance of the bonds as validated. The notes may be authorized, sold, executed, and delivered in the same manner as bonds. As with its bonds, the authority may sell such notes at public or private sale. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing notes of the authority or any issue thereof may contain any provisions which the authority is authorized to include in any resolution or resolutions authorizing bonds of the authority or any issue thereof, and the authority may include in any notes any terms, covenants, or conditions which it is authorized to include in any bonds. Validation of such bonds shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of such notes, but it shall not be required that such notes be judicially validated. Bond anticipation notes shall not be issued in an amount exceeding the par value of the bonds in anticipation of which they are to be issued. 
(e)  Interest rates on obligations of the Authority: The interest rate on or rates to be borne by any bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the authority shall be fixed by the board of directors of the authority and any limitations with respect to interest rates found in the 'Revenue Bond Law' (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended, or the usury laws of the State of Georgia shall not apply to obligations issued under this act [article]. 
(f)  Validation and Issuance of Revenue Bonds: All revenue bonds issued by the authority under this act [article] shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the 'Revenue Bond Law' of the State of Georgia, as heretofore and hereafter amended, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section and except as specifically set forth below in this subsection: 
(1)  Revenue bonds issued by the authority may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions, as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide; 
(2)  Revenue bonds shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Henry County may be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution stating the date on which such bonds were validated and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state; 
(3)  In lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which revenue bonds to be issued by the authority are to bear, the notice to district attorney or attorney general and the notice to the public of the time, place and date of the validation hearing may state that the bonds when issued will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest specified in such notices or that in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates that none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate specified in the notices: Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of the authority to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in so doing, the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices; 
(4)  The term "cost of project" shall have the meaning prescribed in subsection (c) of Section 2 of this Act [section 2-12-112(c)] whenever referred to in bond resolutions of the authority, bonds and bond anticipation notes issued by the authority, or notices and proceedings to validate such bonds. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 8; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 4; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4078, Act No. 989, § 2) 
State Law reference— Revenue Bond Law, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-82-60. 
Sec. 2-2-120. - Finding and declaration by authority. 
No bonds except refunding bonds shall be issued hereunder unless the authority shall have found and declared that: 
(1)  The undertaking for which the bonds are to be issued will increase employment in Henry County. 
(2)  The lessee or purchaser of the building or buildings involved will not by virtue of establishing operations in said county, reduce the number of employees employed by said lessee or purchaser elsewhere in the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 9; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 6) 
Editor's note— The above section originally was section 10 of the 1967 act; section 6 of the 1980 amendatory act redesignated it section 9. Such act repealed the original section 9. 
Sec. 2-2-121. - Promotional and entertainment expenses. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "promotional and entertainment expenses" shall mean expenses incurred to solicit, attract, obtain, and complete projects, including expenses incurred for entertainment of industrial and commercial representatives. 
(b)  The authority may expend such funds as it deems necessary for the payment of promotional and entertainment expenses, provided that the funds are derived from sources other than revenues received from Henry County, the State of Georgia, or the federal government. 
(c)  Office expenses, employee salaries, and food, lodging and transportation expenses, and the cost of attending seminars, conferences, and meetings incurred by authority members or employees traveling in furtherance of the purposes of the authority shall not be considered promotional or entertainment expenses but shall be considered expenditures in the normal course of business, and such expenditures shall be considered as authorized by paragraphs (4) and (10) of section 6 [2-2-117] of this act. 
(d)  The authority shall keep records of all promotional and entertainment expenses incurred and shall account for all such expenses in the annual audit. 
(e)  The powers granted by this section shall not be deemed to restrict other powers of the authority, but shall be considered cumulative in their effect. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 10; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, §§ 5, 6; Ga. Laws 1985, P. 3549, Act No. 22, § 3) 
Editor's note— The above section originally was section 11 of the 1967 act; section 6 of the amendatory act redesignated it section 10. 
Sec. 2-2-122. - Title to property. 
Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and persona, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Henry County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 11; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 6) 
Editor's note— The above section originally was section 12 of the 1967 act; section 6 of the amendatory act redesignated it section 11. 
Sec. 2-2-123. - Audits. 
The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually at the expense of the authority by a competent, independent auditor. The audit and a summary of the audit shall be filed with the clerk of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues [Board of Commissioners] of Henry County and shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 12; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 6) 
Editor's note— The above section originally was section 13 of the 1967 act; section 6 of the amendatory act redesignated it section 12. The board of commissioners of roads and revenues is now known as the board of commissioners. See Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-5-20. 
Sec. 2-2-124. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this act [article] shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this act [article], which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereto. The general assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this act [article] if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 14; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 6) 
Editor's note— The above section originally was section 15 of the 19967 act; section 6 of the amendatory act redesignated it as section 14. The catchline for the above section has been supplied by the editor. 
Sec. 2-2-125. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1967, P. 2291, Act No. 108, § 15; Ga. Laws 1980, P. 3087, Act No. 728, § 6) 
Editor's note— The above section originally was section 16 of the 1967 act; section 6 of the amendatory act redesignated it section 15. The catchline for the above section has been supplied by the editor. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF CONDUCT FOR COUNTY COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-2-126. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Henry County Board of Commissioners." 
(Ord. No. 03-01, 1-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-2-127. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to recognize the actual authority of the members of the board; prohibit ultra vires acts or acts deemed to be inappropriate by members of the board; to establish penalties for violations; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, 1-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-2-128. - Conduct during public meetings. 
During the public portions of the public meetings and public hearings members of the board of commissioners shall not: 
(1)  Speak without first being recognized by the chair; 
(2)  Interrupt anyone who has the floor; 
(3)  Use profanity during the public meeting; 
(4)  Refuse to yield the floor, or to argue with the chair, if he or she is ruled out of order by the chair; 
(5)  Make disparaging remarks about another's character during the public portion of any meeting; 
(6)  Represent their personal opinion and beliefs as the position of the board as a whole; 
(7)  Refuse to recognize the validity of the actions approved by a majority vote of the board; and 
(8)  Divulge the subject matter of any confidential matter, legal advise, legal strategy, or the content of discussions held during executive session. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, 1-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-2-129. - Conduct outside of meetings. 
(a)  A member of the county board of commissioners shall not: 
(1)  Direct any department head or county employee to do a job or perform a task. All such requests shall be made to the county manager. Once such a request is made of the county manager, then the commissioner shall follow-up with the county manager regarding the performance of the work. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a commssioner from asking a department head or employee for the status of projects or work being performed. 
(2)  Direct the director of the department of transportation or any of that department's employees to stop any project, which they are working on, nor shall any of the department's personnel or equipment be redirected. Any request to change project or work priority shall be made to the county manager. 
(3)  Direct the director of the department of planning and zoning or any of that department's employees to stop work in progress, change priorities of pending application reviews, or change dates of scheduled rezonings or matters to appear before any board. Any such request shall be made to the county manager. 
(4)  Direct the director of the department of building inspections or any of that department's employees to stop work in progress, change priority of inspections or certifications, or in any way influence a matter pending in that department. Any such request shall be made to the county manager. 
(b)  If a commissioner attempts to violate any provision of subsections (1) through (4) above, a county employee shall: 
(1)  Offer to locate the department head or county manager for a conference call or meeting; or 
(2)  State to the commissioner that they have not been authorized by the county manager to perform the task or directive given, and will forward the request to their superior as soon as practicable without disrupting the work currently in progress. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, 1-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-2-130. - Chairman as chief executive officer. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the chairman from exercising his duties as chief executive officer of the county under the local act and ordinances affecting the office. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, 1-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-2-131. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any county commissioner or the county manager shall have the right to bring a suspected violation of this article to the attention of the full board. Such matter shall be placed on a board agenda for discussion and deliberation with a decision to be voted on in public session as to whether any provision of this article has been violated. 
(b)  Upon a finding by a majority vote of the board that a violation has occurred, then the following penalties shall apply: 
(1)  Upon the first violation of this article, a public censure to be read in public session condemning the violation; 
(2)  Upon a second violation of this article, a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00); and 
(3)  Upon a third or subsequent violation of this article, a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 03-01, 1-2-2003) 
Secs. 2-2-131—2-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MEETINGS PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-2-141. - Meetings procedure. 
(a)  Main motion. In order for the board to take any official action on any subject, a commissioner must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another commissioner agrees to second the motion. 
(b)  Seconds to motions. When a motion requires a second, the chairman shall call two times for a second. If no second is made after the second call, then the motion shall die for lack of a second. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-01(A)—(B), 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-142. - Debate. 
After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the board shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the chairman in a manner that is fair to all members of the board. Commissioners can participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the chairman. 
During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the board take a particular action on a motion (section 2-2-145). There are two classes of subsidiary motions: Debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and motion to table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
Commissioners may also introduce privileged motions (section 2-2-146). Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-02, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-143. - Voting procedure. 
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions. 
(a)  Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
(1)  If debate has been completed and no other commissioner wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote. If there are no objections, the chair can proceed with the vote; 
(2)  If the chairman calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the board may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The chairman will then read the proposed motion to the board and ask for the votes of the commissioners. 
(b)  Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The chairman shall read the proposed motion to the board and then call for the vote. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-03, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-144. - Ranking of motions. 
Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the board returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the top of the following list take precedence over motions at the bottom of the list. 
Highest rank: 
Privileged motion (Undebatable) 
(1)  Adjourn. 
(2)  Recess. 
(3)  Question of privilege. 
Subsidiary motion (Undebatable) 
(4)  Table (postpone temporarily). 
(5)  Vote immediately (previous question). 
(6)  Limit debate or extend. 
Subsidiary motions (Debatable) 
(7)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). 
(8)  Refer to committee (commit). 
(9)  Amend. 
(10)  Postpone indefinitely. 
Other motions 
Lowest rank: 
(11)  Main motion. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-04, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-145. - Subsidiary motions. 
During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce motions that propose that the board take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow a board to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted or debated. Three (3) subsidiary motions—amend, limit debate and vote immediately—can apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)  Postpone indefinitely. If a commissioner believes the main motion should not be considered by the board, that commissioner may move to postpone the consideration of the main motion indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled for the duration of the meeting. A motion to postpone indefinitely can be debated but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)  Amend. If a commissioner believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. Motion to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. A motion cannot be amended more than two times. Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. Debate is limited to the proposed amendment. A majority vote is required for the board to adopt an amendment. It the amendment is adopted then the board shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a commissioner believes that further information is needed before the board can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to commit should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the board. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a commissioner believes the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the chairman will bring the original motion back to the board for consideration at the specified time which may be at the same meeting, at a subsequent meeting, or upon the occurrence of a specified event. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)  Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the commissioner who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(6)  Call for the question (previous question). If a commissioner believes debate on a motion should end and that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the commissioner can move to call for the question to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of two-thirds of the board is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)  Motion to the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the same meeting. The main motion can be brought back for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the board during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-05, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-146. - Privileged motions. 
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do no address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a commissioner or of the board as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time when business is still pending. It is a temporary intermission of the proceedings. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a commissioner must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but it is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-06, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-147. - Incidental motions. 
Incidental motions allow commissioners to exert their rights as a member of the board. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)  Appeal. If a commissioner disagrees with a ruling that is made by the chair, that commissioner may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the board. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to table. 
(2)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a commissioner has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the board. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motion. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)  Point of order (question of order). If a commissioner believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the board to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to table. 
(4)  P oint of information (request for information). If a commissioner has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-07, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-148. - Supplementary main motions. 
Three (3) motions allow the board to act on a main motion that has wither been passed or tabled by the board. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from the usual main motions in the ways specified. 
(1)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the board to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the board to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any commissioner can make a motion to reconsider and any commissioner may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the board is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the board will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)  Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the board overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any commissioner. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the commissioner seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, then the board shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the board to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-08, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-2-149. - Tie vote on a motion. 
Should the vote on a motion result in a tie vote, it shall be deemed that no action was taken by the board. A subsequent or second motion may then be made. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § (1)1-09, 1-3-2005) 
Chapter 2-2.5 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-2.5-1—2-2.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HENRY COUNTY COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS ACT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—15 as Ch. 2-2.5, Art. II, §§ 2-2.5-21—2-2.5-35 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-2.5-21. - Short title. 
This Act shall be referred to as the "Henry County Community Improvement Districts Act." 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2.5-22. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Act shall be to provide for the creation of one or more community improvement districts within Henry County and each municipality therein, and such districts shall be created for the provision of such of the following governmental services and facilities as may be provided for in the resolution activating each district created under this Act or any supplemental resolution amending same: 
(1)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights, and devices to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads; 
(2)  Parks and recreational areas and facilities; 
(3)  Storm water and sewage collection and disposal systems; 
(4)  Development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water; 
(5)  Public transportation; 
(6)  Terminal and dock facilities and parking facilities; and 
(7)  Such other services and facilities as may be provided for by general law. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 2) 
Sec. 2-2.5-23. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the term: 
(1)  Agricultural means the growing of crops for sale or raising of animals for sale or use, including the growing of field crops, fruit or nut trees, the raising of livestock or poultry, and the operation of dairies, horse-boarding facilities, and riding stables. 
(2)  Board means the governing body created for the governance of each community improvement district authorized in this Act. 
(3)  Bonds or general obligation bonds means any bonds of a district which are authorized to be issued under the Constitution and laws of Georgia, including refunding bonds, but not including notes or other obligations of a district. 
(4)  Caucus of electors means for each district the meeting of electors provided for in Section 5 [Section 2-2.5-25] of this Act at which the elected board members of the district are elected. A quorum at such caucus shall consist of those electors present, and a majority of those present and voting is necessary to elect board members. No proxy votes may be cast. 
(5)  Cost of the project or cost of any project means and includes: 
(A)  All costs of acquisition (by purchase or otherwise), construction, assembly, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation incurred in connection with any project or any part of any project; 
(B)  All costs of real property, fixtures, or personal property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project or for any facilities related thereto, including, but not limited to, the cost of all land, estates for years, easements, rights, improvements, water rights, connections for utility services, fees, franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, and certificates; the cost of securing any such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, or certificates; and the cost of preparation of any application therefor and the cost of all fixtures, machinery, equipment (including all transportation equipment and rolling stock), furniture, and other property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project; 
(C)  All financing charges and loan fees and all interest on bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district which accrue or are paid prior to and during the period of construction of a project and during such additional period as the board may reasonably determine to be necessary to place such project in operation; 
(D)  All costs of engineering, surveying, and architectural and legal services and all expenses incurred by engineers, surveyors, architects, and attorneys in connection with any project; 
(E)  All expenses for inspection of any project; 
(F)  All fees of fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees for bondholders under any trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement; all expenses incurred by any such fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees; and all other costs and expenses incurred relative to the issuances of any bonds, notes, or other obligations for any project; 
(G)  All expenses of or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of any project; 
(H)  All costs of plans and specifications for any project; 
(I)  All costs of title insurance and examinations of title with respect to any project; 
(J)  Repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of any of the foregoing costs, including interest thereon and any other expenses of such loans; 
(K)  Administrative expenses of the board and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any project or the financing thereof or the placing of any project in operation; and 
(L)  The establishment of a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, or such other funds or reserves as the board may approve with respect to the financing and operation of any project and as may be authorized by any bond resolution, trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district may be authorized. 
Any cost, obligation, or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the district. 
(6)  District means the geographical area designated as such by the resolution of the governing body or bodies consenting to the creation of the community improvement district or as thereafter modified by any subsequent resolution of the governing body or bodies within which the district is or is to be located, or a body corporate and politic being a community improvement district created and activated pursuant to this Act, as the context requires or permits. 
(7)  Electors means the owners of real property within the district which is then subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board, as appear on the most recent ad valorem real property tax return records of Henry County, or one officer or director of a corporate elector, one trustee of a trust which is an elector, one partner of a partnership elector, or one designated representative of an elector whose designation is made in writing to the Henry County tax commissioner, on a form satisfactory to the commissioner, at least eight (8) days prior to an election. An owner of multiple parcels has one vote, not one vote per parcel. Multiple owners of one parcel have one vote which must be cast by one of their number who is designated in writing by such multiple owners as their elector. 
(8)  Equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property, with reference to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board, means that the burden of the taxes, fees, and assessments shall be apportioned among the properties subject thereto based upon the values established in the most recent ad valorem tax reassessment of such properties certified by the chairman of the Henry County Board of Tax Assessors. 
(9)  Forestry means the planting and growing of trees for sale in a program which includes reforestation of harvested trees, regular underbrush and undesirable growth clearing, fertilizing, pruning, thinning, cruising, and marking which indicate an active tree-farming operation; it does not include the casual growing of trees on land otherwise idle or held for investment, even though some harvesting of trees may occur thereon. 
(10)  Hereby, herein, hereinunder, and herewith mean under this Act or relevant portions of this Act. 
(11)  Project means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interests in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements located or to be located within the district and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, or other improvement, all for the essential public purposes set forth in Section 2 [Section 2-2.5-22] of this Act. 
(12)  Property owner or owner of real property means any entity or person shown as a taxpayer for one or more parcels of real estate on the most recent ad valorem tax records of Henry County within the district as certified by the Henry County tax commissioner. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one property owner and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(13)  Property used nonresidentially means property used for neighborhood shopping, a planned shopping center, general commercial, tourist services, office or institutional, office services, light industry, heavy industry, central business district, or other commercial or business use which does not include residential. 
(14)  Taxpayer means any entity or person paying ad valorem taxes on real property, whether on one or more parcels of property within the district. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one taxpayer and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 3) 
Sec. 2-2.5-24. - Creation. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article IX, Section VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended in 1984 (said amendment being set out at [as] Resolution Act No. 68, Ga. L. 1984, p. 1703), there is created one or more community improvement districts to be located in Henry County, Georgia, either wholly within the unincorporated area of the county, or wholly within any municipality in the county, or partly within one or more municipalities and partly within the unincorporated area of the county, each of which shall be activated upon compliance with the conditions provided in this section and which shall be governed by a board as constituted under Section 5 [Section 12-2.5-25] of this Act. The conditions for such activation shall be as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  There shall be adopted a resolution consenting to the creation of each community improvement district by: 
(1)  The Henry County Board of Commissioners if the district is located wholly within the unincorporated area of Henry County; 
(2)  The governing authority of the municipality if the district is located wholly within the incorporated area of a municipality; or 
(3)  The governing authorities of Henry County and any municipality in which the district is partially located if it is located partially within the unincorporated area of Henry County and partially within the incorporated area of any municipality. 
(c)  Written consent must be given to the creation of the community improvement district by: 
(1)  A majority of the owners of real property within the district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district; 
(2)  The owners of real property within the district which constitutes at least seventy-five (75) percent by value of all real property within the district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. For the purposes of this paragraph, value shall be determined by the most recent approved county ad valorem tax digest; and 
(3)  The written consents provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall be submitted to the Henry County tax commissioner who shall certify whether paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection have been satisfied with respect to each such proposed district. 
(d)  No district or board created under this Act shall transact any business or exercise any powers hereunder until the conditions of this section are met. A copy of such resolutions shall be filed with the Secretary of State, who shall maintain a record of all districts activated under this Act, and with the Department of Community Affairs. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 4) 
Sec. 2-2.5-25. - Administration, appointment, and election of board members. 
(a)  Each district created pursuant to this Act shall be administered by a board composed of seven (7) board members to be appointed and elected as provided in this section. One board member shall be appointed by the Henry County Board of Commissioners if any portion of the district lies within the unincorporated area of Henry County, one board member shall be appointed by the governing authority of each municipality within which the district is now or hereafter partially located if any portion of the district lies within the incorporated area of such municipality, and the remaining board members shall be elected by the owners of real property within the district subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. The appointed board members shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body which appointed same, respectively. The initial elected board members shall serve for terms of office as follows: one-half thereof, or one less than half if an odd number, shall serve for two (2) years, and the remaining board members shall serve for four (4) years, respectively. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for four (4) years, except the appointed board members who serve at the pleasure of the governing body which appointed them, respectively. 
(b)  The initial board members to be elected as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be elected in a caucus of electors which shall be held within sixty (60) days after the adoption of the resolutions and the obtaining of the written consents provided in Section 4 [Section 2-2.5-24] of this Act at such time and place within the district as the Henry County Board of Commissioners, or the governing body of the municipality if the district lies wholly within the incorporated area thereof, shall designate after notice of the election shall have been given to said electors by publishing same in the legal organ of Henry County once a week for three (3) weeks preceding such caucus. Thereafter, there shall be conducted biennially, not later than sixty (60) days following the last day for filing ad valorem real property tax returns in Henry County, a caucus of said electors at such time and place within the district as the board shall designate in such notice for the purpose of electing board members to those board member positions whose terms expire or are vacant. If a vacancy occurs in an election position on the board, the board shall, within sixty (60) days thereof, call a special election to fill the same to be held within sixty (60) days of the call unless such vacancy occurs within one hundred eighty (180) days of the next regularly scheduled election, in which case a special election may, but need not, be called. For any election held under this subsection, notice thereof shall be given to said electors by publishing notice thereof in the legal organ of Henry County on four (4) dates, at least forty-five (45) days, thirty-one (31) days, seventeen (17) days, and ten (10) days, respectively, prior to such election. 
(c)  The board members shall be subject to recall as any other elected public official by the electors as defined in this Act. 
(d)  Board members, including appointed board members, shall be electors within the district. If a board member ceases to be an elector, such board member's position shall be declared vacant as of the date of the event terminating such status. 
(e)  The board members shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. They shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice-chairman and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of whom may but need not be a member of the board. 
(f)  If the boundaries of a district are subsequently changed after creation of the district to include land within a municipality which was not a party to the creation of the district, or if a municipality's boundaries are changed to include land within a then existing district, the governing authority of the municipality shall acquire the right to appoint a member to the board of the district upon entering into the cooperation agreement provided for in Section 9 [Section 2-2.5-29] of this Act. If the boundaries of a district or municipality are subsequently changed after creation of a district to include land within the unincorporated area of Henry County and the district originally had no land within the unincorporated area of Henry County, the Henry County Board of Commissioners shall acquire the right to appoint a member to the board of the district upon entering into the cooperation agreement provided for in Section 9 [Section 2-2.5-29] of this Act. The newly appointed board member in such cases shall take office upon the vacation of the first elected board member's office to be vacated, by expiration of term, death, resignation, or recall, and that office shall thereafter be appointed by such governing authority. If, by municipal annexation or by deannexation of land from a district, the district no longer includes land within the unincorporated area of Henry County or within a municipality, respectively, then upon such occurrence the board member of the district appointed by such governing authority in which the district is no longer located shall cease to be a board member and such member shall thereafter be elected as otherwise provided in this section. 
(g)  Neither Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," nor Chapter 3 of Title 2 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," shall apply to the election of district board members. Should a vacancy in office occur of a district board member and the regular caucus of electors is more than six (6) months in the future, a special election shall be called to fill such vacancy, unless filled by appointment as required in this section. The district board may adopt such bylaws not inconsistent with this Act to provide for any matter concerning such elections. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 5) 
Sec. 2-2.5-26. - Taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(a)  The board may levy taxes, fees, and assessments within the district only on real property used nonresidentially, specifically excluding all property exempt from ad valorem taxation under the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia and all property used for residential, agricultural, or forestry purposes and specifically excluding tangible personal property and intangible property. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall not exceed two and five-tenths (2.5) percent of the aggregate assessed value of all such real property. The taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be used only for the purpose of providing governmental services and facilities which are specially required by the degree of density of development within the district and not for the purpose of providing those governmental services and facilities provided to the county or municipality as a whole. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall be collected by Henry County if the district lies wholly or partly within the unincorporated area of Henry County or by the municipality within which the district lies if it is wholly within a municipality, in the same manner as taxes, fees, and assessments are levied by Henry County or the municipality, respectively. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as Henry County or municipal ad valorem taxes, respectively, and may be enforced and collected in the same manner. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments so levied, less a fee to cover the costs of collection of one percent thereof, but not more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in any one calendar year, shall be transmitted by Henry County or the municipality who collects same to the board and shall be expended by the board only for the purposes authorized in this Act. 
(b)  The board shall levy the above-provided taxes between January 1 and June 1 each calendar year and notify in writing the collecting governing bodies by June 15 each year so they may include the levy on their regular ad valorem tax bills. 
(c)  If, but for this provision, a parcel of real property is removed from a district or otherwise would become nontaxable, it shall continue to bear its tax millage then extant upon such event, for bonded indebtedness of the district then outstanding, until said bonded indebtedness then outstanding is paid or refunded. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 6) 
Sec. 2-2.5-27. - Boundaries of the districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of each district shall be as designated as such by the Henry County Board of Commissioners if wholly within the unincorporated area of Henry County and such municipalities within which the district may be partially located if partially within the unincorporated area of Henry County and partially within one or more municipalities, or by the governing authority of a municipality if wholly within the incorporated area thereof, as set forth in the resolutions required in Section 4 [Section 2-2.5-24] of this Act or as may thereafter be added as provided in this section. 
(b)  The boundaries of a district may be increased after the initial creation of a district pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Written consent is first obtained of a majority of the owners of real property within the area sought to be annexed and which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district; 
(2)  Written consent of owners of real property within the area sought to be annexed which constitutes at least seventy-five (75) percent by value of the property which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. For the purposes of this paragraph, value shall be determined by the most recent approved county ad valorem tax digest; 
(3)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the board of the district; and 
(4)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the governing authorities of Henry County, if any portion of the district is or is to be in the unincorporated area of Henry County, and such municipalities as may have area within the district before or after the annexation. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 7) 
Sec. 2-2.5-28. - Debt. 
Each district may incur debt without regard to the requirements of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution of Georgia or any other provision of law prohibiting or restricting the borrowing of money or the creation of debt by political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, which debt shall be backed by the full faith, credit, and taxing power of the district but shall not be an obligation of the State of Georgia or any other unit of government of the State of Georgia other than the district. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 8) 
Sec. 2-2.5-29. - Cooperation with local governments. 
The services and facilities provided pursuant to this Act shall be provided for in a cooperation agreement executed jointly by the board and the governing body of Henry County and any municipalities within which the district is partially located. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit the authority of Henry County or any such municipality to provide services or facilities within the district; and Henry County or such municipalities shall retain full and complete authority and control over any of its facilities located within its respective areas of any district. Said control shall include but not be limited to the modification of, access to, and degree and type of services provided through or by facilities of the municipality or county. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit or preempt the application of any governmental laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations to the district or the services or facilities provided in this district. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 9) 
Sec. 2-2.5-30. - Powers. 
(a)  Each district and its board created pursuant to this Act shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the board or to further the public purposes for which the district is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, and contracts with respect to the use of projects; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the district; 
(5)  To finance (by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district or any other funds of the district, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (whether limited or general), or other entities, all of which the board is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purposes and to execute bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreements, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the board, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)  To issue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purposes of the district and to pay all costs of the board incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purposes; 
(8)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, grantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the district's public purposes and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(9)  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the district; 
(10)  To contract for any period, not exceeding fifty (50) years, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state for the use by the district of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state, or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of the state of any facilities or services of the district, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the district and any such political subdivision with which the district contracts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)  To receive and use the proceeds of any tax levied by any county or any municipal corporation to pay the costs of any project or for any other purpose for which the board may use its own funds pursuant hereto; 
(12)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(13)  To use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use thereof or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to be the best advantage of the district and the public purposes thereof; 
(14)  To appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, architects, urban or city planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(15)  To encourage and promote the improvement and development of the district and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long-range plans or proposals for the district in cooperation with Henry County and any municipal corporations in which the district is wholly or partially located; 
(16)  To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the board, the election and duties of officers of the board, and other matters which the board determines to deal with in its bylaws; 
(17)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purposes of the district; and 
(18)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred hereby. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers elsewhere enumerated in this Act. No such power limits or restricts any other power of the board. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 10) 
Sec. 2-2.5-31. - Bonds generally. 
(a)  Notes or other obligations issued by a district other than general obligation bonds shall be paid solely from the property pledged to pay such notes or other obligations. General obligation bonds issued by any district shall constitute a general obligation of the district to the repayment of which the full faith and credit and taxing power of the district shall be pledged. 
(b)  All bonds, notes, and other obligations of any district shall be authorized by resolution of its board adopted by a majority vote of the board members at a regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bear such date or dates, shall mature at such time or times (not more than forty (40) years from their respective dates), shall bear interest at such rate or rates (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time), shall be subject to redemption on such terms, and shall contain such other terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations may permit or provide. The terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions contained in or provided or permitted by any resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bind the board members of the district then in office and their successors. 
(d)  The board shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems it expedient to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether or not the bonds to be refunded have matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose permitted under this Act. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed upon, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded. 
(e)  There shall be no limitation upon the interest rates or any maximum interest rate or rates on any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district; and the usury laws of this state shall not apply to bonds, notes, or other obligations of these districts. 
(f)  Bonds issued by a district may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide. 
(g)  Bonds shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the clerk of the Superior Court of Henry County may be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution, stating the date on which such bonds were validated; and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state. 
(h)  In lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which such bonds are to bear, and the principal amount and maturities of such said bonds, the notice to the district attorney or the Attorney General, the notice to the public of the time, place, and date of the validation hearing, and the petition and complaint for validation may state that the bonds when issued will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) and that the principal amount will not exceed and the final maturity date will not be later than as specified in such notices and petition and complaint or may state that, in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates, none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) so specified; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of a board to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in doing so the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices and in the petition and complaint. 
(i)  The terms "cost of the project" and "cost of any project" shall have the meaning prescribed in this Act whenever those terms are referred to in bond resolutions of a board in bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district, or in notices or proceedings to validate such bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 11) 
Sec. 2-2.5-32. - Authorized contents of agreements and instruments of the board generally; use of proceeds of sale of bonds, notes, etc.; subsequent issues of bonds, notes, etc. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this section and by Section 11 [Section 2-2.5-31] of this Act, the agreements or instruments executed by a board may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by such board. 
(b)  The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds, notes, and other obligations issued by a district shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly as permitted in this Act, all or part of the cost of any project or for the purpose of refunding any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued in accordance with this Act. 
(c)  Issuance by a board of one or more series of bonds, notes, or other obligations for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds, notes, or other obligations in connection with the same project or with any other projects; but the proceeding in which any subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations are issued shall recognize and protect any prior loan agreement, security agreement, or other agreement or instrument made for any prior issue of bonds, notes, or other obligations, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the board to issue subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations on a parity with such prior issue. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 12) 
Sec. 2-2.5-33. - Construction; applicability of Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973"; notice, proceeding, publication, referendum. 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. The offer, sale, or issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations by a district shall not be subject to regulation under Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." No notice, proceeding, or publication except those required in this Act shall be necessary to the performance of any act authorized in this Act, nor shall any such act be subject to referendum. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 13) 
Sec. 2-2.5-34. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without his approval. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 14) 
Sec. 2-2.5-35. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, P. 4946, Act No. 502, § 15) 
Secs. 2-2.5-36—2-2.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HENRY COUNTY PROJECT FINANCING COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS ACT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4340, Act No. 182, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—7 as Ch. 2-2.5, Art. III, §§ 2-2.5-41—2-2.5-57 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-2.5-41. - Short title. 
This Act shall be referred to as the "Henry County Project Financing Community Improvement Districts Act." 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2.5-42. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Act shall be to provide for the creation of one or more community improvement districts within Henry County and each municipality therein, and such districts shall be created for the provision of such of the following governmental services and facilities as may be provided for in the resolution activating such district created under this Act, or any supplemental resolution amending same: 
(1)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights, and devices to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads; 
(2)  Parks and recreational areas and facilities; 
(3)  Stormwater and sewage collection and disposal systems; 
(4)  Development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water; 
(5)  Public transportation; 
(6)  Terminal and dock facilities and parking facilities; and 
(7)  Such other services and facilities as may be provided for by general law. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 2) 
Sec. 2-2.5-43. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  Agricultural means the growing of crops for sale or raising of animals for sale or use, including the growing of field crops, fruit or nut trees, the raising of livestock or poultry, and the operation of dairies, horse-boarding facilities, and riding stables. 
(2)  Board means the governing body created for the governance of each community improvement district authorized by this Act. 
(3)  Bonds or general obligation bonds means any bonds of a district which are authorized to be issued under the Constitution and laws of Georgia, including refunding bonds but not including notes or other obligations of a district. 
(4)  Cost of the project or cost of any project means and includes: 
(A)  All costs of acquisition, by purchase or otherwise; construction; assembly; installation; modification; renovation; or rehabilitation incurred in connection with any project or any part of any project; 
(B)  All costs of real property, fixtures, or personal property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project or for any facilities related thereto, including, but not limited to, the cost of all land, estates for years, easements, rights, improvements, water rights, connections for utility services, fees, franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, and certificates; the cost of securing any such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, or certificates; and the cost of preparation of any application therefor and the cost of all fixtures, machinery, equipment (including all transportation equipment and rolling stock), furniture, and other property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project; 
(C)  All interest and other financing charges and loan fees and all interest on bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district which accrue or are paid prior to and during the period of construction of a project and during such additional period as the board may reasonably determine to be necessary to place such project in operation; 
(D)  All costs of engineering, surveying, and architectural and legal services and all expenses incurred by engineers, surveyors, architects, and attorneys in connection with any project; 
(E)  All expenses for inspection of any project; 
(F)  All fees of fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees for bondholders under any trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement; all expenses incurred by any such fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees; and all other costs and expenses incurred relative to the issuances of any bonds, notes, or other obligations for any project; 
(G)  All expenses of or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of any project; 
(H)  All costs of plans and specifications for any project; 
(I)  All costs of title insurance and examinations of title with respect to any project; 
(J)  Repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of any of the foregoing costs, including interest thereon and any other expenses of such loans; 
(K)  Administrative expenses of the board and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any project or the financing thereof or the placing of any project in operation; and 
(L)  The establishment of a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, or such other funds or reserves as the board may approve with respect to the financing and operation of any project and as may be authorized by any bond resolution, trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district may be authorized. 
Any cost, obligation, or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the district. 
(5)  District means the geographical area designated as such by the resolution of the governing body or bodies consenting to the creation of the community improvement district or as thereafter modified by any subsequent resolution of the governing body or bodies within which the district is or is to be located, or a body corporate and politic being a community improvement district created and activated pursuant hereto, as the context requires or permits. 
(6)  Equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property, with reference to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board, means that the burden of the taxes, fees, and assessments shall be apportioned among the properties subject thereto based upon (A) the values established in the most recent ad valorem tax reassessment of such properties certified by the chairman of the Henry County Board of Tax Assessors or (B) if so specified, such other method specified in the project specifications. 
(7)  Forestry means the planting and growing of trees for sale in a program which includes reforestation of harvested trees, regular underbrush and undesirable growth clearing, fertilizing, pruning, thinning, cruising, and marking which indicate an active tree-farming operation; it does not include the casual growing of trees on land otherwise idle or held for investment, even though some harvesting of trees may occur thereon. 
(8)  Project means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interests in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements located or to be located within the district, and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, or other improvement, all for the essential public purposes set forth in Section 2 [Section 2-2.5-42] of this Act, which project is a project described in the project specifications for the district. 
(9)  Project specifications means a description of the project or projects to be undertaken by the district. The project specifications must include the rates for taxes, fees, and assessments that the district may levy. The project specifications may also include as a matter of election any or all of the following: (i) the maximum amounts that may be raised for any annual period by taxes, fees, and assessments; (ii) the maximum period of time during which such taxes, fees, and assessments may be levied; and (iii) a method for the equitable apportionment of such taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(10)  Property owner or owner of real property means any entity or person shown as a taxpayer for one or more parcels of real estate on the most recent ad valorem tax records of Henry County within the district as certified by the Henry County Tax Commissioner. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one property owner and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(11)  Property used nonresidentially means property used for neighborhood shopping, planned shopping center, general commercial, tourist services, office or institutional, office services, light industry, heavy industry, central business district, or other commercial or business use which does not include residential. 
(12)  Taxpayer means any entity or person paying ad valorem taxes on real property, whether on one or more parcels of property within the district. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one taxpayer and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 3) 
Sec. 2-2.5-44. - Creation; project specifications; conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article IX, Section VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended in 1984, said amendment being set out at Ga. L. 1984, p. 1703, et seq., there is created one or more community improvement districts to be located in Henry County, Georgia, either wholly within the unincorporated area thereof, or wholly within any municipality therein, or partly within one or more municipalities and partly within the unincorporated area thereof, each of which shall be activated upon compliance with the conditions provided in this Act and which shall be governed by a board constituted as provided in this Act. The conditions for such activation shall be: 
(1)  The delivery of a petition by any taxpayer, containing the project specifications for the proposed district, to the Henry County Board of Commissioners and, if applicable, the governing authority of any municipality in which any part of the proposed district is to be located; 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the creation of each community improvement district, which resolution shall state that the district is created under the Henry County Project Financing Community Improvement Districts Act, and to the project specifications by: 
(A)  The Henry County Board of Commissioners, if the district is located wholly within the unincorporated area of Henry County; 
(B)  The governing authority of the municipality, if the district is located wholly within the incorporated area of a municipality and wholly within Henry County; or 
(C)  The governing authorities of Henry County and any municipality in which the district is partially located if it is located partially within the unincorporated area of Henry County and partially within the incorporated area of any municipality within Henry County; and 
(3)  Written consent to the creation of the community improvement district by and the project specifications by: 
(A)  A majority of the owners of real property within the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and 
(B)  The owners of real property within the community improvement district which constitutes at least seventy-five (75) percent by value of all real property within the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and for this purpose value shall be determined by the most recent approved county ad valorem tax digest; 
(4)  If the proposed community improvement district is to lie in an area wholly or partially coexistent with one or more community improvement districts, then the governing board of the newly created district and the governing board of the preexisting district or districts shall have entered into a cooperative agreement whereby the collection of taxes and the provision of services in the overlapping areas of such districts shall be specified. The written consents and cooperative agreement, if required, provided for above shall be submitted to the Henry County Tax Commissioner who shall certify whether subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (2) of this subsection, as applicable, have been satisfied with respect to each such proposed district. No district or board created under this Act shall transact any business or exercise any powers hereunder until the foregoing conditions are met. A copy of such resolutions shall be filed with the Secretary of State, who shall maintain a record of all districts activated under this Act, and with the Department of Community Affairs. 
(b)  The project specifications may be amended, changed, or expanded from time to time, but not so as to reduce taxes, fees, and assessments pledged to holders of bonds or other indebtedness of the district without such holders' written consent, by the adoption, certification, and filing of consents as described in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 4) 
Sec. 2-2.5-45. - Administration and appointment of board members. 
(a)  Each district created pursuant to this Act which lies wholly within unincorporated Henry County shall be administered by the Henry County Board of Commissioners or by a five-member board appointed by the Henry County Board of Commissioners; provided, however, that so long as the directors of the Henry County Development Authority, created pursuant to the provisions of the Henry County Development Authority Act, Ga. L. 1967, p. 2291, as amended, shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, the members of the board of each community improvement district created hereunder shall be the same as and shall serve terms coextensive with the board of directors, as now or hereafter constituted, of the Henry County Development Authority. 
(b)  Each district created pursuant to this Act which lies wholly within an incorporated area in Henry County or partially within an unincorporated area of Henry County and partially within an incorporated area of Henry County shall be administered by a board of which five (5) members are appointed by the Henry County Board of Commissioners and one member is appointed by the governing body of each municipality within which the community improvement district wholly or partially lies; provided, however, so long as the directors of the Henry County Development Authority are appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, the five (5) members of the board of each community improvement district to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County shall be the same as and shall serve terms coextensive with the board of directors, as now or hereafter constituted, of the Henry County Development Authority. The board member or members appointed by each municipality within which the community improvement district wholly or partially lies shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body which appointed such member. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 5) 
Sec. 2-2.5-46. - Taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(a)  The board may levy taxes, fees, and assessments within the district only on real property used nonresidentially, specifically excluding property exempt from ad valorem taxation under the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia and all property used for residential, agricultural, or forestry purposes and specifically excluding tangible personal property and intangible property. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall not exceed two and one-half (2½) percent of the aggregate assessed value of all such real property; provided, however, that no tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall exceed any lesser limitation designated in the project specifications and that no tax, fee, or assessment shall be levied beyond any time limitation designated as provided in the project specifications. The taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be used only for the purpose of providing the projects which are specially required by the degree of development within the applicable district and not for the purpose of providing those governmental services and facilities provided to Henry County or the municipality as a whole. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall be collected by Henry County if the district lies wholly or partly within the unincorporated area of Henry County, and by the municipality within which it lies if it is wholly within a municipality, in the same manner as taxes, fees, and assessments are levied by Henry County or the municipality, respectively. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as Henry County or municipal ad valorem taxes, respectively, and may be enforced and collected in the same manner. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments so levied shall be transmitted by Henry County or the municipality who collects same to the board and shall be expended by the board only for the purposes authorized under this Act. 
(b)  The board shall levy the above-provided taxes between January 1 and June 1 each calendar year and notify in writing the collecting governing bodies by June 15 each year so they may include the levy on their regular ad valorem tax bills. 
(c)  If, but for this provision, a parcel of real property is removed from a district or otherwise would become nontaxable, it shall continue to bear its tax millage then extent [extant] upon such event for bonded indebtedness of the district then outstanding until said bonded indebtedness then outstanding is paid or refunded. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 6) 
Sec. 2-2.5-47. - Boundaries of the districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of each district shall be as designated as such by the Henry County Board of Commissioners if wholly within the unincorporated area of Henry County and such municipalities within which the district may be partially located if partially within the unincorporated area of Henry County and partially within one or more municipalities, or by the governing authority of a municipality if wholly within the incorporated area thereof, as set forth in the resolutions required in Section 4 [Section 2-2.5-44] of this Act or as may thereafter be added as provided in this Act. 
(b)  The boundaries of a district may be increased after the initial creation of a district pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Written consent of: 
(A)  A majority of the owners of real property within the area sought to be annexed into the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and 
(B)  The owners of the real property within the area sought to be annexed into the community improvement district which constitutes at least seventy-five (75) percent by value of all real property within the area sought to be annexed into the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and for this purpose value shall be determined by the most recent approved county ad valorem tax digest. 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the board of the district; and 
(3)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the governing authorities of Henry County, if any portion of the district is or is to be in the unincorporated area of Henry County, and such municipalities as may have area within the district before or after the annexation. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 7) 
Sec. 2-2.5-48. - Debt. 
Each district may incur debt without regard to the requirements of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution of Georgia, or any other provision of law prohibiting or restricting the borrowing of money or the creation of debt by political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, which debt shall be backed by the full faith, credit, and taxing power of the district but shall not be an obligation of the State of Georgia, Henry County, or any other unit of government of the State of Georgia other than the district. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 8) 
Sec. 2-2.5-49. - Cooperation with local governments. 
The services and facilities provided pursuant to this Act shall be provided for in a cooperation agreement executed jointly by the board and the governing body of Henry County and any municipalities within which the district is partially located. If the parties to the cooperation agreement so agree, the cooperation agreement may provide that such private persons as are designated by the district perform the actual construction or improvement of the services and facilities provided by the district. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit the authority of Henry County or any such municipality to provide services or facilities within the district; and Henry County or such municipalities shall retain full and complete authority and control over any of its facilities located within its respective areas of any district. Said control shall include but not be limited to the modification of, access to, and degree and type of services provided through or by facilities of the municipality or Henry County. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit or preempt the application of any governmental laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations to the district or the services or facilities provided therein. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 9) 
Sec. 2-2.5-50. - Powers. 
(a)  Each district and its board created pursuant to this Act shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the board or to further the public purposes for which the district is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, and contracts with respect to the use of projects; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the district; 
(5)  To finance (by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district or any other funds of the district, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships, whether limited or general, or other entities, all of which the board is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purposes and to execute bonds; notes; other obligations; leases; trust indentures; trust agreements; agreements for the sale of its bonds, notes, or other obligations; loan agreements; security agreements; assignments; and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the board, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing. 
(7)  To issue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purposes of the district and to pay all costs of the board incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purposes; 
(8)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the district's public purposes and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(9)  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the district; 
(10)  To contract for any period, not exceeding fifty (50) years, or such longer period as may be authorized by law, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state for the use by the district of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state, or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of the state of any facilities or services of the district, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the district and any such political subdivision with which the district contacts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)  The district shall have the power and is authorized, whenever bonds of the district have been validated as provided in this Act, to issue, from time to time, its notes in anticipation of the issuance of such bonds as validated and to renew, from time to time, any such notes by the issuance of new notes, whether the notes to be renewed have or have not matured. The district may issue notes only to provide funds which would otherwise be provided by the issuance of the bonds as validated. The notes may be authorized, sold, executed, and delivered in the same manner as bonds. As with its bonds, the district may sell such notes at public or private sale. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing notes of the district or any issue thereof may contain any provisions which the district is authorized to include in any resolution or resolutions authorizing bonds of the authority or any issue thereof; and the district may include in any notes any terms, covenants, or conditions which it is authorized to include in any bonds. Validation of such bonds shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the notes, but it shall not be required that such notes be judicially validated. Bond anticipation notes shall not be issued in an amount exceeding the par value of the bonds in anticipation of which they are to be issued; 
(12)  To grant, mortgage, convey, assign, or pledge its property, revenues or taxes, fees, or assessments to be received as security for its bonds, notes, or other indebtedness and obligations; 
(13)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(14)  To use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein or to rent or lease such property to or from others to make contracts with respect to the use thereof or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to be to the best advantage of the district and the public purposes thereof; 
(15)  To appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, architects, urban or city planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(16)  To encourage and promote the improvement and development of the district and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long-range plans or proposals for the district in cooperation with Henry County and any municipal corporations in which the district is wholly or partially located; 
(17)  To invest its funds, whether derived from the issuance of its bonds or otherwise, in such manner as it may deem prudent and appropriate, without further restriction; 
(18)  To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the board, the election and duties of officers of the board, and other matters which the board determines to deal with in its bylaws; 
(19)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purposes of the district; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred by this Act. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated in this Act; and no such power limits or restricts any other power of the board. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 10) 
Sec. 2-2.5-51. - Bonds generally. 
(a)  Notes or other obligations issued by a district, other than general obligation bonds, shall be paid solely from the property pledged to pay such notes or other obligations. General obligation bonds issued by any district shall constitute a general obligation of the district to the repayment of which the full faith and credit and taxing power of the district shall be pledged (subject to the power of the district to tax only in accordance with any limitations established by the project specifications). 
(b)  All bonds, notes, and other obligations of any district shall be authorized by resolution of its board, adopted by a majority vote of the board members at a regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bear such date or dates; shall mature at such time or times, not more than forty (40) years from their respective dates; shall bear interest at such rate or rates, which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time; shall be subject to redemption on such terms; and shall contain such other terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations may permit or provide. The terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions contained in or provided or permitted by any resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bind the board members of the district then in office and their successors. 
(d)  The board shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems it expedient to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether or not the bonds to be refunded have matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose permitted hereunder. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed upon, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded. 
(e)  There shall be no limitation upon the interest rates or any maximum interest rate or rates on any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district; and the usury laws of this state shall not apply to bonds, notes, or other obligations of these districts. 
(f)  Bonds issued by a district may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide. 
(g)  Bonds issued by a district shall be validated under and in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law," or in accordance with such other successor provision governing bond validation generally as may be provided by law. Bonds shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the clerk of the Superior Court of Henry County shall be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution, stating the date on which such bonds were validated; and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state. 
(h)  In lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which such bonds are to bear and the principal amount and maturities of such said bonds, the notice to the district attorney or the Attorney General, the notice to the public of the time, place, and date of the validation hearing, and the petition and complaint for validation may state that the bonds when issued will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest, which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time, and that the principal amount will not exceed and the final maturity date will not be later than as specified in such notices and petition and complaint or may state that, in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates, none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate, which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time, so specified; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of a board to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in doing so the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices and in the petition and complaint. 
(i)  The terms "cost of the project" and "cost of any project" shall have the meaning prescribed in this Act whenever those terms are referred to in bond resolutions of a board, in bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district, or in notices of proceedings to validate such bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 11) 
Sec. 2-2.5-52. - Authorized contents of agreements and instruments of the board generally; use of proceeds of sale of bonds, notes, and other obligations; subsequent issues of bonds, notes, and other obligations. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this section and by Section 11 of this Act, the agreements or instruments executed by a board may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by such board. 
(b)  The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds, notes, and other obligations issued by a district shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly as permitted by this Act, all or part of the cost of any project, or for the purpose of refunding any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued in accordance with this Act. 
(c)  Issuance by a board of one or more series of bonds, notes, or other obligations for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds, notes, or other obligations in connection with the same project or with any other projects; but the proceeding wherein any subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations are issued shall recognize and protect any prior loan agreement, security agreement, or other agreement or instrument made for any prior issue of bonds, notes, or other obligations, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the board to issue subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations on a parity with such prior issue. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 12) 
Sec. 2-2.5-53. - Construction; applicability of Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973"; notice, proceeding, publication, referendum. 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this Act. The offer, sale, or issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations by a district shall not be subject to regulation under Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." No notice, proceeding, or publication except those required under this Act shall be necessary to the performance of any act authorized by this Act nor shall any such act be subject to referendum. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 13) 
Sec. 2-2.5-54. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part of this Act. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts of this Act would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 14) 
Sec. 2-2.5-55. - Termination. 
So long as a district has no debt outstanding the board of a district may terminate and dissolve the district as of a certain date, and on such date all property, rights, and obligations of the district shall devolve to Henry County, unless the district shall lie wholly within an incorporated area, in which case the property, rights, and obligations of the district shall devolve to the municipality in which the district shall lie. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 15) 
Sec. 2-2.5-56. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 16) 
Sec. 2-2.5-57. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed; provided, however, that the Henry County Community Improvement Districts Act, Ga. L. 1985, P. 4946, [Sections 2-2.5-21 through 2-2.5-35] shall not be repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4339, Act No. 182, § 17) 
Chapter 2-3 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Compensation of superior court clerk, § 2-2-63; salary of probate judge, § 2-2-64. 
State Law reference— Superior courts, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 15-6-1 et seq.; state courts, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 15-7-1 et seq.; probate courts Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 15-9-1 et seq.; magistrate courts, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 15-10-1 et seq.; juvenile courts, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 15-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-3-1—2-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAGISTRATE COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—6 of Act No. 880 of the 1988 General Assembly are included herein as Ch. 2-3, Art. II, at the discretion of the editor. Boldface catchlines were also supplied by the editor. 

Sec. 2-3-21. - Created. 
As provided in Chapter 10 of Title 15 of the O.C.G.A., relating to magistrate courts, there shall be a magistrate court of Henry County. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, P. 3849, Act No. 880, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-22. - Election and qualifications of officers. 
The election and qualifications of the officers of the magistrate court shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of Title 15 of the O.C.G.A., relating to magistrate courts. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, P. 3849, Act No. 880, § 2) 
Sec. 2-3-23. - Practice, procedure and jurisdiction. 
All practice, procedure, and jurisdiction in the magistrate court shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of Title 15 of the O.C.G.A., relating to magistrate courts, and the uniform rules set forth for such courts. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, P. 3849, Act No. 880, § 3) 
Sec. 2-3-24. - Salary of chief magistrate. 
(a)  The chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Henry County shall receive a base annual salary of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00), to be payable in monthly installments from the funds of Henry County. 
(b)  Whenever the employees in the classified service of the state merit system receive a cost-of-living increase of a certain percentage or a certain amount, the annual salary of the chief magistrate serving in office at the time of such increase shall be increased by the same percentage or same amount applicable to such state employees. If the cost-of-living increase received by state employees is in different percentages or different amounts as to certain categories of employees, the annual salary shall be increased by an average percentage or average amount of the general increase in salary granted to the state employees. The county governing authority shall use the average percentage increase or average amount increase as calculated by the office of planning and budget. The periodic changes in the annual salary of the chief magistrate as authorized by this subsection shall become effective six (6) months following the date that the cost-of-living increase received by state employees becomes effective. 
(c)  The amounts provided in either subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be increased by five (5) percent for each four-year term of office served by the chief magistrate, computed at the end of each such period of service. The increase shall not have retroactive effect, except that the term of the chief magistrate in office on July 1, 1991, shall be counted for determining the appropriate salary under this subsection. 
(d)  The base annual salary provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be applicable to any person who takes office as chief magistrate for the first time or after a break in previous service as chief magistrate. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, P. 3849, Act No. 880, § 4; Ga. Laws 1991, P. 4413, Act No. 186, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-25. - Effective date. 
This act [article] shall become effective on the first day of the month following the month in which it is approved by the governor or in which it becomes law without such approval. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, P. 3849, Act No. 880, § 5) 
Editor's note— Act No. 880 was approved by the governor on March 10, 1988. 
Sec. 2-3-26. - Conflicting laws repealed. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act [article] are repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, P. 3849, Act No. 880, § 6) 
Chapter 2-4 - LICENSES AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendments relating to licenses, taxation and business regulations, Ch. 1-4; tax for support of water and sewer systems authorized, § 1-5-2; tax commissioner, § 2-2-81; ordinances relating to licenses and taxation generally, Ch. 3-3; excise tax on malt beverages and wine, § 3-14-17; licensing of malt beverages and wine, § 3-14-46 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-4-1—2-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX ON MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME RENTAL SITES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Unless indicated otherwise, the catchlines for the legislation compiled in this article have been supplied by the editor. 
Cross reference— Authority of general assembly to authorize tax on mobile homes, rental sites and units, § 1-4-6; mobile home location permit requirements, § 3-9-156 et seq. 

Sec. 2-4-16. - Authorized. 
The board of commissioners of Henry County is hereby authorized to levy and collect a tax on all mobile home rental units and mobile home rental sites located within Henry County. The board shall fix the rate of such tax in an amount not to exceed two (2) percent of the total amount annually collected as rent for such units and sites. Such taxes shall be due and payable on or before December 20 of each year in the same manner as ad valorem taxes. All taxes remaining unpaid on December 20 of each year shall bear interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum from said date and the tax commissioner shall issue executions therefor against each delinquent taxpayer. 
(Ga. Laws 1971, P. 4127, Act No. 813, § 1) 
Editor's note— A 1976 amendment to Art. VII, § 1 of the Georgia Constitution repealed Ga. Code Ann. § 23-2307, which was similar to the above act. See also OCGA § 48-6-20 et seq. 
Sec. 2-4-17. - Conflicting laws repealed. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act [article] are hereby repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1971, P. 4127, Act No. 813, § 2) 
Secs. 2-4-18—2-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Unless indicated otherwise, the catchlines for the legislation compiled in this article have been supplied by the editor. 
Cross reference— Authority of general assembly to authorize county to levy license tax or regulatory fees, § 1-4-4; business licenses generally, § 3-3-21 et seq. 

Sec. 2-4-26. - Authorized. 
The board of commissioners of Henry County shall have the power to levy, assess, and collect a license fee from any person, firm, or corporation, except those subject to regulation by the Georgia Public Service Commission, who may maintain a place of business or who may in any manner engage in any type of business in any area of Henry County outside the incorporated limits of municipalities located therein. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3853, Act No. 1377, § 1) 
Sec. 2-4-27. - Violation of business regulations. 
A violation of any regulation adopted by the board of commissioners of Henry County pursuant to authority of an amendment to Article XI, Section I, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of 1945, authorizing the board of commissioners to regulate certain business activities within Henry County, shall constitute a misdemeanor which shall be punishable as prescribed by the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3853, Act No. 1377, § IA; Ga. Laws 1977, P. 4485, Act No. 714, § 1) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 1-4-4. 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors, OCGA §§ 17-10-3, 17-10-4. 
Sec. 2-4-28. - Conflicting laws repealed. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act [article] are hereby repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, P. 3853, Act No. 1377, § 2) 
Sec. 2-4-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES 

Sec. 2-4-30. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the business and occupation tax ordinance of Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95) 
Sec. 2-4-31. - Authorization. 
This article is enacted pursuant to authority of Chapter 13 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated relating to specific business and occupation taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95) 
Sec. 2-4-32. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms, "administrative fee," "gross receipts," "location or office," "occupation tax," "practitioners of professions and occupations," and "regulatory fees" shall have the meanings provided by OCGA Section 48-13-5. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 96-01, § 4, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-4-33. - Business and occupation tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and assessed a business and occupation tax on all businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of Henry County. Each such location or office shall be subject to separate taxation. The businesses and practitioners excluded from taxation by OCGA Section 48-13-16 shall not be subject to the tax levied herein. 
(b)  There is hereby levied and assessed a business and occupation tax on all businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in this state, but which have one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated part of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients, or which own personal or real property in the unincorporated part of the county which generates income. 
(c)  There is hereby levied and assessed a business and occupation tax on all real estate brokers transacting business within the unincorporated portions of Henry County, which tax shall be calculated as provided in OCGA Section 48-13-17 and subsections (a) and (c) of section 2-4-34 of this article. 
(d)  The amount of the tax imposed hereby shall be as provided by the schedule contained in Henry County Code section 2-4-34. Taxes shall be levied, assessed, and collected annually. 
(e)  Payment of the tax and fee imposed hereby shall be a condition precedent to the conduct of any business, profession, or occupation in the unincorporated part of Henry County by any person, firm, or corporation subject to the tax and fee. The receipt for payment of the tax and fee shall constitute a license to conduct the business, profession, or occupation subject to the tax and fee and shall be displayed in a prominent location, unless the taxpayer pays the tax pursuant to subsection (b) of this Code section, in which event the same shall be displayed upon demand by any county employee authorized to enforce this article. 
(f)  This article shall not be construed to violate OCGA Section 48-13-13. All business and occupation taxes levied and assessed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be levied and assessed consistently with OCGA 48-13-13. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 96-01, §§ 5—7, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-4-34. - Calculation of occupation taxes; tax returns; confidentiality. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this Code section, the occupation tax provided by this article shall be calculated based upon minimum and maximum flat fees and a formula utilizing gross receipts and profitability ratios. The gross receipts of each business or occupation subject to taxation shall be determined based upon a return filed by each taxpayer, as hereinafter provided. Profitability ratios shall be determined by reference to the dominant line of business or service of the business or occupation and the standard industrial classification code for that business or occupation as published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. The tax due from each business or occupation subject to taxation between the minimum and maximum flat fees shall be calculated by multiplying the business or occupation's gross receipts by the factors indicated in the following table, by profitability class. The minimum and maximum fees are also indicated on the table: 

 
(b)  Practitioners of professions and occupations listed in paragraphs (1) through (18) of subsection (c) of OCGA Section 48-13-9 shall elect as their entire occupation tax either the occupation tax resulting from the calculation derived according to subsection (a) of this section or a flat fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(c)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to a business and occupation tax according to the criteria specified in OCGA Section 48-13-17 and subsection (a) of this Code section. 
(d)  Gross receipts data to be utilized in calculating the tax due from each business or occupation shall be submitted to the county department charged with the duty of collecting the tax on a form to be provided by the county. Said gross receipts data shall be submitted on or before January 31 in each year beginning with 1997. In 1996, the information shall be submitted no later than March 1. All such information shall be submitted under oath. 
(e)  All occupation taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be calculated based on the gross receipts of the business for the calendar year for which the tax is levied. However, for the convenience of the county and the taxpayer, each business or occupation subject to the tax shall, on or before the dates indicated in the preceding subsection (d), provide the county with the required information concerning gross receipts during the preceding calendar year. This information shall be utilized to calculate the estimated tax due from each business or occupation for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied shall be paid in accordance with the gross receipts data submitted for the succeeding calendar year. If the amount of estimated tax paid is less than the actual amount due based upon the actual gross receipts of the business for the tax year, then the difference shall be due and payable by the taxpayer on or before the deadline for payment of taxes in the succeeding year. If the estimated amount paid for a tax year exceeds the amount due based upon the actual gross receipts of the business for the tax year, then the difference shall be refunded by the county or, if the business or occupation continues to be conducted during the succeeding tax year, the overpayment for the previous year will be credited by the county against the estimated tax due for the succeeding tax year. 
(f)  Information provided to the county by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner of a profession shall be confidential and exempt from inspection or disclosure, except that the same may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(g)  If a business or a practitioner of a profession has more than one (1) location or office subject to taxation pursuant to this article, then the gross receipts of the business shall be allocated as follows: 
(1)  Where the dollar amount of the gross receipts of the business or practitioner can be allocated to one (1) or more of the locations or offices on the basis of product manufactured in that location or office or service provided for compensation in that location or office, the gross receipts generated by each location or office shall be separately taxed; 
(2)  Where the dollar amount of gross receipts cannot reasonably be allocated among multiple locations or offices, the total gross receipts shall be divided by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner, and an equal percentage of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner shall be allocated to each location or office; 
(3)  In no instance shall the sum of the portions of the total gross receipts of a business or practitioner exceed one hundred (100) percent of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 96-01, § 1, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-4-35. - Requirements for issuance. 
(a)  Administrative fee. Each person, firm or corporation paying an occupation tax pursuant to this article shall also pay an administrative fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) per year to defray the cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(b)  Additional requirements for issuance. Except as limited by other provisions of this chapter, upon application for a license, the tax commissioner shall issue the same if the applicant has paid all occupation, specific or ad valorem taxes due the county by the applicant in the previous year. If the business to be licensed is a privileged one, the application shall reflect compliance with the regulations applicable thereto. If the application is not in order or any of the requirements of this chapter have not been met, the tax commissioner shall not issue a license to the applicant therefor. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a license may, upon written appeal filed with the board of commissioners of the county within ten (10) days, have such denial reviewed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 18-05, § 1, 9-5-18 ) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 07-02, adopted Feb. 6, 2007, amended § 2-4-35 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-4-35 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-03, adopted May 1, 1995. 
Sec. 2-4-36. - Collection of taxes and fees. 
The taxes and administrative fees levied and assessed pursuant to this article shall be collected by the Henry County Department of Buildings Inspections and Licenses. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 96-01, § 2, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-4-37. - Deadline for payment of tax and administration fee. 
The business and occupation taxes and administrative fees authorized by this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1, and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1. In the event any person, firm, or corporation commences business after January 1 in any year, the tax and fee for that year shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business, and shall be delinquent if not paid within ninety (90) days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 96-01, § 3, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-4-38. - Persons commencing business after January 1. 
When any person, firm, or corporation commences business after January 1 in any year, the business or occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be calculated at the rate provided by section 2-4-34 of this article from the date of commencement of the business; however, the administrative fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not be reduced. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 96-01, § 8, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-4-39. - Penalties. 
(a)  Should any business or occupation tax or administrative fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for ninety (90) days from the due date of the tax or fee, the person, firm or corporation liable for the tax or fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due. Taxes and fees which remain unpaid for twelve (12) months from the due date of the tax or fee shall be subject to interest charges of one and one-half (1½) percent per month for each month or portion thereof in which the same remain unpaid after the twelfth month of delinquency. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies provided by law for the collection of the occupation tax and administrative fee provided by this article, the officer charged with the collection of the tax or fee shall be authorized to issue executions against delinquent taxpayers for the amount of the taxes or fees due. 
(c)  If a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon an execution issued by the officer charged with the collection of the tax or fee against any person, firm, or corporation defaulting on its obligation to pay the tax and fee imposed hereby, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona, and the business license issued to said person, firm or corporation shall be subject to revocation after due notice and a hearing before the board of commissioners of Henry County. If, at any time after the entry of a nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax and administrative fee in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the taxpayer may collect any fees and charges due as though there had never been any default in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Lien for delinquent tax. In addition to the other remedies provided for in this article the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the tax commissioner, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax, which such execution shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent and the lien shall cover the property of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax, all as provided by ordinances of the county and state law. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the county marshal upon the property of defendant located in such jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances of the county and the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the tax commissioner against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of the nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 2-6-07) 
Sec. 2-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOBILE HOME TAX 

Sec. 2-4-41. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Dealer shall mean any person who is engaged in the business of selling mobile homes wholesale or retail and who holds a valid current dealer's identification number issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
Mobile home shall mean a manufactured home or relocatable home as defined in Part 2 of Article 2 of Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 5-5-98) 
Sec. 2-4-42. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to mobile home dealers. 
(b)  Any mobile home which qualifies the taxpayer for a homestead exemption under the laws of this state shall not be subject to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 5-5-98) 
Sec. 2-4-43. - Issuance of permits and decals. 
Each year, the tax commissioner shall issue mobile home location permits pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Revenue to the owners of mobile homes subject to ad valorem taxation under Article 10 of Chapter 5 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and shall issue a decal as proof of payment of said taxes. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 5-5-98) 
Sec. 2-4-44. - Placement of decals. 
All mobile homes subject to taxation shall display the decal issued by the tax commissioner in the front or rear window thereof, whichever is nearest to the roadway. If no such window exists, or if the front or rear of the mobile home does not face the roadway, then the decal shall be displayed in the window nearest to the door facing the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 5-5-98) 
Sec. 2-4-45. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Henry County Code Enforcement Department is hereby appointed the authorized agent of the county to issue citations for failure to display decals as required by this article. 
(b)  Citations shall be issued by the Henry County Code Enforcement Department upon receipt of a list compiled by the appraisal staff of the board of tax assessors, which identifies the mobile homes failing to display decals as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 5-5-98) 
Sec. 2-4-46. - Penalties. 
(a)  Every owner of a mobile home in the county on January 1 who fails to pay the taxes and display the decal as required by this article by May 1 shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Upon conviction thereof, the owner shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), except that upon receipt of proof of purchase of a decal prior to the date of the issuance of a summons, the fine shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  Any owner who locates, or permits or be located, a mobile home in the county after January 1 and who fails to secure, attach and display thereon a decal as required by this article within thirty (30) days shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Upon conviction thereof, the owner shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), except that upon receipt of proof of purchase of a decal prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period within which to obtain same, the fine shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 5-5-98) 
Chapter 2-10 - WATER AND SEWERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-10-1—2-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Unless indicated otherwise, the catchlines for the legislation compiled in this article have been supplied by the editor. 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendments relating to water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 1-5; board of commissioners to audit water and sewerage authority, § 2-2-33; ordinances relating to water, sewers and sewage disposal, § 3-5-201 et seq. 

Sec. 2-10-16. - Definition. 
The term "county governing authority" [as] used in this act [article] shall be construed to mean the regularly elected commissioner or commissioners of roads and revenues of said county. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2589, Act No. 211, § 11) 
Editor's note— The phrase "commissioner of roads and revenues of said county" shall now be "commissioner of said county." See Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-5-20. 
Sec. 2-10-17. - Ownership of systems and interpretation. 
Any water or sewerage systems that may be constructed under the provisions of this act [article] shall be construed to be property of Henry County, and nothing in this act [article] shall be construed to limit the said County of Henry in issuing bonds, revenue certificates or any other means of financing as are now or hereafter recognized by law for the development of such water or sewerage facilities. The powers and rights conferred by this act [article] shall be cumulative to the powers and rights that now exist. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 10) 
Sec. 2-10-18. - County authorized to operate, build, etc. waterworks system. 
That the County of Henry shall have the right, power and authority to operate, build and maintain a waterworks system, together with the right to acquire lands, construct waterworks facilities, including projects embracing sources of water supply and related facilities; to sell water and its related facilities to individuals, private concerns, governmental agencies and municipalities and counties of this State and to further authorize the said County of Henry to accept franchises for that purpose granted by other municipalities and by counties of this State to said County of Henry. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 311, § 1) 
Sec. 2-10-19. - County authorized to lay mains, etc.; financing generally. 
The powers granted by this act [article] shall authorize the County of Henry to lay or construct water mains and water distribution systems both within and without the limits of said county, and to issue water revenue-anticipation certificates for such purposes as may be authorized by law. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 2) 
Sec. 2-10-20. - County authorized to regulate its water system. 
The said County of Henry shall have the right, power and authority to exercise police powers over the entire water system and shall have the right and authority to make rules and regulations governing the construction, operation, and maintenance, extension and connections with any water main within or without the limits of said county and shall have the right and authority to require all users of water who connect with the water mains to install proper meters and make connections in accordance with the rules and regulations provided therefor and shall have the right and authority to refuse to sell or furnish water to any person, firm, county, corporation or municipality who fails or refuses to comply with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated for the operation of said water system. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring the county to furnish water to any consumer if in the discretion of said county it is not deemed feasible or desirable to do so. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 3) 
Sec. 2-10-21. - Water and Sewerage Authority generally. 
(a)  The water system is to be constructed, maintained, and operated for and on behalf of said county by the "Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority." 
(b)  The authority shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the board of commissioners of Henry County. One member shall be appointed from each commissioner district in Henry County. The first members of the authority appointed under this section shall be appointed at the first meeting of the board of commissioners held in January, 1983. The five (5) members so appointed shall serve for terms of office of two (2) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be appointed by the board of commissioners every two (2) years at the first meeting of the board held in January. Successors shall be appointed for terms of office of two (2) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The members of the authority who are in office on May 1, 1982, shall continue to serve until December 31, 1982, and until their successors are appointed and qualified as hereinabove provided. 
(c)  At the first meeting of the authority in January each year, the members of the authority shall organize and select a chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary. All officers of the authority shall be members of the authority. The authority shall report their actions to the board of commissioners of Henry County on or before July 31 of each year for the immediately preceding year. 
(d)  Vacancies for the unexpired term shall be filled by the governing authority of Henry County. 
(e)  Three (3) members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and they shall have the right to meet whenever they shall deem it in the best interest of the authority. Notice of such meeting shall be given each member in writing at least three (3) days before such meeting, and a majority of the authority or the chairman may call such meeting upon giving the required notice. No action shall be taken by the authority unless approved by three (3) members of the authority, and no bonds shall be issued, loans made, applications for grants processed, or any similar transaction entered into unless approved and executed by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County. 
(f)  The officers of the authority shall serve at the pleasure of the authority. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 4; Ga. Laws 1967, P. 3388, Act No. 596, § 1; Ga. Laws 1972, P. 3567, Act No. 1392, § 1; Ga. Laws 1973, P. 3519, Act No. 641, § 1; Ga. Laws 1977, P. 4129, Act No. 606, § 1; G. Laws 1981, P. 4011, Act No. 364, § 1; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4080, Act No. 995, § 1; Ga. Laws 1985, P. 3934, Act No. 152, § 1) 
Sec. 2-10-22. - Compensation of members of authority. 
The members of the authority shall receive forty dollars ($40.00) for each regular or called meeting they actually attend as compensation for their services, not to exceed thirty-six (36) meetings during any one calendar year. In addition thereto, members of the authority shall be reimbursed, upon approval by the authority in each instance, for actual expenses incurred on the official business of the authority. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 4A; Ga. Laws 1977, P. 4129, Act No. 606, § 2) 
Sec. 2-10-23. - General powers of authority. 
Said board shall have general supervision and control over the entire water system or systems that may be constructed and placed in operation for said county, together with the right to expand or curtail such operations as it may deem advisable. The board shall regulate and provide for the use of its water, fix the time, place and rates for such usage, and in default may cause such services to be discontinued until all arrears are fully paid, and may issue executions for any amount that may be past due and the secretary or clerk of said board is hereby authorized and empowered to issue execution therefor, which may be levied and collected as other executions. The board shall have power to construct, alter, expand and maintain such water system with the funds made available to it by the county governing authority by the issuance and sale of bonds, or revenue-anticipation certificates issued by said county, and by funds arising from the operation of said water system. The authority shall have the right to join with the county in the issuance of revenue-anticipation certificates and pledge the revenues of the authority to the payment of any such certificates so issued. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 5) 
Sec. 2-10-24. - Authority's duty re: finances. 
The board is hereby charged with the duty of collection for all services rendered by said water system of said county and is hereby required to keep money so collected in a bank or banks as may be required by the county governing authority. Any person handling any of such funds shall be required to give a surety bond in such amount as may be required by said board and approved by the county governing authority. The board at all times shall maintain a schedule of fees, rates and tolls for the services of said water system as shall be sufficient to retire any revenue certificates, or other indebtedness incurred in the construction, maintenance, operation, and expansion of said water system, and to provide for any reserves and funds required to be maintained by the county in connection with the issuance of any such revenue certificates, together with sufficient amounts to pay the current operating costs of such water system. Any funds accumulated in excess of those required for the above purposes and not needed in the operation, maintenance, and expansion of such system, shall be transferred to the county governing authority to retire any general obligation water bonds that may be outstanding and any excess over the payments that may be due on such bonds shall be used by said county for any legal purposes for which taxes may be levied or expanded. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 6) 
Sec. 2-10-25. - Employees; reports. 
The authority shall have the power to employ and discharge its employees at its pleasure; however, the authority shall adopt as a guideline the personnel policies of equal employment opportunity and affirmative action presently used by the governing authority of Henry County. The authority shall make quarterly reports to the county governing authority of all money it has received and expenditures made in the operation of said water system. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 7; Ga. Laws 1982, P. 4080, Act No. 995, § 2) 
Sec. 2-10-26. - Sewerage system. 
The said Henry County Water [and Sewerage] Authority is hereby authorized to construct a county sewerage system in said county, and all rights conferred to said board to construct, operate, and maintain a water system for said county and to join with the county in the issuance of revenue-anticipation certificates for that purpose, shall likewise apply to the construction operation and maintenance of a sewerage system for said county. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 9) 
Editor's note— The Henry County Water Authority has been renamed the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority. See § 2-10-21 of this part. 
Sec. 2-10-27. - Severability. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that if any section, portion, provision, sentence, paragraph, or part of this act [article] shall be held invalid, the whole of this act [article] shall not become void, but only so much of the same as may be declared void. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 12) 
Sec. 2-10-28. - Conflicting laws repealed. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that all laws or parts of laws in conflict with this act [article], be and the same are hereby repealed. 
(Ga. Laws 1961, P. 2588, Act No. 211, § 13) 
PART III - COUNTY ORDINANCES 
Chapter 3-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments, embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated, the "Code of Henry County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
This entire compilation consisting of Parts I, II and III, and appendices, shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Henry County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 3-1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to all ordinances and resolutions of the board of commissioners unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-1. 
All. The word "all" means every one, or the whole number of particulars. 
Adequate. The word "adequate" means equal to what is required, suitable to the case or occasion, fully sufficient, proportionate, satisfactory. 
Aforesaid. The word "aforesaid" usually means next before, unless the context requires a different signification. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Also. The word "also" means "in like manner," "likewise," "in addition," "besides," "as well," "further," "too." 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
At. The term "at" may mean "in," "near," "within," or "about." Its primary idea is nearness, and it is less definite than "in" or "on." 
Board of commissioners. The words "board of commissioners" shall mean the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "code" means the Code of Henry County, Georgia, as designated in section 3-1-1 above. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in the state law, enumerating public and legal holidays, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty; however, when said following day shall be a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-1. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Henry County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Following. The word "following" usually means next after, unless the context requires a different signification. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference— Gender, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-1. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons, or officers, may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-1. 
May. The word "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference— Definition of "may", Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Must. The word "must" is mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number shall include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-1. 
Oath. An "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference— Definition of "person", Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Preceding. The word "preceding" usually means next before, unless the context requires a different signification. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. A "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense of words, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-1. 
Until a certain day. The term "until a certain day" includes all of such day. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
Whereas. The term "whereas" means "considering that." 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 3-1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 3-1-4. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time, take effect immediately after their passage, or as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 3-1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinances or resolutions in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance or resolution repealed. 
Sec. 3-1-6. - Amendments; effect of new ordinances and resolutions; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances and resolutions passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances and resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances and resolutions as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances and resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted anew by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Henry County Code, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Henry County Code, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 3-1-7. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 3-1-8. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified within a particular chapter of the Code of Henry County, Georgia, any person violating any of the provisions of the ordinances of Henry County, Georgia shall, upon conviction or plea of guilty thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both, such fine and imprisonment as the facts of the case may justify. 
(b)  Each such violation committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Each day any violation of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in section or elsewhere in this Code, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the county as provided by law or ordinance. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 85-08, 5-21-85) 
Cross reference— Penalty for violation of business regulations, §§ 1-4-4, 2-4-26, nuisances generally, Ch. 3-16. 
Chapter 3-2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— County health care advisory officer, § 3-12-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-2-1. - Organizational chart. 
The county government is organized as shown on chart in section 3-2-71 of this Code. 
Sec. 3-2-2. - Insurance for county vehicles. 
All vehicles owned and operated by the county shall be insured with coverage of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person for bodily injury with an aggregate limit of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. 
(Res. of 3-17-77) 
Sec. 3-2-3. - Payments for burial of indigents. 
[The] board of commissioners shall pay the amount it determines for burial of indigent persons; such amount shall be no less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
( Ord. No. 15-03, 4-21-15 ) 
Sec. 3-2-4. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  No company shall sell any supplies, equipment, goods, or any type of personal property in which a board member, commission member, or authority board member has any financial interest to the county. 
(b)  A board member may sell goods or products to another county board, or authority where they do not sit as a member. 
(c)  No board member, commission member, authority member, or employee shall give gifts, entertainment or any other personal favor to, any corporation, entity or organization with whom or with which Henry County may have or is likely to have business dealings. 
(d)  Except as provided for herein, no board member, commission member, authority member or employee may accept any noncash personal gift over fifty dollars ($50.00) in value from any person, private firm or corporation. In no case shall any board member, commission member, authority member or employee accept any cash gift or payment of any kind. Members of the board of commissioners may accept complimentary tickets or admission to events, meetings, seminars or other gatherings where such attendance could serve the county by providing access to local, state or federal business, civic or government leaders. 
(e)  Each board or authority member and any person employed in any capacity by each board or authority is required to disclose any outside activities, interest or investments that conflict, or suggest potential conflict, with the best interest of Henry County. 
(f)  No board or authority member and any person employed in any capacity by each board or authority shall participate in any decision-making process relative to the business of Henry County where that board member has the potential to gain some personal profit from the decision to be made, or because of some personal interest in the matter before the board which the board member may be prevented from, or may appear to have been prevented from, making an unbiased decision with respect to the matter. 
(g)  In any decision-making process of the county board of commissioners, or any of its authorities or commissions, immediately upon a potential conflict of interest of a board member becoming apparent to that board member, the board member shall immediately inform the board of the potential conflict and shall immediately terminate all involvement and input into the relevant decision-making process regarding the conflict of interest matter. 
(h)  If any board member, authority member or any person employed in any capacity by each board or authority violates the provisions of this section, all relevant information shall be turned over to the appropriate authorities by the board of commissioners for investigation and possible prosecution. 
(i)  The county board of commissioners shall require that all board and authority members, present and future, shall, in writing, agree to uphold the policies herein set out. 
(Ord. No. 85-04, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 04-10, § 1, 10-5-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No 85-04, enacted Apr. 16, 1985, did not specifically amend this Code, hence, codification of the substantive provisions of such ordinance as § 3-2-4 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-2-5. - Code of ethics. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(a)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by county officials; 
(b)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the county; 
(c)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the county; and 
(d)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(2)  Scope. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed county officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Georgia Constitution shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This section shall be interpreted to supplement and not replace or be in conflict with applicable provisions of state law and the Georgia Constitution. 
(3)  Definitions. Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
(a)  County official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include county employees, but does mean county commissioners, persons appointed by the board of commissioners to county authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the county or other county board, authority or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the board, authority or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(c)  Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the county. 
(d)  Gift means the transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of form, without adequate and lawful consideration. "Gift" shall not include a benefit received or given on terms available to the general public. All gifts of property, money or services given to the county must be accepted by resolution of the board of commissioners. "Gift" shall not include: 
1.  Any nonpecuniary gift, ticket, or other thing of value, the value of which is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less; 
2.  An award, plaque, certificate, memento or similar item publicly presented in recognition of the official's charitable, political, professional or public service; 
3.  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of the official's personal business by an institution authorized by law to engage in the making of such a loan; 
4.  Food, beverages and registration at group events to which all similarly situated public officials are invited; 
5.  Any ticket or other pass of admission to any recreational, musical, theatrical, or sporting event for less than the face value of such ticket or pass of admission, for an entertainment or athletic event at which the official or employee is performing an official duty, which means, for purposes of this subsection, any appearance, meeting, discussion, greeting, or introduction, the substantial purpose of which is related to the performance of an official act or action; 
6.  Complimentary tickets or admission to events, meals, meetings or seminars or other gatherings where such attendance could serve the county by providing access to local, state or federal business, civic or government leaders; 
7.  Legitimate salary, benefits, commissions or expenses associated with an official's nonpublic business; 
8.  The solicitation, acceptance or receipt of regulated political campaign contributions. 
(e)  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, son or daughter of any county official related by blood, adoption or marriage. 
(f)  Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
(g)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a county official or employee, that would be affected in the same way as the public generally or employees generally. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general county fees, county utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
(h)  Substantial interest means any financial interest or personal interest or any other direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit held by or accruing to a public official as a result of a contract, employment relationship, or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county. The term does not include any remote or incidental interest. For purposes of this code of ethics, the term "financial interest" means any interest which shall, directly or indirectly, yield a monetary or other material benefit to the official, or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or to the immediate family member of the official. 
An official shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in matters and transactions involving: 
1.  Any person in his or her immediate family who will or may receive a direct benefit not commonly shared by others who are similarly situated; 
2.  Any person with whom a contractual relationship (either written or implied) exists, whereby the official may receive any payment or other benefit, including any agreement for employment; 
3.  Any entity in which the official or member of the official's immediate family member is a director, officer or substantial shareholder; 
4.  Any transaction in which the official or the official's immediate family member is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the person or entity seeking action or approval from the county or applicable board in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(4)  Prohibitions. 
(a)  No county official shall use his or her official position to secure special privileges, special considerations or exemptions for himself or herself, immediate family members, or those with whom he/she has a substantial interest, for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the county. 
(b)  No county official shall disclose or use, except as required by law, confidential information acquired by virtue of his or her position with the county for personal gain or for another person's private gain, in order to advance private, financial interests where such disclosure is not generally available to the public and would otherwise conflict with the best interests of the county. 
(c)  No county official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the county or other county body against the interests of the county; provided that nothing herein shall be interpreted as prohibiting a county official from advocating a position or pursuing a course of action on behalf of constituents or a public interest in the normal course of his/her public office. 
(d)  No county official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding in exchange for the performance of the duties of his or her office except as may be provided by law. This provision shall not apply to campaign contributions as regulated and allowed by state and federal law. 
(e)  No county official shall use public funds for personal economic gain. All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people. 
(f)  No county official shall use or direct the use of county facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private, personal purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public at large or otherwise allowed by approved policy or procedure. 
(g)  No county official shall use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(h)  No county official shall advocate for or cause, directly or indirectly, the hiring, advancement, promotion, or transfer of a member of his or her immediate family to any office or position with the county or a county agency. 
(i)  No county official shall appoint or recommend the appointment of a member of his or her immediate family to any county board, commission, or authority. 
(5)  Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A county official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting the official personally, an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. In such cases, the county official must: 
1.  Immediately publicly disclose the fact and nature of the interest on the record; and 
2.  Refrain from any discussion or vote concerning such matter or otherwise attempting to influence the vote, discussion or decision of the county regarding such matter. 
3.  If a question arises concerning a conflict of interest during any public session, the county attorney shall be consulted and in the absence of the county attorney, the chairman shall be consulted. 
4.  The county clerk shall maintain a separate record of all such recusals made pursuant to this provision. 
(b)  A county official shall avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest. An appearance of a conflict of interest exists when a reasonable person would conclude from the surrounding circumstances that the ability of the official to protect the public interest or impartially perform a public duty is compromised by financial or personal interests in the matter or transaction not generally shared by the public at large. The appearance of a conflict of interest can exist even in the absence of an actual conflict of interest. In such cases, the county official shall have the same public disclosure and recusal requirements as required in subparagraphs (a)1. and 2. above. 
(c)  Where the interest of a county official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the county official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. It is recognized that unnecessary recusals or abstentions from matters in which there does not exist an actual or reasonable appearance of a conflict of interest are contrary to the duties and functions of public office. 
(6)  Public contracts. The county shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with an official or with a person or business in which the official has a substantial interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(a)  Contracts for goods or services with a business that employs an official or employee, or family member of an official or employee, where: 
1.  The contract is competitively procured; and 
2.  The official does not participate in any aspect of the procurement or performance of the contract; 
(b)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for county funds; 
(c)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest for such loan; 
(d)  Contracts for services entered into with a business which is the only available source for such goods or services; and 
(e)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation, provided that a record explaining the emergency is prepared by the county manager and submitted to the board at its next regular meeting. 
No official shall participate in any contract involving the county if he or she knows or should know that an interest in the contract is possessed by such official or one (1) or more members of his or her immediate family, or any business (other than a public agency) in which the official or a member of his or her immediate family serves as an officer, director, stockholder, creditor, trustee, partner, or employee. 
(7)  Disclosures. 
(a)  Financial disclosures shall be governed by federal and state law and this code of ethics shall not require any additional reports to be filed other than those required by federal and state law. 
(b)  All disclosures with regard to zoning applications shall be governed by federal and state law. 
(c)  On an annual basis and no later than ninety (90) days following the close of every fiscal year, the board shall cause to be published on the county's official website, a list of all vendors who received payment from the county during the preceding fiscal year. The total amount of such payments shall be included in the publication. 
(8)  Receipt and processing of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints alleging a violation of the provisions of this section may be filed by any public official or any member of the public. Any such complaint shall be filed with the county clerk. All complaints shall be submitted in writing, shall be signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly specify the facts and address matters within the scope of this section. The clerk is authorized to reject any complaint that is not signed under oath. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the county clerk or the clerk's designee shall immediately forward a copy of the complaint to: 
1.  The county attorney; 
2.  The county official(s) charged in the complaint; and 
3.  The remaining members of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form and no later than thirty (30) days thereof, the county attorney shall forward the same to a duly qualified hearing officer for review. The hearing officer shall be authorized to preliminarily determine whether the complaint is facially invalid or unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to state a violation of this section. If such a finding is determined by the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall enter written findings and transmit such findings to the board for final action. Any action taken by the board shall be taken by way of public vote. 
(d)  For complaints that are not dismissed, the hearing officer shall be empowered to hold hearings, collect evidence and information concerning the complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. In any investigation, the complaining party must appear before the hearing officer to provide testimony under oath and provide requested information concerning the allegations in the complaint. Failure of a complainant to cooperate in the investigation in any manner will result in the automatic dismissal of the complaint. 
(e)  All investigations shall be completed within a reasonable period of time. Upon conclusion of the investigation, the hearing officer shall enter written findings and transmit such findings to the board for final action. 
(f)  All hearings referenced herein shall be held within sixty (60) calendar days after filing of the complaint. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with due process and procedures and regulations approved by the board. In all circumstances, at least one (1) hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The county official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven (7) calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The county official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. 
(g)  Failure to comply with any of the time deadlines in this section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board or hearing official to act upon any complaint. 
(h)  Upon receipt of the hearing official's findings, the board shall publicly vote to either: 
1.  Dismiss the complaint for lack of evidence; or 
2.  Take other action as is consistent with subsection (9) of this section and the evidence adduced during the investigation. 
(9)  Penalty. 
(a)  Any public official violating any provision of this section is subject to: 
1.  Public reprimand or censure by the county; or 
2.  Reimbursement or restitution to the county; or 
3.  Referral of the matter to appropriate authorities for investigation and possible prosecution; or 
4.  Any combination of the above. 
(b)  Any complainant found to have filed a frivolous complaint or who has refused to participate in an investigation following the filing of any complaint, which results in the dismissal, shall be subject to: 
1.  Reimbursement or restitution to either the county and/or the public official for attorney's fees and/or expenses for expenses incurred in handling the complaint. 
2.  The county attorney shall be authorized to file suit in the appropriate court in order to enforce any such award. 
(10)  Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any county official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of commissioners may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this subsection. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Henry County within thirty (30) days after the final decision of the board. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas and shall stay the enforcement of any penalty imposed by the board. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 1(1—10), 5-17-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-03, adopted May 17, 2011, enacted new provisions to be designated as § 3-2-4. Inasmuch as there already exists and section with that designation, said provisions have been codified as § 3-2-5 to avoid duplication of numbers. 
Sec. 3-2-6. - 911 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
(1)  Definitions. Unless specified otherwise in this section, all terms shall be defined in the same manner as specified in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-122. 
(2)  9-1-1 Charges on monthly services. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a), there is imposed a monthly 9-1-1 charge upon each telephone service, subscribed to by a telephone subscriber, whose exchange access lines are in the areas served or which could be served by the 9-1-1 service. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(a)(1)(A), the amount of such 9-1-1 charge shall be one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per month per telephone service provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a), there is imposed a monthly wireless enhanced 9-1-1 charge upon each wireless telecommunications connection, other than a connection for prepaid wireless service, subscribed to by a telephone subscriber whose place of primary use is within the geographic area that is served by Henry County, Georgia, or that would be served by Henry County, Georgia, for the purpose of such an emergency 9-1-1 system. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 46-5-134(a)(2)(A), the amount of such enhanced wireless 9-1-1 charge shall be one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per month per wireless telecommunications connection provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(c)  The 9-1-1 charges under this section shall commence January 1, 2019. 
(3)  Collecting and remitting of 9-1-1 charges. All such 9-1-1 charges collected by service suppliers shall be remitted to the Georgia Department of Revenue, as the contracted collection partner of the Georgia Emergency Communications Authority, at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-185, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-186, and any other Georgia Department of Revenue or Georgia Emergency Communications Authority rule or regulation adopted pursuant to Article 12 of Chapter 13 of Title 38 of the O.C.G.A. and Chapter 13 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Administrative Procedures Act". 
(4)  Deposit and use of proceeds. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134, all proceeds received by Henry County from 9-1-1 charges imposed by this resolution shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by the county; kept separate from general revenue of the county; and used exclusively for the statutorily authorized purposes. 
(5)  Resolution filing requirements. The clerk of the county shall file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this resolution within ten (10) days of the adoption thereof. Any subsequent amendment to this resolution shall likewise be so filed by the clerk within ten (10) days of the adoption thereof. 
(6)  Effective date and applicability. This section shall become effective on January 1, 2019. Any prior resolution establishing such 9-1-1 charges shall remain in effect until January 1, 2019. On such date, such 9-1-1 charges shall be governed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-06, §§ 1—4, 8-2-11; Ord. No. 18-03, §§ 1—6, 8-21-18 ; Ord. No. 18-04, §§ 1—6, 8-21-18 ) 
Secs. 3-2-7—3-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Local acts relating to board of commissioners, § 2-2-26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-2-16. - Regular meetings. 
The meeting held on the first Tuesday of the month shall commence at 9:00 a.m., and the meeting held on the third Tuesday of the month shall commence at 6:30 p.m. These meetings shall be held in the county's administration building. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § II, 5-19-03) 
Cross reference— Meetings of board of commissioners § 2-2-26. 
Secs. 3-2-17—3-2-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-06, §§ 1—21, adopted Oct. 21, 2003, pertained to a meetings organization and public access plan for meetings of the board of commissioners. Such ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 2, §§ 3-2-21—3-2-21.20, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-2-21. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.1. - Executive sessions. 
Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of discussing topics exempted from public access requirements by Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Sections 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exemptions shall be open to the public. 
(1)  Non-exempt topics. If a commissioner attempts to discuss a non-exempt topic during an executive session, the chairperson shall immediately rule that commissioner out of order and such discussion shall cease. If the commissioner persists in discussing the non-exempt topic, the chairperson shall adjourn the meeting immediately. 
(2)  Procedure for entering into executive sessions. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session, and the specific reasons for the executive session. All votes taken on items discussed in executive session shall be taken in an open meeting. 
(3)  Executive session minutes. 
a.  Executive sessions discussing real estate acquisition. Minutes of an executive session in which the acquisition of real estate is discussed shall be taken in the same manner as minutes of an open meeting (section 3-2-21.20) and made available for public inspection, except that any portion of the minutes identifying the real estate shall be redacted until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, abandoned or until court proceedings have been initiated. 
b.  Other executive sessions. The county clerk at the direction of the chairman may maintain minutes of executive session items devoted to any topic other than land acquisition. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosure of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(4)  Chairman or presiding officer affidavit. The chairman or other presiding officer shall execute an affidavit stating, under oath, that the executive session was devoted to topics exempt from the public access requirements. The affidavit shall include the specific exemption to the open meetings law. The affidavit shall be notarized and filed with the minutes of the open meeting. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 2, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.2. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 3, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.3. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chairman to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairman if he or she believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner or commissioner's leave and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting shall be postponed until such time as there are sufficient members present to constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not attained within thirty (30) minutes, the chairman with the approval of the commissioners present may reschedule the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 4, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.4. - Chairman. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners, as presiding officer, is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairman shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairman shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chairman may, at his election, either vote or abstain on any matter before the board. If by casting a vote, the chairman could break a tie, then the chairman shall cast a vote. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 5, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.5. - Vice-chairman. 
The board shall select a vice-chairman from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairman shall fulfill the duties of the chairman if the chairman is not in attendance. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 6, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.6. - Presiding officer. 
If the chairman and the vice-chairman are absent or otherwise unable to serve as presiding officer at a meeting and a quorum of commissioners is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as presiding officer of the meeting until either the chairman or vice-chairman is present at the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 7, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.7. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 8, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.8. - Amendments to the rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order shall be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county manager three (3) business days before a regular meeting of the board. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all board members. All amendments require a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board to be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 9, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.9. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board. Rules governing quorums, voting methods and requirements, the notification to commissioners of meetings and rules necessary for compliance with state law may not be suspended; provided, however, that, in the event that a state of emergency is declared by the governor or other authorized state official, the board may waive time-consuming procedures and formalities imposed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 10, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.10. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners are held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month. The first Tuesday's meeting is at 9:00 a.m. and the third Tuesday's meeting is at 6:30 p.m. The meetings are held in the Community Room of the Henry County Administration Building, 140 Henry Parkway, McDonough, or at such other place as directed by the chairman. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 11, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.11. - Meetings other than regular meetings. 
The board may meet at times and locations other than those regularly scheduled meetings. 
(1)  Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county site by the chairman for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the chairman or at the request of at least four (4) commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least twenty-four (24) hours at the regular meeting place. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ, as well as to each member of the county governing authority. 
(2)  Meetings with less than twenty-four hours' notice. When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county governing authority as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(3)  Meetings during a state of emergency. When it is imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to hold board meetings at the regular meeting place due to emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes, as declared by the governor or other authorized state official, the board may meet anywhere within or outside of the county. Such a meeting may be called by the chairman or by any two (2) commissioners. At the meeting, the commissioners shall establish and designate emergency temporary meeting locations where public business may be transacted during the emergency. Any action taken in such meetings shall have the same effect as if performed at the regular meeting site. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 12, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.12. - Agenda. 
The chairman, or his designee, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners as early as is practical before every board meeting. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Changing the agenda. The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. A new item, other than a zoning decision, may be added to the agenda by a majority vote of the board only if it becomes necessary to address the item during the meeting. 
(3)  Agenda must be made public. The agenda of all matters to come before the board shall be made available to the public upon request and shall be posted at the meeting site as far in advance as reasonably possible, but not more than two (2) weeks prior to the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 13, 10-21-03; Ord. No. 17-01, § 6, 1-3-17 ) 
Sec. 3-2-21.13. - Consent agenda. 
A consent agenda may be prepared by the chairman, or his designee, for the board to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval without debate may be placed on a consent agenda. At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairman shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairman shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairman may ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda shall be approved by a majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 14, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.14. - Decorum. 
In addition to the requirements of section 2-2-128 of this Code, each commissioner shall conduct himself or herself during public meetings in accordance with the provisions of this section. All commissioners shall conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner during all commission meetings. All remarks by any commissioner shall be directed to the chairman and not to individual commissioners, staff, or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate and may be ruled out of order. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. The chairman shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he or she may raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairman may rule on the question or may allow the board to debate the issue and decide by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 15, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.15. - Discussion. 
No discussion on any matter shall be engaged in by or permitted among the commissioners unless and until a motion on such matter has been offered and seconded. After a motion has been made and seconded, the chairman shall open the floor to discussion. The commissioner who made the motion shall have the floor to open the discussion. Discussion among the commissioners shall be permitted for a total of eighteen (18) minutes. Each commissioner shall have no more than three (3) minutes to discuss any item properly before the commission. Extended discussion shall be permitted only for exceptionally complex matters upon the approval of the chairman. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 16, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.16. - Voting. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, and subject to the provisions hereof, a majority shall mean at least one-half (½) of the commissioners present plus one (1) commissioner, excluding abstentions. When a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the commissioners present excluding abstentions. In the event the chairman elects to abstain from voting on any matter, a majority is determined without including the chairman in the count of commissioners casting votes; if the chairman elects to cast a vote on any matter, a majority is determined by including the chairman in the count of commissioners casting votes. In the event of a tie vote, the chairman shall vote to break the tie. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 17, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.17. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner, except the chairman, shall vote on all motions unless he or she has a conflict of interest preventing him or her from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his or her decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 18, 10-21-2003) 
Sec. 3-2-21.18. - Public participation. 
Public participation at meetings of the Henry County Board of Commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments. 
a.  Unless otherwise approved by majority vote of the board of commissioners, at each regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia (which meetings are presently conducted on the first and third Tuesday of each month), a time for public comment (the "public comment portion") shall be made available. No public comment portion shall be included at any emergency or special called meeting of the board of commissioners, unless approved by majority vote of the board; 
b.  Each member of the public wishing to address the board shall have a total of five (5) minutes during which he/she may address the board. Such time shall not be extended unless approved by a majority of the board of commissioners. The five-minute time limit shall not be extended by any dialog with or comments by members of the board of commissioners. No member of the public may address the board during the public comment portion more than once during any meeting; 
c.  Prior to the commencement of each meeting during which there will be a public comment portion, members of the public wishing to speak shall sign in with the county clerk and shall provide their name and the topic upon which they wish to speak for introduction by the chair; 
d.  Public comments on matters pending on the board's agenda may be permitted at such time as the matter is called for consideration; 
e.  No member of the public shall be placed on the agenda for purposes of public comment except in accordance with the provisions of this section unless approved by majority vote of the board of commissioners; 
f.  No member of the public shall be permitted to make personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks to any member of the board, staff or general public. Any person who makes such remarks, or who utters loud, threatening, personal or abusive language, or engages in any other disorderly conduct which disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any board meeting shall, at the discretion of the chair or a majority of the council, be barred from further audience before the board during that meeting; 
g.  Public participation on agenda items. By majority vote, the board of commissioners may permit public comment on any item appearing on the agenda. In such event, such public comment regarding such matter shall be heard after such agenda item is called. Such public comment on an agenda item shall be limited to five (5) minutes per speaker with a total of fifteen (15) minutes on any agenda items; 
h.  Public hearings. The board, by majority vote, may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any matter under consideration by the board. In such event, unless extended by majority vote of the board, public comments will be limited to a total of twenty (20) minutes, with ten (10) minutes allocated to those in favor of any particular matter and ten (10) minutes allocated to those in opposition to any particular matter; 
i.  Video displays prohibited. No video displays or multimedia presentations shall be permitted during the public comment portion of any meeting; however, members of the public addressing the board may present documents and photographs to be displayed to or shared with the board; 
j.  Nothing contained in this section shall serve to alter or amend the procedures for public hearings set forth in state law for zoning hearings or other matters required, by state or federal law, to be accompanied by a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 19, 10-21-03; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 1-3-17 ) 
Sec. 3-2-21.19. - Minutes. 
The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the name of the commissioner who proposed each motion, the name of the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. it shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
The board shall approve the minutes before they may be considered as an official record of the board. The minutes shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board. The minutes of any previous meeting shall be reviewed and corrected, if necessary, and approved by the board during a subsequent meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts regarding the content of the minutes shall be decided by a majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairman and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 20, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 3-2-21.20. - Committees. 
The chairman, with the concurrence of the board, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration unless expressly delegated such authority by a majority vote of the commissioners. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places, and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairman with the concurrence of the board. Committee meetings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the requirements of this meeting organization ordinance and state law. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § 21, 10-21-2003) 
Secs. 3-2-22—3-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL AFFAIRS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Financial affairs generally, § 2-2-31 et seq. 

Sec. 3-2-26. - Fiscal year. 
The county's fiscal year shall be from July 1, to June 30. 
(Res. of 7-5-67; Res. No. 84-42, 12-4-84; Res. No. 85-10, 4-2-85) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year of counties Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 36-81-3. 
Secs. 3-2-27—3-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONNEL 

Sec. 3-2-41. - Classification and pay plan. 
For the purpose of governing the administration of the compensation functions of the county, the classification and pay plan, as adopted and amended through the adoption date of this Code, is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. Copies of such plan and all amendments thereto are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 11-4-80, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 3-2-42. - Personnel rules and regulations. 
The employment practices of Henry County shall be set forth in a document known as the Henry County Personnel Manual. The manual shall be maintained by the director of human resources and updated on a regular basis to reflect changes in federal, state or local law. The director of human resources, the county attorney, the county manager, or any member of the administration committee may initiate changes to the personnel manual. Substantive changes shall require the approval of the board of commissioners and shall be adopted by resolution. 
(Ord. of 11-4-80, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 03-07, 11-4-2003) 
Secs. 3-2-43—3-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Development authority, § 2-2-111 et seq.; hospital authority, § 3-12-16; recreation commission, § 3-13-16 et seq.; water and sewerage authority, § 2-10-21. 

Sec. 3-2-56. - Compensation of development authority. 
All members of the county development authority shall be paid forty dollars ($40.00) per month out of funds of the development authority. If the authority's secretary-treasurer is not a member of the authority, he shall be paid forty dollars ($40.00) per month out of funds of the development authority. 
(Ord. of 7-8-80) 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendments relating to development authority, Ch. 1-3; local acts relating to development authority, § 2-2-111 et seq. 
Secs. 3-2-57—3-2-70. - Reserved. 

Organizational Chart for Henry County Government, January 1990 
(Res. No. 85-05, 1-2-85; 1-16-90) 
Chapter 3-3 - LICENSES AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendments relating to licenses, taxation and business regulations, Ch. 1-4; local acts relating to licenses and taxation, Ch. 2-4; excise tax on wine and malt beverages, § 3-14-17; amusements, Ch. 3-15; licensing of malt beverages and wine, § 3-14-46 et seq.; license for private haulers of garbage, etc., § 3-5-136 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-3-1. - Board of tax assessors. 
The board of tax assessors is established as required by statute. Such board shall have the functions provided by statute. 
State Law reference— Board of tax assessors created, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 48-5-290; functions of board, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 48-5-297 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3-2. - Board of equalization. 
The board of equalization is established as required by statute. Such board shall have the functions provided by statute. 
State Law reference— Establishment and functions of board of equalization, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 48-5-311. 
Sec. 3-3-3. - Due date for taxes; interest, etc. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the state, county, county board of education or any other entity or agency created by law which are levied upon tangible property, other than motor vehicles, shall become due and payable in a single tax billing. 
(b)  All taxes due the state or the county shall be due and payable on November 15 in each year. 
(c)  Taxes which are not paid by the due date shall be delinquent; provided however, after notices of taxes due are mailed out, each taxpayer shall be afforded sixty (60) days from date of postmark to make full payment of taxes due before the taxes shall bear interest as provided in this section. 
(d)  The rate of interest and penalty to be charged by the county shall be the rate of interest and penalty specified by general law. All taxes due the state or the county remaining unpaid on November 15, the tax commissioner shall collect the interest on the unpaid taxes. 
(Res. No. 82-22, 5-4-82; Res. No. 83-07, 4-19-83) 
State Law reference— Authority of board of commissioners to so provide, Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 48-5-148—48-5-152. 
Sec. 3-3-3.1. - Tax refunds due to clerical error. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The board of commissioners of Henry County has determined that a need exists, from time to time, to refund ad valorem taxes to property owners when obvious clerical errors have been made. 
(b)  Investigation; determination. It will first be investigated by the chief tax appraiser and then the tax commissioner, and a unanimous joint determination made and signed by both on the appropriate written form that clerical errors have indeed been made in specific cases. 
(c)  Statutory authority. In accordance with state law as found in Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 48-5-380(e), the authorization to refund these monies, including approving or disapproving of claims, may be delegated by the board of commissioners to an appropriate department in local government, and this authority shall be delegated only in undisputed cases of obvious clerical errors. 
(d)  Inapplicability. In disputed cases where there is no obvious error, the approval or disapproval of claims shall not be delegated by the Henry County governing authority. 
(e)  Refund authority delegated; written report. The chief appraiser of Henry County and the Henry County Tax Commissioner are delegated with the hereinabove stated joint authority, provided that said refund not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) from the board of commissioners portion of the refund; and provided further that, each time a refund is made, the board of commissioners shall be notified in writing. 
(Res. No. 85-01, 1-8-85) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 85-01, enacted Jan. 8, 1985, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, designation of the substantive provisions of such resolution as § 3-3-3.1 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-3-4. - Purchase of automobile tags with checks; bad checks. 
(a)  The tax commissioner of the county is authorized to accept checks from the public in payment for automobile tags. 
(b)  The board of commissioners will be responsible for any checks which are returned and are deemed uncollectible. 
(c)  The tax commissioner shall collect all returned checks and shall charge a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for all returned checks which are later collected. The fee charged for returned checks shall be paid into the general fund of the county treasury. 
(d)  All returned checks which are deemed uncollectible by the tax commissioner after having exhausted the legal remedies available shall be paid for by the county out of the county treasury. 
(e)  Upon notice to the board of commissioners that a check is uncollectible, the board of commissioners shall be authorized to issue a notice to the county sheriff and his lawful deputies, and to all sheriffs and lawful deputies of the state, to pick up the tag purchased with the bad check issued and deliver the tag to the tax commissioner. 
(Res. No. 79-1, §§ 1—6, 1-2-79) 
State Law reference— Payment of taxes by check, penalties for bad checks, etc., Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 48-5-146. 
Sec. 3-3-5. - Local option sales tax. 
The local option sales tax is hereby imposed pursuant to Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 48-8-83. 
(Res. of 1-1-80) 
State Law reference— Local option sales tax, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 48-8-81 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3-6. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  In accordance with OCGA Section 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in OCGA Section 48-5-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(b)  The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to subsection (a) shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  Pursuant to OCGA Section 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of OCGA Section 48-6-93. The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this section based upon the information provided in said return. 
(d)  Taxes levied pursuant to this section shall be due no later than thirty (30) days after filing the return prescribed by subsection (c). 
(Res. No. 83-22, §§ 1—4, 10-4-83) 
Sec. 3-3-7. - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance. 
In accordance with OCGA Section 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in OCGA Section 33-3-5(2), (3), (4), and (5). "Gross direct premiums" shall mean gross direct premiums as used in OCGA Section 33-8-3.2(a). 
(Res. No. 83-17, § 1, 9-6-83) 
Secs. 3-3-8—3-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of general assembly to authorize county to levy license tax or regulatory fees, § 1-4-4; local acts relating to business licenses and regulation, § 2-24-26 et seq.; penalty for violations of business regulations, § 2-4-26. 
State Law reference— County occupation taxes, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-3-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate establishments which do business in the county and to protect the general public from unfair and unscrupulous business practices. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § I, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-22. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer, advertise, begin or carry on any of the occupations, uses or businesses mentioned for which a license fee is required in the unincorporated area of the county, without first applying annually to the board of commissioners through the business license department and obtaining a license for carrying on such business, use or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, §§ I, II, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-23. - License fee schedule. 
(a)  Generally. Business license fees shall be as established and published by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Unlisted categories. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in business of any kind, which is not covered in this Code or the schedule of fees established as provided in paragraph (a) above, shall be required to purchase a business license. The fee for such license shall be determined by similar or related business as listed in the schedule of fees. Such fee shall remain in force until such time as the county commissioners may fix or assess the same. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, §§ V, XV, 10-21-81) 
Cross reference— License fees required to be paid prior to issuance of a building permit, § 3-9-3. 
Sec. 3-3-24. - Term, payment and proration. 
All business licenses shall be issued for the calendar year and the required fees shall be paid in full by each person upon the issuance of the license. No pro rata license shall be issued to any person commencing business in the county after July 1 of each year where the business shall be considered as temporary. No license shall be issued at anytime for less than one-half of the annual fee. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § III, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-25. - Penalty for late renewal. 
A penalty of fifty (50) percent of the required license fee is imposed upon any licensee who does not renew his license before February 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § X, 10-21-81; Ord. No. 83-02, § 1, 1-5-83; Ord. No. 87-08, 6-16-87) 
Sec. 3-3-26. - Posting. 
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business of person to whom the license is issued. Upon failure to do so, the board of commissioners may revoke the license. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § VI, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-27. - Transfer. 
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be transferable as to licensee or place of business. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § VIII, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-28. - Exemption for veterans. 
Veterans of the armed forces of the United States may apply for free license; providing, they are drawing a permanent disability pension of one hundred (100) percent and have a certificate of eligibility from the Georgia Department of Veterans Services. This shall be verified by the office of the probate court of the county. Only one free permit shall be issued to each veteran and it shall authorize the operation of only one business. The veteran must be the sole owner of the business for which the permit is issued and meet all prescribed codes and regulations as set forth by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § IV, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-29. - Permit, etc., for exempt businesses. 
A person who is exempt from paying a license fee to the county shall obtain a permit from the county license department. Such a permit shall be issued without charge upon the applicant submitting proper and lawful credentials which show that the applicant is exempt from paying the license fee. Such a person shall comply with all ordinances governing his business or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § XIII, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-30. - Home occupations. 
Any business being operated in a private home and in a residential area, will be known as home occupation. No license shall be prorated for a home occupation. Such a license may be suspended by the business license department when it is proven that the health, welfare or convenience of the residents in the immediate area is adversely affected. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § XIV, 10-21-81) 
Sec. 3-3-31. - Compliance with zoning and other ordinances. 
No license shall be issued if the proposed location of the business to be licensed does not comply with the county's zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances. 
Sec. 3-3-32. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Home occupation licenses. Any business being operated in a private home and in a residential area, will be known as home occupation. No license shall be prorated for a home occupation. Such a license may be suspended by the business license department when it is proven that the health, welfare or convenience of the residents in the immediate area is adversely affected. 
(b)  Suspension authority; causes. The license department is authorized to suspend any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article whenever a person doing business deviates from the normal operation for which the license was purchased, or fails in performance to meet the required regulations and codes set forth by the building inspection, police, fire or health departments, or violates any law or ordinance of the United States, of the state or the county in pursuance of such business conducted under such license, or when it is proven before the license department that there is a violation of the nuisance law. 
(c)  Notice; hearing. The license department shall not suspend a license prior to notice to the license holder and a hearing before the director of the building and inspection department unless the holder of the license is endangering or harming the public through the operation of that business. In the event that a license is suspended under the "harm" to the public [provision] of this section, a hearing shall be held before the director of the building and inspection within three (3) days from the date the license is suspended. All other hearings shall be held within ten (10) days from the date of notice of hearing. 
(d)  Appeals. A licensee may appeal the decision of the director to the board of commissioners within five (5) days of the date of his decision by written notice of appeal filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 81-1021, § VII, 10-21-81; Ord. No. 87-11) 
Sec. 3-3-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 3-3-33, which pertained to special provisions for fortunetellers, astrologers, etc., was repealed by Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, enacted May 1, 1995. The deleted provisions derived from Ord. No. 83-03, § I, enacted Jan. 18, 1983. 
Sec. 3-3-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 3-3-34, which pertained to penalties for violations of this article, was repealed by Ord. No. 85-18, enacted Oct. 15, 1985. The deleted provisions derived from Ord. No. 81-1021, § IX, enacted Oct. 21, 1981. 
Sec. 3-3-35. - Portable eating establishments. 
(a)  Portable eating establishment is defined as any structure which is capable of being relocated in its entirety on wheels with axles or in any other manner and which does not sit on a foundation designed for the establishment as a permanent structure. 
(b)  License conditions. Licenses may be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The licensee shall be a person of good moral character or, in the case of other business entities, the individuals of the business entities who have any ownership interest shall be persons of good moral character. 
(2)  Licenses shall be issued to individual applicants, corporations or other business entities. Ownership interest must be disclosed on the application. Failure to disclose ownership interest at any time during the term of the license shall be cause for revocation. 
(3)  The establishment must be an accessory to an existing business. The establishment shall be allowed only in C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts. 
(4)  The applicant must have written permission from the property owner where the establishment is to be located. 
(5)  The establishment shall be located on a paved surface and shall be located in the front of an existing business or on the side of the existing business and shall be plainly visible to all traffic. The establishment must be placed at least twenty (20) feet from any other structure. 
(6)  The establishment shall be at least ten (10) feet from existing rights-of-way and shall be located so that it will not impede traffic flow or obscure vision of oncoming motorists. The establishment shall provide off-street parking. 
(7)  Electrical service shall be from existing business. 
(8)  No outside storage shall be allowed for the establishment which shall include but not be limited to picnic tables. 
(9)  The establishment must provide health department approval to Henry County officials within ten (10) days from the issuance of a temporary license. The license shall be immediately revoked if health department approval is not received within ten (10) days. 
(10)  Portable signs shall not be allowed in connection with the establishment business. 
(11)  The establishment must be skirted completely to conceal the undercarriage. 
(c)  Fee. The fee for the license shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which shall be paid at the time the application is made and the fee shall be returned if the license is not issued to applicant. 
(Ord. No. 85-18, 10-15-85) 
Secs. 3-3-36—3-3-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 84-01, enacted Jan. 17, 1984, repealed all sections of Ord. No. 81-1021 pertaining to door-to-door sales, soliciting, hucksters, etc., which provisions were formerly codified herein as Art. III, "Peddlers." Ordinance No. 84-01 further enacted, in lieu of the repealed provisions, a new section which is included herein as Art. III, § 3-3-46, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-3-46. - Door to door canvassing and soliciting prohibited; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling on the residences within the unincorporated areas of the county for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, or business of any kind, without first registering with the revenue collection officer and paying the appropriate regulatory fee. Each registrant shall furnish his/her name and permanent address, his/her signature, the name and address of his/her employer, the nature of products sold or displayed, and the proposed method of operation within the county. Each registrant shall be fingerprinted and photographed by an employee of the county. 
(1)  Regulatory fee; identity cards. 
(a)  The revenue collection officer shall collect a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each registration. Upon approval, a registration card will be issued showing the name of the firm or corporation and the name of the representative. Such registration shall be valid for ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. The registration may be renewed during the same calendar year for an additional ninety-day period without another investigation or additional fees. 
(b)  Each registrant shall be issued an identity card bearing his/her name and photograph, the company name, and the expiration date of the registration. Each solicitor must carry such identity card at all times while soliciting or canvassing within the county and shall display such card to each customer and upon appearance at each residence and/or business establishment canvassed or solicited. 
(2)  Hours of operation; other requirements. 
(a)  Soliciting or canvassing on the public streets, areas, or parks of the county shall be conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(b)  Soliciting or canvassing or calling from house to house within the unincorporated areas of the county shall be conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  The number of solicitors or canvassers in the county for any single firm, corporation, or organization shall not exceed ten (10) in number at any one (1) time. 
(d)  Prior to any solicitation of funds within the county, each canvasser or solicitor shall identify the organization which he represents. Additionally, each canvasser or solicitor must inform each person solicited of any minimum payment, deposit, or donation required for the acceptance of any merchandise, wares, goods, or any similar items provided by each canvasser or solicitor prior to such acceptance by each person solicited. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a canvasser or solicitor to perform any of the following acts: 
1.  Falsely represent, either directly or by implication, that funds being solicited are on behalf of any person other than the person registered with the business license division; 
2.  Without the express prior permission of an occupant or property owner, to solicit at any residence, apartment complex, or shopping center, other than areas open to public parking, where a sign has been posted prohibiting such solicitation; 
3.  To remain on private premises after being asked to leave the premises or to continue solicitation after being refused upon the public streets, areas, or parks; such action shall constitute harassment; or 
4.  To solicit or canvass on any private premises upon which is displayed a sign, plaque or other posting declaring" "No Soliciting" or other similar prohibition. 
(3)  Special requirements for religious or charitable soliciting. 
(a)  Any person desiring to solicit or canvass upon the public streets, areas, or parks, or call from house to house within the unincorporated areas of the county for the purpose of raising funds or seeking donations for any religious, charitable, or eleemosynary organization shall register with and obtain a license from the county. Such person shall furnish the following information to the business license division: 
1.  Applicant's name and permanent address; 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of the firm, corporation, or organization represented; 
3.  Names and addresses of all persons canvassing or soliciting within the county; 
4.  The nature of any merchandise or goods to be sold or offered for sale in conjunction with such solicitation; and 
5.  Proof of tax-exempt status shall be required when registering with the business license division. 
a.  The business license division shall collect a fee of one dollar ($1.00) from each organization to cover costs of processing the license. Each organization shall be issued an identity card bearing the name of each individual who shall engage in solicitation or canvassing on behalf of the organization, the organization's name, and the expiration date of the license. Each applicant does not have to be fingerprinted or photographed. 
b.  The license shall be valid for ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. 
(4)  License revocation. Any license issued under this article may be suspended and/or revoked by the board of commissioners, revenue collection officer, business license director, sheriff, due to any violation of any ordinance or resolution of the county, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the license holder shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in this article for the original application. 
(5)  Activity not regulated hereby. This section is not intended to, nor shall it operate to, regulate door-to-door visitation for the following purposes: political canvassing or religious canvassing, provided that such canvassing does not include the soliciting of orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any kind. 
(6)  Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the Henry County Magistrate Court, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by confinement in the common jail of the county for a period of not more than sixty (60) days or by both fine and confinement. 
(b)  Continued violation of the provisions of this article may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction of this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law may exist. Remedies contained in this article are meant to be cumulative in nature. 
(Ord. No. 84-01, § 1, 1-17-84; Ord. No. 87-18, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Secs. 3-3-47—3-3-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— County excise tax on rooms, lodgings or accommodations, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 3-3-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date: From the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room: A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel: Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. The term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period: The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant: Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator: Any person operating a hotel in the county, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident: Any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten (10) consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person: An individual, firm, partnership, joint association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either, upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return: Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax: The tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 1, 2-16-82) 
Sec. 3-3-67. - Scope. 
This article shall apply only to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 1, 2-16-82) 
Sec. 3-3-68. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid to the governing authority a tax of five (5) percent of the rental paid for occupancy of every guest room in a hotel or motel in the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 2, 2-16-82; Ord. No. 92-01, 1-7-92) 
Sec. 3-3-69. - Collection of tax by operator. 
(a)  Every operator maintaining a hotel or motel in the county and renting guest rooms, not exempted under this article, shall collect a tax of five (5) percent of the amount of the rental paid by each occupant. 
(b)  Proceeds of the tax. The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 3, 2-16-82; Ord. No. 92-01, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 07-08, § I, 11-5-07) 
Sec. 3-3-70. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article with respect to occupancy by a permanent resident. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 4, 2-16-82) 
Sec. 3-3-71. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this county shall immediately register with the tax commissioner, on a form provided by the tax commissioner. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of this place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the tax commissioner may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or a partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer thereof. 
(b)  The tax commissioner shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 5, 2-16-82) 
Sec. 3-3-72. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  All amounts of taxes shall be due and payable to the tax commissioner monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the tax commissioner showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by said officer. 
(c)  Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and `Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act", approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. Laws, 1951, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6, 2-16-82) 
State Law reference— Authorized deduction, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 48-8-50. 
Sec. 3-3-73. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the tax commissioner of the county is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the board of commissioners by any person, said officer may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the account due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  There shall be imposed a specific penalty to be added to the amount of the determination of the taxes due in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each ten (10) day period or fraction thereof from the date the taxes were due. 
(c)  The tax commissioner, or his designated representatives, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at the address as it appears in the records of the tax commissioner. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 7, 2-16-82; Ord. No. 93-09, 11-16-93) 
Sec. 3-3-74. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the tax commissioner shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the tax commissioner. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(b)  There shall be imposed a specific penalty to be added to the amount of the determination of the taxes due in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00) whichever is greater, for each ten (10) day period or fraction thereof from the date the taxes were due. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 8, 2-16-82; Ord. No. 93-09, 11-16-93) 
Sec. 3-3-75. - Administration. 
(a)  The county administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Every operator renting guest rooms in this county to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the tax commissioner may require. 
(c)  The tax commissioner, or any person authorized in writing by the tax commissioner, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  In administration of the provisions of this article, the tax commissioner may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the tax commissioner when required by the tax commissioner and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as he may require. 
(e)  Upon a reasonable belief that an operator has made no return or a deficient return, or a determination of deficiency has been made by the tax commissioner, the county administrator, upon notice to the operator, may request a hearing before the board of commissioners of Henry County requiring the operator to show cause why its business license should not be revoked or suspended. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at the address as it appears in the records of the tax commissioner. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. Notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The operator may appear at the hearing personally or through an attorney, may cross examine the county's witnesses, may present evidence or otherwise be heard. The board of commissioners of Henry County may revoke or suspend the operator's business license upon a finding to the preponderance of the evidence that the operator has made a deficient return of the tax, has failed to pay the full amount due, or has failed to make a return. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 9, 2-16-82; Ord. No. 93-09, 11-16-93) 
Sec. 3-3-76. - Collection remedies. 
(a)  At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the tax commissioner may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the board of commissioners to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax commissioner showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  If the purchase[r] of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the board of commissioners under this article, it may be offset by the tax commissioner. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the tax commissioner, he will have three (3) years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the tax commissioner, the excess amount paid by the board of commissioners may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 10, 2-16-82) 
Sec. 3-3-77. - Enforcement by police and citation and summons. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the county police department to enforce the provisions of this article. Upon information constituting probable cause made known to any officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this article that a violation of the same has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the presiding judge of the magistrate's court on a day and time certain to answer the charge contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 12, 2-16-82) 
Sec. 3-3-78. - Violations. 
Any person violating the affirmative or negative provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 13, 2-16-82) 
Cross reference— Penalty for violation of ordinances, § 3-1-8. 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors, official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 17-10-3, 17-10-4. 
Secs. 3-3-79—3-3-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM FRANCHISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— With the consent of the county, the substantive provisions of Ord. No. 85-21, which did not specifically amend this Code, have been included herein as a new Art. V. 
Cross reference— Franchise grants saved from repeal, Adopting Ordinance, § 3(c). 

Sec. 3-3-101. - Application. 
(a)  Before any cable television system does any work in the county for the purpose of operating a cable television system, the owner and/or operators of the cable television system are required to make an application for a franchise for the nonexclusive right to erect, construct, maintain and operate a community antenna television system. The owners and/or operator shall make an application in writing to the licensing department of the county. 
(b)  The franchise may be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The applicant shall pay a six thousand five hundred dollar ($6,500.00) nonrefundable application fee which shall be payable and submitted at the time the application is submitted. 
(2)  The franchisee shall be a person of good moral character. The franchisee shall provide to the county, at the time of the application, the nature of the legal entity of the franchisee, character references, a complete financial disclosure form and financial statement regarding the assets and liabilities of the franchisee entity, a resume of technical skills and knowledge in the field of community antenna television systems and feasibility study of the proposed cable television system including engineer's drawings providing specifications for construction and erection of the system and estimated costs of the system. 
(3)  Franchises may be issued to individual applicants, corporations or other business entities. All ownership interest must be disclosed on the application. Failure to disclose any ownership interest at any time during the term of the franchise shall be cause for revocation. 
(4)  The franchise, if granted, shall be for a period of fifteen (15) years. A renewal option for successive fifteen-year periods shall be included in the franchise agreement; however, the option shall be renewed by the county only after public hearing. 
(5)  The franchise, if granted after public hearing, shall specify that the franchisee shall accomplish significant construction within one year from date of agreement and the franchisee shall thereafter reasonably make cable service available to a substantial percentage of its franchise area each year. The board of commissioners shall determine percentage based upon population, number of houses and any factors relevant to the area to be served. If the franchise granted does not require the complete wiring of the franchise areas, this provision shall be adopted only after full public hearings, which includes specific notice of the consideration of this policy. The board of commissioners may require the posting of a bond or certified check in an amount and with surety conditions satisfactory to the board of commissioners, providing for and securing to the governing body an amount to provide for the cost of significant construction. 
(6)  The franchise fee shall be determined by the board of commissioners at the time of the public hearing and shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners on an annual basis thereafter and is subject to change upon notice to the franchisee and public hearing. However, beginning January 1, 2008, the franchise fee rate applicable to all cable operators doing business in Henry County under a local franchise agreement shall be five (5) percent of the cable operators' "gross revenues" as that term is defined by Georgia law. 
(7)  The county board of commissioners shall have the right to impose any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability, on a cable operator or its services. Such fee is in addition to the regular franchise fee. A written notice will be given to the franchisees of the proposal of such tax, fee or assessment, and a hearing may be held at the request of the franchisees. 
(Ord. No. 85-21, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 07-10, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 3-3-102. - Notice and public hearing. 
Prior to the execution of a franchise agreement, the licensing department shall publish a notice in the legal organ of the county; one (1) each week for two (2) consecutive weeks, which notice shall state the name of the proposed cable television system, the proposed area of the cable television system and the date and time of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 85-21, § 2, 12-3-85) 
Sec. 3-3-103. - Definition of terms. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the same meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense including the future; words in the plural number include singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. All other terms and phrases not specifically defined herein shall have the meanings as defined in the 1984 edition of the Webster's Dictionary. 
Access channels means services provided by a cable television system on its public, educational, local government, or leased channels, whether separate or composite. 
Additional service or additional subscriber service means any communications service other than a basic service, provided over its cable television system by the franchisee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates or any other person engaged in communications services including, by way of illustration but not limited to, pay or subscription television, burglar alarm, data or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading, and home shopping. 
Basic service or basic subscriber service means the delivery by the franchisee to television receivers, or any other suitable type of audiovideo communication receivers, to all subscribers to locations in the county of signals of over-the-air television broadcasters and public access channels required by the FCC to be carried by a cable television system as defined by the FCC; and other service at the option of the company. 
Board means the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
Channel means a signaling path provided by a cable television system to relay to subscriber terminals television broadcast programs or any other programs or signals from whatever source which may legally and technically be delivered to such terminal. 
Commercial impracticability means a result of a change in condition which is beyond the contract of the operator and the nonoccurrences of which was a basic assumption on which the requirement was based. 
Community antenna television system, cable television system and CATV, for the purpose of this article, are synonymous terms, describing a system employing antennae, microwave, wires, waveguides, coaxial cables, fiber optics, or other conductors, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or used for the purpose of: 
(1)  Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television or radio signals and distributing and transmitting them; 
(2)  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received from television broadcast signals; 
(3)  Transmitting television pictures; film and video tape programs, not received through broadcast television channels, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; and 
(4)  Transmitting and receiving all other signals, including digital, voice and audio-visual. 
 Provided, however, that any of the services permitted hereunder to be performed, described in this paragraph, shall be those performed by or through the franchisee for subscribers, as herein defined, in the operation of a cable television system as franchised by Henry County. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals from a frequency not susceptible to reception by the television receiver of the subscriber to a frequency which is susceptible of reception, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits the subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations. 
County means Henry County, Georgia. 
County administrator means the county administrator of Henry County, Georgia, or any other person selected by the board with regard to the administration of this article or any lawfully designated designee of such official. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Franchise means and includes any general authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, ordinance, privilege, permit, license or authority to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system or components thereof within Henry County. Such authorization means and includes any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on the business within the county not including any nonpay specific project construction permits as required by other ordinances and regulations of the county. 
Franchisee means the individual, company, corporation or firm granted the franchise by the board under this article, and its lawful successors, transferees or assigns. 
Gross annual subscriber receipts includes those revenues derived from the supplying of basic, expanded, and premium services; as defined herein. 
Premium services means programming supplied on a per-program and per-channel basis. 
Road means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface, of all public streets, roads, highways, alleys, easements, boulevards, bridges, tunnels, public utility easements, and all public grounds within or belonging to the county. 
Subscriber or customer means an authorized recipient legally receiving basic service or additional service, or both. 
User means a person utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of transmission of material to subscribers as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Ord. No. 85-21, § 3, 12-3-85) 
Sec. 3-3-104. - Modification. 
(a)  Cable operators shall have the right to request modification of franchise requirements. The cable operator must support its request by demonstrating the commercial impracticability of complying with the existing requirements. A replacement or alternative to the existing requirement must be submitted, and it must be shown that such replacement or alternative is appropriate, because of the same commercial impracticability. If the cable operator wishes to eliminate or substitute a service, it must demonstrate that it will maintain the same mix, quality and level of services required in the original franchise agreement. 
(b)  All requests to modify, eliminate or substitute services must be in writing, and must be accompanied by the required showing of commercial impracticability and proposed alternatives in the case of a request for modification or by a demonstration of the mix, quality and level of services to be rendered after an elimination or substitution of services. Such requests will be reviewed by the board of commissioners and a final decision made at a public proceeding within one hundred twenty (120) days of receipt of the cable operator's request. Such time limit may be extended by mutual agreement. Written notice will be given to the cable operator as to the time and place of such public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 85-21, § 4, 12-3-85) 
Sec. 3-3-105. - Franchise agreement. 
If the board grants the franchise to applicant, an agreement shall be entered into between the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia and the franchisee. The basic form is attached as Exhibit "A" and made a part of Ordinance No. 85-21 as set forth therein. The board may change some or all terms of the agreement based upon the conditions under which the franchise is granted. 
(Ord. No. 85-21, § 5, 12-3-85) 
Sec. 3-3-106. - Severability clause. 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, by the FCC, other federal or state regulatory agency or court of competent jurisdiction, this infirmity shall not affect the validity of the article. Provided, however, that in the event the FCC or other state or federal regulatory agency or court declares any provision invalid, then such provision will be renegotiated as soon as reasonably practical by the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia and the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 85-21, § 6, 12-3-85) 
Secs. 3-3-107—3-3-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNSHOPS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-07, adopted Sept. 1, 1992, amended the Code by adding Art. V, §§ 3-3-70—3-3-102, thereto. Inasmuch as there existed an Art. V, the editor has included the provisions as Art. VI, §§ 3-3-120—3-3-149. Section 3-3-100, repeal, § 3-3-101, severability, and § 3-3-102, effective date, were omitted by the editor. 

Sec. 3-3-120. - Purposes of article; authority. 
(a)  This article is enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of pawnshops or similar places where money is advanced on goods or other effects, merchandise or personal property of any kind. 
(b)  This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-121. - Compliance with article required. 
(a)  All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop, shall first file an application with the county licenses and permits office and receive a license to conduct such business. 
(b)  All persons already engaging in such business prior to the effective date of this article shall file an application in accordance with the terms of this article at the expiration of their current business license. If the board of commissioners shall determine any such application filed should be denied, the applicant may continue to operate his business for a period of thirty (30) days following the date the application is denied. At all times during which such applicant continues to operate his business, he shall be subject to the regulatory provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-122. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the express or implied power of sale upon default. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a well-defined part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or any kind of personal property whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Person means an individual or individuals, a partnership or partnerships, a corporation or corporations and association or associations. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-123. - Applications. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this article shall make a written application to the supervisor of the occupational tax office for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the occupational tax office. Applicants must be twenty-one (21) years of age or older. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the address of the place where the proposed business is to be conducted; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders; and such other information as may be required by the county or the police department. The application shall be sworn to by the applicant or his agent. 
(b)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records required of them by the board of commissioners, its authorized agent, the licenses and permits office or the police department. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from date of request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-3-124. - Permit; issuance decision; appeal. 
(a)  After ascertaining that all requisite forms have been completed and filed, that all additional information, including fingerprints and background check as set forth below, has been submitted and the result of such fingerprints and background checks do not reveal the existence of any criminal history which would disqualify an applicant, the occupational tax coordinator, or his/her designee, shall approve or deny the application. Payment of an annual permit fee in an amount established by action of the Henry County Board of Commissioners is due at application. 
(1)  Authority. This subsection is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1.2), the Georgia Umbrella Statute entitled Dissemination of Information to Public Agencies, Political Subdivisions, Authorities, and Instrumentalities. 
(2)  Fingerprinting required. An individual seeking to receive a pawnbroker license shall be fingerprinted as a condition of submitting an application for said license. By filing such application, the applicant consents to the county obtaining their criminal history record information (CHRI) from the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 
(3)  [Investigation of application.] Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the Henry County Occupational Tax Department will transmit both sets of fingerprints to the GCIC. The GCIC will compare the subject's fingerprint against its criminal file and submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a comparison with nationwide records. The results of the Federal Bureau of Investigation check will be returned to GCIC, which will disseminate the state and national results to Henry County Occupational Tax Department. 
(4)  Access authorized; usage regulations. 
(A)  Henry County is hereby authorized to access national criminal history record information pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1.2). 
(B)  Information obtained and handled for any purposes pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all State laws and the Federal Privacy Act. 
(C)  No information given as part of the request for a criminal history and no record obtained pursuant to this section may be entered on any database. 
(D)  No information given or obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(E)  In compliance with Federal Law 95-544, which provides for the rendering of a fitness determination, the Henry County Occupational Tax Coordinator or his/her designee will decide whether the record applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for enumerated disqualifiers, as set forth within this chapter. 
(F)  A person who has consented to the county for a criminal history based on fingerprinting record may request and receive a copy of the criminal history record report from the county at no additional charge. Should the person seek to amend or correct the record, he or she shall be responsible for contacting the GCIC as to Georgia records and/or the FBI concerning records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(b)  In any case in which it appears to the occupational tax coordinator or his/her designee that an applicant is not entitled to the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the Henry County Occupational Tax Coordinator or his/her designee shall so notify the applicant in writing by mailing said notice to the last address furnished to the Henry County Occupational Tax Department by the applicant. In the event that the Henry County Occupational Tax Coordinator or his/her designee refuses to issue a permit, or in the event that a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant or permit holder shall have an absolute right of appeal to the board of commissioners according to the procedures set forth herein. The appeal shall be perfected by filing a notice of appeal to the Henry County Board of Commissioners. The notice of appeal to the Henry County Board of Commissioners must be filed within fourteen (14) days following the mailing of the Henry County Occupational Tax Office or his/her designee's notification of denial or surrender of the permit. The Henry County Board of Commissioners shall set a date for hearing on the matter within thirty (30) days after receipt by the applicant of the notice of appeal. Moreover, the Henry County Board of Commissioners shall notify the applicant in writing of the date, time and place with the matter shall be heard. 
( Ord. No. 18-07, §§ 1, 2, 12-4-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-07, adopted Dec. 4, 2018 , amended § 3-3-124 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-3-124 pertained to investigation of application; report, and derived from Ord. No. 92-07, adopted Sept. 1, 1992. 
Sec. 3-3-125. - Citizenship; residence requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to an applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or who is not the holder of an official green card for aliens. 
(b)  If the applicant is a business entity, the owner(s) of the majority of the ownership interests in such business entity must meet the requirement above and the license shall be issued to the corporation. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 06-08, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 3-3-126. - Issuance of license to persons with prior criminal convictions prohibited; exception. 
No license hereunder shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation if an individual having an interest either as owner, partner or principal stockholder(s), such interest being direct or indirect, beneficial or absolute, who shall have been convicted, entered a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or entered a plea of guilty under the First Offender Act within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of the application, of any felony or misdemeanor of any state, of the United States or violation of any municipal or county ordinance except traffic violations. If the conviction is for a misdemeanor, violation of a municipal or county ordinance, the board of commissioners may, after investigation, waive same as a disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-127. - General qualifications. 
(a)  No license shall be issued if the application or other evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any business license or permit issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked. 
(3)  The applicant, while a holder of a license to operate a pawnshop has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business, within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to produce any paper or document necessary in the operation of its business as may be required by any officer, agency or department of the county, state or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the county, state or United States. 
(5)  The applicant has supplied false information either upon his application or in any communication with any official of the county relative to his application. 
(6)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee required under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  The applicant, during the twelve (12) month period next preceding the filing of his application has engaged in any deceptive business practices as defined by section 3-3-80 (1) of this article. 
(8)  In addition to the above, in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be issued, the following criteria shall be considered as being in the best interest of the public: 
(a)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(b)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent or surrounding property values. 
(c)  The number of licenses already granted for similar business in the trading area of the location for which the license is sought. 
(d)  If the applicant's spouse is capable of meeting the same qualifications as the applicant, particularly if it appears the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or "dummy" to obtain a license. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-128. - Transfers. 
No license granted shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-129. - Revocation and suspension of licenses—Generally. 
Subject to the provisions of the following section, the board of commissioners may suspend, revoke or place on probation, with or without conditions, any license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-130. - Same—Notice and hearing. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be suspended, revoked or placed on probation with or without conditions, except for due cause as defined in subsection (b) hereof and only after a hearing before the board of commissioners upon a prior written notice to the licensee of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the reason why the license may be suspended or revoked. Three (3) days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem the circumstances justify. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  A licensee commits a deceptive business practice when he: (i) uses or possesses a false weight, measure or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity in connection with any sale or service; (ii) sells, offers, exposes for sale or delivers less than the represented quality or quantity; (iii) takes or attempts to take more than the represented quality or quantity of any commodity when, as buyer or broker, he furnishes the weight or measure; (iv) provides a service which is of an unreasonably lesser quality than the service offered or represented; (v) engages in any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(2)  Violates any laws, ordinances or resolutions regulating such business; 
(3)  The licensee has supplied false information to the licenses and permits office or board of commissioners regardless of when the county shall have become aware of same; 
(4)  The licensee has failed to obtain or has suffered the expiration, suspension or revocation of any paper or document necessary to pursue its business as may be required by any office, agency, authority or department of the county, state or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the county, state or the United States; 
(5)  The licensee has failed to comply with any provisions of this article; 
(6)  A licensee makes any misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead any party with whom the licensee deals. The term "misrepresentation of fact" as used herein shall embrace not only express misrepresentations; but, also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the licensee's conduct, including acts and omissions. By way of illustration only and without limiting the scope of this subsection, "due cause" as herein defined shall consist of any act or practice designated as unlawful in sections 3 (b)(1) through 3 (b)(11) of the Fair Business Practices Act of 1975 (OCGA 10-1-390 et seq.) or declared by the Administrator of said Act to be unlawful pursuant to regulations made under section 4 of said Act, subject to the exemptions contained in Section 6 of said Act; or 
(7)  Any licensee who has been charged with the offense of theft by receiving stolen property as contemplated under the provisions of OCGA section 16-8-7. It is not necessary for the licensee to be convicted under the statute. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may specify certain conditions of operation upon the licensee during any time of probation. Such conditions shall be on file with the licenses and permits office. No probation shall extend over a period of more than twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-131. - Public hearing on applications; approval by board of commissioners. 
All applications for licenses shall be acted upon by the occupational tax office after the appropriate licensing requirements and administrative procedures have been undertaken. No license shall be issued until it has been approved by the occupational tax office. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-3-132. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval of application. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained and occupational tax fees paid not more than two (2) weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the occupational tax office and if not so obtained, the license so issued by the occupational tax office shall be void. 
(b)  When a license had been approved and the applicant has deposited with the licenses and permits office the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 5, 6, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-3-133. - Annual license fee to be set by the board of commissioners; refunds. 
(a)  The annual license fee for licenses hereunder shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No license shall be issued for less than a calendar year period and in case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year period the licensee shall not be entitled to receive any refund. 
(c)  All licenses shall be issued for the calendar year beginning January 1 and the fees prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be paid in full by each person prior to issuance of a license. 
(d)  Any license issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it is issued. 
(e)  No license fee shall be prorated for any business commenced after January 1 of any calendar year and full amount of the annual license fee as prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be payable for any business commenced after January 1 of any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-134. - License to authorize operation of one place of business. 
Each license shall authorize the operation of one place of business only and persons doing business in more than one place within unincorporated Henry County shall obtain a separate license, paying a separate fee, for each such place of business. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-135. - Change of location. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the licenses and permits office of such move and of the new address in writing, on a form provided by the county, no later than thirty (30) days before the day of moving. A new license shall be issued upon payment of a fee in an amount to be set by the board of commissioners if the new location conforms to the county's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-136. - License to be displayed. 
All licenses issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business of the person to whom the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-137. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses hereunder must, within three (3) months after the issuance of said license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license unless the time is extended by the board of commissioners. Failure to open the licensed establishment within three (3) months shall operate as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the licensee. 
(b)  Any licensee who begins the operation of business and then ceases to operate the business for a period of three (3) consecutive months shall constitute a forfeiture of his license to operate the business. Said license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity for any further action of the board of commissioners. However, an extension, for good cause, may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-138. - Renewal. 
Any person subject to this article shall register with the licenses and permits office and shall apply for renewal of any existing license on or before December 15 of each calendar year prior to the year in which he intends to do business. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-139. - Licenses constitute grant or privilege. 
(a)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be a mere grant of a privilege to carry on a pawnshop business during the term authorized in the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and any other ordinance, resolution or law of the county, state or United States relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses issued hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County and is subject to any future ordinances affecting the operation of this business." 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-140. - Name of licensee and license number to be displayed. 
Each licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription, "Henry County Pawnshop License Number _______," in uniform letters not less than three (3) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-141. - Daily report to police. 
(a)  Every licensee shall prepare a daily report in writing for the Henry County Police Department, in such form as may be prescribed by the Police Department, of all property pledged to or bought by the licensee during the preceding twenty-four (24) hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such report shall be typewritten or printed legibly. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the report shall disclose: 
(1)  The name and address of the licensee; 
(2)  Time of transaction; 
(3)  Serial numbers of pawn tickets; 
(4)  Amount paid or advanced; 
(5)  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, and all identifying names, marks and numbers; and 
(6)  A description of persons pledging, selling or pawning, including name, address, driver's license number, weight, height, and eye color. 
Serial numbers on items must be included in the report. Insufficient or incomplete reports shall be rejected. Any licensee or employee who fails or refuses to prepare and keep reports as provided in this section or makes false entries concerning a transaction or who fails or refuses to permit an inspection or examination of the report by any police officer shall constitute a criminal offense, punishable as provided in section 3-3-148 hereof. 
(b)  Each licensee shall require any person pawning, pledging or selling an article or articles to display a photo identification such as a duly issued driver's license or other similar identification. The licensee shall record the driver's license number or other number or feature of such identification. 
(c)  The failure of any licensee or employee to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a criminal offense, punishable as provided in section 3-3-148 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-142. - Regulation as to employees. 
No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been finger printed by the police department and has been issued an annual personal identification card. A reasonable fee for the issuance of the annual personal identification shall be charged by Henry County Police Department. It shall be the duty of the licensee to assure the provisions of this section are strictly followed. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-143. - Adding merchandise to stock. 
A licensee selling goods other than those pledged may add new merchandise to his stock of the same type as that on which loans are made, up to value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), without having to pay an additional license fee as may otherwise be imposed according to the terms of the business license ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-144. - Articles not to be disposed of for thirty (30) days after acquisition. 
Any licensee who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being here used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a criminal offense, punishable according to section 3-3-148 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-145. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, pledge or sale goods of any character or description from a minor. For the purposes of this article, a minor is any individual seventeen (17) years of age or under. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-146. - Sale of knives, blackjacks, other weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale or expose for sale any kinds of metal knucks, dirks, sword-in-cains, spears, bowie knives, switch blade knives, blackjacks or similar weapons. Any licensee or employee thereof violating this section shall constitute a criminal offense punishable as provided in section 3-3-148 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-147. - Failure to obtain license, permission for transfer; penalty. 
Any person who fails to apply for and obtain a license as required in this article or fails to obtain permission for transfer of an existing license, shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the license fee. Said penalty shall be imposed for each thirty-day period or portion thereof, which the person conducts business while failing to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-148. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the Henry County Magistrate Court, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by confinement in the common jail of the county for a period of not more than sixty (60) days or by both fine and confinement. 
(b)  Continued violation of the provisions of this article may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction of this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law may exist. Remedies contained in this article are meant to be cumulative in nature. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 3-3-149. - Collection of unpaid fees. 
Any person who fails or neglects to pay any license fee as required by this article is subject to the collection in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes, regardless of the provisions herein for penalty. 
(Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-92) 
Secs. 3-3-150—3-3-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, ANTENNAS AND BILLBOARDS 

Sec. 3-3-201. - Operating permit required. 
(a)  All owners of telecommunications towers, antennas and all billboards are hereby required to register and obtain an operating permit on or before December 31 each calendar year. 
(b)  All applications for an operating permit shall be made to the operating permit officer as designated by the county administrator from time to time. The application, operating permit forms and other documents and papers necessary for the implementation and enforcement of this article shall be on such forms as may be prepared by the county administration. No application shall be considered by the operating permit officer or the governing authority until such application is complete and accompanied by all necessary documents, papers, and other evidence of eligibility as may be set forth or otherwise required by the application. All such applications shall be sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by a manager or member if a limited liability company, or by an officer or equivalent position if a corporation or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 3-3-202. - Separate operating permit required. 
All telecommunications towers, each antenna located thereon, on a rooftop or other location, and all billboards shall each obtain a separate certificate, paying a separate fee for each such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 2, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 3-3-203. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days from receipt of a fully completed application submitted in accordance with this article, the operating permit officer or his designee shall issue a written determination granting, granting subject to such reasonable conditions as the governing authority deems appropriate, or denying the operating permit in whole or in part. If the operating permit is denied the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. 
(b)  All regulatory fees required in connection with any approved operating permits must be paid in full to the operating permit officer at the time the application is submitted. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any terminology used in this article or any other provision herein to the contrary, the granting of an operating permit for one (1) year shall in no way vest any rights or privileges whatsoever to any renewal or subsequent operating permit, and such person must satisfy in full the requirements for such operating permit established by ordinance at the time of such renewal. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 3-3-204. - Denial, suspension and revocation of operating permit. 
(a)  An operating permit or an application for an operating permit under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked only for due cause as defined in subsection (c) of this section. An operating permit may be denied or suspended by the operating permit officer as set forth in this article; provided, however, that an operating permit may be revoked only after a hearing before the governing authority of the county with prior written notice to the applicant or permittee of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the reason why the operating permit is to be revoked. Ten (10) days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem the circumstances justify. If an operating permit is denied by the operating permit officer under this article, the reasons for such denial shall be set forth in writing to the applicant. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days following receipt of notice of denial to appeal the decision of the operating permit officer to the governing authority, which shall review such application de novo at the next regular meeting of the governing authority following receipt of any such appeal, or, at the election of said governing authority, at special meeting within forty-five (45) days following said appeal; provided, however, that any appeal received within ten (10) business days prior to the next regular meeting of the governing authority shall be heard at the second regularly scheduled meeting of said governing authority following receipt of said appeal. If the governing authority affirms the decision of the operating permit officer, then the operating permit shall be denied. If the decision of the operating permit officer is reversed, then the operating permit shall be issued to the applicant. Alternatively, the governing authority may elect to issue the operating permit subject to such reasonable conditions as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(b)  The operating permit officer may suspend an operating permit where there is evidence of due cause under subsection (c) of this section for revoking the operating permit. Such action by the operating permit officer shall be reported, in writing, to the governing authority. This action shall be reviewed at the next regular meeting of the governing authority, or, at the election of said governing authority, at a special meeting within forty-five (45) days following said suspension; provided, however, that any appeal received within ten (10) days prior to the next regular meeting of the governing authority shall be heard at the second regularly scheduled meeting of said governing authority following receipt of a suspension notice. If the governing authority affirms the decision of the operating permit officer, then the operating permit shall be permanently revoked. If the decision of the operating permit officer is reversed, then the operating permit shall be returned to the permittee immediately. Alternatively, the governing authority may elect to return the operating permit to the permittee subject to such reasonable conditions as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(c)  An operating permit or application therefor under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked only if one (1) or more of the following exists: 
(1)  The applicant or permittee has failed to obtain any certificate, approval, or document necessary as may be required by any office, agency or department of the county, state or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the county, state or United States. 
(2)  The applicant or permittee has supplied false information to the operating permit officer or the governing authority. 
(3)  The applicant or permittee has violated any county, state or federal law, or any ordinance or resolution regulating the telecommunications tower, antenna or billboard. 
(4)  The applicant or permittee has failed to pay any fee required under this article, has failed to make a return or pay a tax due to the Henry County Tax Commissioner in connection with its business or any predecessor business (to include, without limitation, occupational tax or real or personal property ad valorem tax), or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article; provided, however, that an operating permit may not be denied, suspended or revoked under this article with respect to ad valorem taxes (whether real or personal property): 
(i)  Due in the current calendar year; 
(ii)  Presently the subject of lawful appeal; or 
(iii)  Not collectible by virtue of duly enacted statute, ordinance, or other law. 
For purposes of this subsection (c)(4), a predecessor business (whether a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other entity) shall be a business engaged in substantially the same or related business as the applicant and from whom the applicant acquired title to or possession of a substantial portion of its business property, either directly or indirectly, whether real or personal, and for which taxes are outstanding. 
(5)  There are conditions on the licensed premises or in the business operations conducted thereon that endanger public health or safety. 
(6)  The applicant or permittee fails to cooperate with any officer, agent or employee of the county who is authorized or directed to inspect the premises used for or in connection with a telecommunications tower, antenna or billboard. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 4, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 3-3-205. - Regulatory fees. 
The regulatory fees levied and charged for all persons and businesses subject thereto are set forth on a schedule, a copy of which is on file in the county administrator's office and the office of the operating permit officer. Regulatory fees are levied and assessed in addition to any business or occupational taxes assessed and levied under this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 5, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 3-3-206. - Proper zoning required. 
No telecommunications towers, antennas, or billboards shall be allowed in an area or location of the county for which such activity or enterprise is not a permitted use under the terms and provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Henry County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 6, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 3-3-207. - Inspections. 
(a)  Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with a telecommunications tower, antenna, or billboard are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the permittee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer, agent, or employee of the county who is authorized or directed to make such inspection, at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, any applicant or permittee who refuses to allow any authorized officer, agent or employee to make any inspection provided for in subsection (a) hereinabove, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection, may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of section 3-3-204, hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 7, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 3-3-208. - Penalties for violation. 
In addition to the other remedies available to the county for violation of this article set forth herein or in any other applicable provision of the Code of Ordinances, the Magistrate Court of Henry County, after notice to the applicant or permittee and hearing; may impose a civil fine for failure to comply with the provisions of this article or a sentence not to exceed sixty (60) days. Such a civil fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. In addition the applicant or permittee shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the governing authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this article. Without limiting the foregoing, the county is specifically empowered to compel compliance with this article by injunction or other similar petition in the Superior Court of Henry County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 8, 10-20-10) 
Chapter 3-4 - PUBLIC SAFETY 
Subchapter 1 - Animals[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-12, adopted July 16, 2012, amended subchapter 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former subchapter 1 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-01, adopted Feb. 2, 2009. 
Cross reference— Authority of county to regulate animals, § 1-1-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-4-1. - Purpose; short title. 
In order to protect the health and safety of persons and animals in Henry County, to improve and make more safe motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic, to control the incidence and spread of rabies, to prohibit abandonment and other forms of cruelty to animals, to promote the general welfare of the citizens of this county by providing specific regulations concerning the care and treatment of animals and providing for violations of those regulations, and to invest the authority to enforce those regulations, the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, Georgia, hereby adopts this subchapter, to be known and cited as the "animal control ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Abandoned animal means any animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended and unsupervised or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or without care. An animal shall also be considered as abandoned, for the purposes of this subchapter, which has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of thirty-six (36) hours unattended and without adequate food, water and shelter. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means protective cover appropriate for the species and providing adequate space to maintain the animal in good health, which also prevents pain, suffering or a significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four (4) sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. Adequate shelter must be compatible with the number of animals on the property. 
(a)  Adequate shelter includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Sufficient coverage and insulation to protect an animal from extreme hot and cold temperatures; 
2.  Sufficient protection from the elements to keep the animal dry; 
3.  Sufficient shade and ventilation to prevent an animal from overheating and/or dehydrating; and 
4.  Adequate bedding or resting area suitable for the breed, species, age, size, and medical condition of the animal. 
(b)  Materials not suitable for shelters include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Inadequately insulated containers; 
2.  Plastic kennels or airline type animal shipping crates; 
3.  Metal or plastic drums; 
4.  Abandoned or parked vehicles; 
5.  Uncovered porches or decks; 
6.  Lean-tos; 
7.  Any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal. 
Adequate veterinary care means medical care of an animal from or under the direction of a veterinarian and necessary to maintain the health of an animal based on the age, species, breed, etc., of the animal, or to prevent an animal from suffering from: 
(a)  Ongoing infections; 
(b)  Infestation of parasites; 
(c)  Disease; or 
(d)  Any other medical condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such care would: 
1.  Endanger the health or welfare of the animal; or 
2.  Promote the spread of communicable diseases. 
Adequate water means clear, clean, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, rainwater and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the board of commissioners by and through the director of the Animal Care and Control Department of Henry County, Georgia, to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. 
Animal shelter means the facilities operated by Henry County for confining animals impounded or surrendered under the provisions of this subchapter. 
Animal under restraint means: 
(a)  Any animal secured by a leash or lead with a collar, or enclosed by way of a fence or other enclosure; 
(b)  Any animal under the immediate supervision and immediate proximity of a responsible and competent person at least sixteen (16) years of age, obedient to the person's commands, and located within the boundaries of property owned, leased or occupied by the owner (as defined herein); or 
(c)  A dog in the act of being trained or used for hunting in conformance with the game laws of the State of Georgia. This definition shall not apply to cats. 
Animals shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Domestic animals. Animals that are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of humans, that are not found naturally in the wild state, including, but not limited to, cats, cattle, dogs, fowl, goats, horses, swine, and various genetically established strains of laboratory/pet animals such as mice, rats, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs and rabbits. 
(b)  Feral animals. Domestic animals which have reverted back to a wild state and do not exhibit traits consistent with their intended use. 
(c)  Native wildlife animals. A nondomesticated animal which is normally found in the natural state within the confines of Georgia. 
(d)  Nonnative or exotic wildlife animals. A nondomesticated animal which is not normally found in the natural state within the confines of Georgia. 
(e)  Domestic/wild animals. An established strain of wild animal which is generally used in the fur or pet industry including, but not limited to, ranch mink, ferrets and brown and white skunks. 
Authority means an animal control board or local board of health, as determined by the governing authority of a local government. 
Board means the animal control board. 
Certificate means a certificate or document issued at the time of vaccination for rabies of a dog or cat and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator, the vaccination tag number, the name, color, breed and sex of the dog or cat, the name and address of the owner, and the date of the vaccination. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
County governing authority means the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
Cruelty to animals means; 
(a)  The neglect, an act, or an omission, which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death to any living animal, including without limitation, the injuring, beating, choking, shooting, stabbing, burning, overworking or otherwise physically harming any animal. 
(b)  Animal hoarding. 
(c)  Leaving an animal unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation such that will prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from dangerous temperatures, lack of food or lack of water. 
This definition does not include the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food nor does it apply to any person who hunts wild animals in compliance with the game and fish laws of the State. 
Current vaccination tag means a metal tag issued by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, or other state agency, which bears a number showing that it is current for a one-year up to a three-year period for immunization of rabies. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Disturbing noises means the owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which annoy or disturb an ordinary reasonable person of normal sensitivities across a residential or commercial boundary line or within a noise-sensitive area. For the purpose of this article, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise incessantly for a period of fifteen (15) minutes, or barks continuously for one-half (½) hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" if, at the time the dog is barking making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected by a local government pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Estrus means a regular period of female dogs and cats in which the animal seeks to mate or breed. 
Fence means: 
(a)  Structure of wire, wood, stone, or other materials which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal or animals it is intended to enclose. 
(b)  Invisible containment systems in which a collar provides an electric shock which prevents an animal from leaving the property of its owner provided the animal is a dog which is neither classified as vicious or dangerous nor in estrus. If an invisible containment system is in use: 
(1)  A sign must be visibly posted on the property indicating that the system is in place. 
(2)  The system must effectively restrain the animal. 
Dogs which are "vicious" or "dangerous" as herein defined shall be restrained in an enclosure which not only restrains the animal from leaving the owner's property, but also protects persons who may come onto the property from harm. Female dogs in estrus shall be restrained in such a way which can reasonably be expected not attract males of the same species. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and/or within which it is located. 
Hoarding means: 
(a)  Collecting animals and failing to provide them with humane/adequate care; 
(b)  Collecting dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this chapter; or 
(c)  Collecting, housing, or harboring animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
Humane manner means to provide care for an animal to include, but not necessarily limited to, adequate food, water, shelter, space and veterinary care or manner of restraint. 
Inhumane manner means: 
(a)  The failure to provide humane care; 
(b)  Restraining an animal in such a way that it cannot access food and water or to move about freely in an area of reasonable size considering the size and nature of the animal; 
(c)  An act or failure to act which causes death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal. 
Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
Miniature goat means a goat which does not exceed forty (40) pounds. 
Miniature pig means a pig which does not exceed one hundred (100) pounds. 
Owner means any person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Person means an individual, firm, corporation, municipality, society or owner. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a vicious dog or dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(a)  Is vicious; 
(b)  Causes unsanitary conditions; 
(c)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(d)  Is found repeatedly unrestrained; 
(e)  Damages property of others; 
(f)  Excessively produces disturbing noises; 
(g)  Female dog or cat in estrus not confined in a manner which can reasonably be expected to keep away or not attract males of the same species; or 
(h)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Henry County Board of Health, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. 
Rescue group means any individual or entity that houses and cares for rescue animals until permanent homes can be located and that maintains all required federal, state and local licenses/registrations. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer as provided in this article and by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Sterilized means the surgical alteration of an animal rendering that animal unable to produce offspring. 
Unsanitary conditions means an animal living space, including shelter and exercise area, contaminated by health hazards, irritants, items or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Excessive animal waste; 
(b)  Garbage, trash or an outflow of waste; 
(c)  Standing water or mud; 
(d)  Rancid/contaminated food or water; 
(e)  Fumes, foul or noxious odors, contaminated air, hazardous chemicals or poisons; 
(f)  Decaying materials; 
(g)  Uncontrolled parasite or rodent infestation; 
(h)  Areas that contain nails, screws, broken glass, broken boards, pits, poisons, sharp implements or other items that could cause injury, illness or death to an animal. 
Vaccinate means the proper administration, by a licensed veterinarian, of a specified dose of anti-rabidic vaccine into a dog or cat, such vaccine having the U.S. government license number approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and having been approved by the state department of human resources, or other state agency. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-3. - Adoption of article by municipalities within county boundaries. 
In accordance with state law, Henry County may enter into agreements with the municipalities located within territorial limits of Henry County to provide animal control services with the corporate limits of such municipality. Pursuant to such agreement, any municipality in the county may adopt this article. Any municipality adopting this ordinance must authorize the enforcement of the municipal ordinance by the Henry County Animal Care and Control Department. Municipal ordinances must provide that the incorporated areas shall be subject to the fees charged by the Henry County Animal Care and Control Department and that all fees charged by the Henry County Animal Care and Control Department shall be retained by the county to defray the cost of operation of the animal care and control department. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
[Sec. 3-4-4.] - [Reserved.] 
Sec. 3-4-5. - Animal care and control department. 
This department shall be under the direction of the board of commissioners, by and through the director of the animal care and control department of the county. Its agents shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing the animal control ordinance of the county and the operation of the county animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-6. - Enforcement. 
This subchapter may be enforced by any employee of the Henry County Animal Care and Control Department or any peace officer. Violators may be issued citations as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-7. - Right of officer to defend himself in performance of duty; interference; right of entry. 
(a)  In the performance of his duties pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, any animal control officer or any law enforcement officer assisting in enforcing this subchapter may use such force as is necessary to defend themselves from attack by an animal. Provided, however, that all efforts shall be made to impound an animal without undue harm, injury or danger to the animal, the officer, or to other persons and property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest an animal control officer or other authorized officer in the performance of their duty, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal care and control department. 
(c)  Any animal control officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any property for the purpose of investigating alleged violations of this chapter, or to seize and impound any animal found to be in violation of this subchapter. The animal care and control department may use any appropriate means necessary to remove an animal in distress locked in a closed vehicle and the operator of the said vehicle shall be charged with cruelty to animals. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-8. - Dead animals. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of Henry County Animal Care and Control and the county department of transportation to remove and dispose of the carcasses of all dead animals found within the rights-of-way of all county roads maintained either totally or in part from county funds. 
(b)  Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal or property owner or possessor in accordance with state laws and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal, its parts, or blood on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal in a well or open pit of any kind, on private or public land. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
State Law reference— Dead Animals Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-4-9. - Unlawful acts. 
Any unlawful act or practice prohibited herein, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Abandonment of any animal; 
(2)  Failure to keep an animal under restraint; 
(3)  Failure to provide a collar and display on said collar of the animal a current vaccination tag; 
(4)  Failure to provide care for an animal in a humane manner; 
(5)  Allowing any animal to become a public nuisance; 
(6)  Failure to have any animal vaccinated against rabies; 
(7)  Treating any animal in an inhumane manner; 
(8)  Keeping a vicious animal, except as authorized by this ordinance; or 
(9)  Cruelty to animals. 
(10)  Failure to sterilize animals adopted from the Henry County Animal Care and Control shelter as required. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-10. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this subchapter may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-11. - Miniature pigs and miniature goats. 
(a)  Only one (1) miniature pig or two (2) miniature goats may be located on any premises and/or property less than three (3) acres in size. 
(b)  Animals may be kept outdoors only if; 
(1)  Property on which the animal(s) are kept is one (1) acre or larger and 
(2)  Animal(s) are contained in a fenced enclosure of wire, wood, stone, or other materials which is of sufficient height and strength sufficient for purposes of restraint and protection. Invisible fencing is not suitable for fencing for miniature pigs or miniature goats. 
(c)  The miniature pig's tusks, if any, must be removed or trimmed so as not to endanger any person or animal. 
(d)  Miniature pigs must have tested negative for swine brucellosis and pseudorabies . 
(e)  Male miniature pigs and miniature goats must be neutered. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-12. - Leaving animal confined or unattended in parked car. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to leave an animal unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation such that will prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from dangerous temperatures, lack of food or lack of water. Employees of Henry County Animal Care and Control or any law enforcement officer shall take such action as is necessary including entry of the vehicle by any reasonable means to remove an animal from such jeopardy and may impound said animal and secure medical treatment for said animal as needed at the owner's or custodian's expense. 
(b)  Henry County Animal Control officers or any law enforcement officer may take possession of any deceased animal found in any parked vehicle for purposes of determining the cause of death of the animal in question. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-13. - Native and nonnative wild animals. 
All complaints and matters concerning native and nonnative wild animals and complaints involving protected species and/or hunting, shall be forwarded to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Game and Fish Division or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division for proper disposition, i.e., compliance, apprehension, control and/or enforcement as may be necessary as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-14. - Prohibited animals. 
It shall be unlawful to purchase, sell, own, possess, harbor or breed skunks, foxes, prairie dogs, raccoons, coyotes, wolves, hybrid wolves, any hybrid animal that is part wild animal, exotic cats or any other native or nonnative wild animal unless licensed by the respective federal or state department of agriculture to possess such animal. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-15. - Backyard chickens. 
(a)  Backyard chickens shall mean a female pullet or hen of the Gallus gallus domesticus ; which are or may be raised for the purpose of providing food or companionship as a pet. Roosters are strictly prohibited. 
(b)  Only four (4) backyard chickens may be located on any premises and/or property less than three (3) acres in size. 
(c)  Backyard chickens may be kept outdoors only if; 
(1)  Property on which the animal(s) are kept is one-half (½) an acre or larger; and 
(2)  The property shall be maintained in a fashion that eliminates odors, pollution or other negative effects resulting from the backyard chickens; and 
(3)  The backyard chickens shall not cause a nuisance; and 
(4)  Animal(s) must be contained within a fenced enclosure of wire, wood, stone, or other materials which is of sufficient height and strength sufficient for purposes of restraint and protection. Invisible fencing is not suitable for fencing for backyard chickens. In addition to the fence, all backyard chickens must be housed in a coop that is enclosed on all sides including the top, located only in the rear yard of the lot. 
(d)  The keeping and raising of backyard chickens shall be subject to all regulations of the Henry County Health Department. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, 7-16-13) 
Secs. 3-4-16—3-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies vaccination, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-19-1. 

Sec. 3-4-21. - When collar and tag required on a dog or cat. 
It shall be the duty of each dog or cat owner, possessor or custodian thereof, to provide a collar for their dog or cat to which a current rabies vaccination tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the tag, shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times, except as provided herein. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punished as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-22. - Vaccination and licensing of dogs and cats required. 
(a)  The owner or possessor of each dog or cat over three (3) months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the municipalities or the unincorporated areas of Henry County shall apply for and obtain a rabies tag for such dog or cat which shall be affixed to a collar worn by such dog or cat at all times. This provision does not apply to show dogs or cats wherein the wearing of a collar may cause damage to the coat of the animal. Owners of show dogs or cats should have in their possession the rabies tag where it may be produced on demand of animal control personnel. 
(b)  Any licensed veterinarian shall be authorized to vaccinate dogs or cats against rabies; provided, that at the time of such vaccination he furnish a vaccination tag issued by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, bearing an official serial number to the owner. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag or license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued. 
(d)  A license fee shall be charged for the certificate of registration as required by Chapter 8 of Title 4 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated for a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(e)  A license fee shall be charged for a certificate of registration as required by Chapter 8 of Title 4 of the official Code of Georgia Annotated for a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-23. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid animal or of an animal showing rabid symptoms, to immediately report such animal to the animal control shelter and give as much pertinent information as possible. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-24. - Quarantine. 
(a)  Where rabies has been found to exist in any animal, or where its existence is suspected, the animal control director or his/her designee may designate an area within which quarantine of all such animals shall be maintained and all such animals shall thereupon be immediately confined to the premises designated by the animal control director or his/her designee in a manner approved by state and county health officials, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(b)  No animal shall be removed from or brought into a quarantined area or premises without prior approval of the animal control director or his/her designee. 
(c)  Quarantine ordered by the animal control director or his/her designee shall be maintained for such period as the animal control director or his/her designee deems necessary to protect the public health. 
(d)  Quarantined areas or premises and areas where rabid animals or animals suspected of rabies remain at large, shall be posted by the animal control director or his/her designee with signs which read as follows: 
"Rabies Suspected" 
or 
"Rabies—Keep Away From Animals" 
Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the animal control director or his/her designee and shall not be defaced or removed except by the animal control director or his/her designee. Signs furnished and approved by the animal control director shall be used. 
(e)  The owner or custodian of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the animal control director or his/her designee under terms of this regulation shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animals subject thereto, and shall be given such other information as the animal control director or his/her designee deems necessary. 
(f)  The heads of all animals suspected of having had rabies at time of death shall be submitted to the animal control director or his/her designee for examination by the department of human resources laboratory. When necessary, the animal control director or his/her designee can sacrifice an animal for the purpose of submitting brain tissue for rabies analysis. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Secs. 3-4-25—3-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 3-4-31. - Impounding authority. 
Henry County Animal Control officers are hereby authorized to impound any vicious dog or guard dog not confined, chained or muzzled as herein provided; any female dog while in estrus not confined within an enclosure which can reasonably be expected to keep away or not attract male dogs; any animal not wearing the rabies inoculation tag required by the statutes of the State of Georgia; any abandoned animal; any prohibited animal and any animal unrestrained in Henry County. The animal shall be confined in the animal shelter or handled as otherwise provided herein. 
Any person who takes into custody an animal running at large in violation of this subchapter shall deliver such animal to the animal shelter without fee or charge. However, a person may house the animal for five (5) business days while attempting to locate and/or contact the owner. Once in the custody of the animal shelter, the shelter shall hold and dispose of such animal in the same manner as though such animal had been running at large and impounded by officers of Henry County Animal Care and Control. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-32. - Notice to owners of impounded animals. 
Upon impounding any dog or other animal, the board of commissioners, by and through the director of the animal care and control department of Henry County, Georgia, or its authorized representative, shall cause to be made a prompt and reasonable effort to locate the animal's owner, possessor or custodian. Upon location thereof, notification of impounding shall be sent to this owner, possessor or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-33. - Fees and fines. 
The fees with respect to all services and licensing performed in connection with enforcement of this chapter shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time. A copy of such fee schedule shall be posted at the Henry County Animal Shelter and may be changed at any time and from time to time as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(a)  The fees established and collected under this chapter and pursuant to the State Dangerous Dog Control Law are not penalties but are imposed for the sole purpose of defraying expenses borne by the county for animal control and welfare under this chapter and are subject to change at any time. 
(b)  The personnel of the animal care and control department shall not return to the owner any animal impounded until the owner of said animal has paid fees and charges assessed, and until the owner has prepaid for a rabies tag or tags as required by Georgia law and by county health department rules. 
(c)  For all other animals impounded other than dogs or cats, the owner or custodian shall be charged the base fees, plus actual expenses and an additional ten (10) percent of both the base fee and actual expense. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Secs. 3-4-34—3-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISPOSITION 

Sec. 3-4-41. - Generally. 
(a)  Other than those animals impounded for quarantine or animal cruelty, animals shall be kept at the animal shelter for a period of not less than four (4) calendar days, excluding Sunday and county holidays, unless reclaimed by the owner within such period. After such time, the animals shall be deemed permanently relinquished to Henry County Animal Care and Control and may be immediately adopted, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as though it had been impounded. 
(b)  Wildlife and wild animals as defined by this chapter which have been captured by or come to be in the custody of Henry County Animal Care and Control shall not be deemed impounded and need not be retained for any minimum length of time. Wildlife and wild animals received by Henry County Animal Care and Control will be disposed of in accordance with federal and state guidelines. 
(c)  Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to Henry County Animal Care and Control shall be deemed permanently relinquished to Henry County Animal Care and Control and may be immediately adopted, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as though it had been impounded. 
(d)  Any impounded animal not claimed within four (4) calendar days (excluding Sunday and county holidays) of impound shall be considered relinquished to Henry County Animal Care and Control, in which event all rights of ownership shall vest in Henry County Animal Care and Control and the owner shall have no further claim to such animal. 
(e)  Henry County Animal Care and Control shall have the exclusive right to dispose of all animals that have been deemed relinquished to Henry County Animal Care and Control in any manner deemed appropriate and in the best interest of the animal and in accordance with this chapter. 
(f)  Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-42. - Reclamation. 
The owner of any impounded animal may regain possession of the animal upon payment of all applicable fees and compliance with the terms of this chapter. Such redemption shall not affect any criminal liability of the owner, which may exist with respect to any violation of this chapter and shall not preclude proceedings against the owner for the purpose of pursuing sanctions under this chapter. The following exceptions apply: 
(a)  Any animal impounded as a result of cruelty, abuse, neglect, or any other reason defined by this chapter as inhumane treatment may be retained by Henry County Animal Care and Control until such time as the case is disposed of in a court competent to hear such matters. 
(b)  Prohibited animals impounded by or come to be in the possession of Henry County Animal Care and Control cannot be reclaimed unless the owner can show proof of proper and current licensure allowing them to have possession of such animal. 
(c)  Any animal adopted from the Henry County Animal Shelter that was not sterilized per the adoption agreement may immediately be reclaimed by Henry County Animal Care and Control and the owner may not be permitted to reclaim said animal. 
(d)  Any dog deemed dangerous or vicious cannot be reclaimed until such time as the requirements for possessing a dangerous or vicious dog have been satisfied. If such requirements are not met within twenty (20) days of impoundment, the dog shall be deemed permanently relinquished to Henry County Animal Care and Control and will be immediately destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-43. - Adoption. 
(a)  Henry County Animal Care and Control may offer for adoption or rescue any animal deemed relinquished to Henry County Animal Care and Control. All persons adopting animals shall be over eighteen (18) years of age and shall provide adequate and humane care as required. Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for breeding, fighting or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. 
(b)  Any person adopting an animal from Henry County Animal Care and Control shall pay an adoption fee in an amount stated in the Henry County Animal Care and Control schedule of fees. This fee includes all or part of the costs of a rabies inoculation. 
(c)  Any person adopting an intact animal shall cause to have the animal sterilized within a period specified as follows: 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days from the date of adoption for animals over the age of six (6) months or; 
(2)  Within the first six (6) months of age for sexually immature animals. 
(d)  Any adopted animal not sterilized within the time specified may be reclaimed by Henry County Animal Care and Control. If an animal is not sterilized after the time specified on the adoption agreement, the owner may receive a citation for violating this article. 
(e)  The animal control director or his/her designee shall have the right to refuse adoption to any person or entity who, for any reason, in the discretion of the animal control director or his/her designee, may be deemed unsuitable as an adopter. 
(f)  No person residing in the same household, nor any corporation, institute or other entity, may adopt more than three (3) animals within any 12-month period; however, nothing shall prohibit Henry County Animal Care and Control discretion to donate more than three (3) animals in a 12-month period, if the donation is in the best interest or welfare of the animal or it is in the best interest of public safety. 
(g)  Owners may not adopt their impounded animal(s) from the Henry County Animal Care and Control Department to circumvent the paying of reclamation fees. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-44. - Rescue. 
Any legally adoptable, unclaimed animal may be donated to animal rescue groups. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-45. - Humane disposition. 
If any animal seized or impounded by the Henry County Animal Care and Control Department evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the animal care and control department shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or humanely euthanize the animal; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the animal control officer may concur with a superior on duty. This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal to afford the owner the opportunity to reclaim the animal. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Secs. 3-4-46—3-4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VICIOUS DOGS AND DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 3-4-51. - Exceptions to definitions. 
(a)  The terms "dangerous dog" and "vicious dog" as defined in this subchapter, shall not include the following: 
(1)  A dog that is in the act of use by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. 
(2)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime, under Chapter 5 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(b)  No person shall be liable for killing or otherwise performing a cruel action on any dog when such person is; 
(1)  Defending his or her person or property, or the person or property of another from injury or damage being caused by a dog; or 
(2)  Defending against injury or damage to any livestock, poultry or pet animal. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-52. - Animal control board. 
(a)  The county governing authority may act as the animal control board for Henry County, Georgia and if so, shall conduct the hearings provided for in this article. The county governing authority may create or establish an animal control board. The purpose of the board shall be to conduct the hearings provided for in this article. 
(b)  If created or established the board shall consist of five (5) members. All members shall be appointed by the county governing authority. The initial terms of members shall be as follows: One (1) member to serve for one (1) year; two (2) members to serve for two (2) years; and two (2) members to service [serve] for three (3) years. Thereafter, all members appointed to the board by the county governing authority shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  No member of the board shall participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. In the event of a vacancy during the term of any member by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise, the appointment of a successor by the county governing authority shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of such member. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-53. - Dog control officer. 
The county governing authority shall appoint a dog control officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the governing authority. The dog control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-54. - Procedures for classifying vicious dogs and dangerous dogs; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(b)  If the dog control officer believes that a dog subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog poses a threat to public safety, the dog may be immediately impounded and the dog owner shall be responsible for all costs resulting from such impoundment. 
(c)  When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within seventy-two (72) hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the authority on the dog control officer's determination within fifteen (15) days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall also provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
(d)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the authority for good cause shown. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the authority conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the authority conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(e)  Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the authority which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(f)  Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. 131, § 50-13-19. 
(g)  The judge in any superior court of competent jurisdiction within this state may order the euthanasia of a dog if the court finds, after notice and opportunity for a hearing as provided by this article, that the dog has seriously injured a human or presents a danger to humans not suitable for control under this article and: 
(1)  The owner or custodian of the dog has been convicted of a violation of any state criminal law and the crime was related to such dog; or 
(2)  Any local government authority has filed with the court a civil action requesting euthanasia of the dog. 
(h)  A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for a hearing as provided by this article, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one (1) occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012, shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-55. - Requirements for possessing a vicious or dangerous dog. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. No more than one (1) certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this Code section, a certificate of registration for a classified dog shall be issued only if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has an enclosure designed to securely confine the classified dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the classified dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the classified dog; 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (d), (e) and (f) of this Code section, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued only if the dog control officer determines that the additional requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of this article. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one (1) vicious dog. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two (2) years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. The owner of a classified dog shall pay an annual registration fee at the time the certificate of registration is issued. The annual registration fee shall be in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Certificates of registration shall be renewed in the month of the initial registration. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a classified dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten (10) days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(h)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(i)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished for euthanasia to a governmental facility or veterinarian. 
(j)  The owner of a classified dog who moves from one (1) jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia shall register the classified dog in the new jurisdiction within ten (10) days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into this state shall register the dog as required within thirty (30) days of becoming a resident. 
(k)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a potentially dangerous dog shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. 
(l)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a dangerous dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-56. - Restrictions on permitting vicious or dangerous dogs outside of a proper enclosure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a classified dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless: 
(1)  The dog is muzzled. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person but not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration. 
(2)  The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary. 
(3)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
(4)  Unattended with minors. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-57. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A classified dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or any other person authorized by the dog control officer if: 
(1)  The dog is not validly registered as required by this article; 
(2)  The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as defined in the article; or 
(3)  The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. 
(b)  In addition, a vicious dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance required by this article. 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provision of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article as determined by the dog control officer and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner's recovery of the dog. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within twenty (20) days of the date the dog is confiscated, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner shall be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(d)  Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-58. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog who violates the applicable provisions of this article or whose classified dog is subject to confiscation under subsection of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. 
(b)  An owner with a previous conviction for a violation of this article whose classified dog causes serious injury to a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this article shall be guilty of a felony and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one (1) nor more than ten (10) years, a fine of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or both. In addition, the classified dog shall be euthanized at the cost of the owner. 
(c)  Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(d)  A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 3-4-59. - General provisions. 
(a)  If any provision of this article, or the application of this article to any person or circumstance, shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, or application of such other provisions, of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(b)  All laws and ordinances, or parts thereof, which conflict with the provisions of this article are repealed. 
(c)  Be it further ordained, that the chairman of the board of commissioners be authorized to sign this article on behalf of the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-12, § II, 7-16-12) 
Secs. 3-4-60—3-4-98. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 2 - Fire Prevention and Protection[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Operation of emergency vehicles, § 3-4-302. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-4-99. - Fire protection district created; described. 
A Henry County Fire Protection District is hereby created and such district shall include all that land now known as Henry County, Georgia, with the exceptions of the incorporated areas of the cities of Stockbridge, McDonough and Hampton. 
(Res. No. 85-31, 12-3-85) 
Sec. 3-4-100. - Fire and rescue department personnel designated as firefighters. 
Those employees of the county fire and rescue department, whether paid or volunteer, who meet the minimum state qualifications as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 25, are designated as "firefighters." 
(Ord. No. 84-10, 6-5-84) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 84-10, enacted June 5, 1984, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of said ordinance as § 3-4-100 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-4-101. - Duties of fire chief generally. 
The fire chief, or fire department personnel under the chief's direction shall: 
(1)  See to the proper and speedy extinguishment of fires which may endanger life or property within the unincorporated areas of the county; 
(2)  Enforce all regulations of the fire department and directives of the board of commissioners and the county administrator; 
(3)  Have supreme and absolute command at the scene of a fire over the endangered property, the general area surrounding the property and all County personnel present including police officers; 
(4)  Issue a report each month in writing to the county administrator for presentation to the board of commissioners on all fires attended by the county fire department in the preceding month, with causes thereof, if ascertainable, and the number and description of any buildings destroyed, an estimate of property damages sustained, persons injured and all fire related deaths; 
(5)  Investigate all fires to determine if arson was involved; 
(6)  Examine, in general, all buildings, except dwellings, throughout the county in order to become familiar with the construction and class of business carried on, the class of goods on each floor and whether the goods are highly combustible or noncombustible, to see that entrances, stairways, halls and exits are accessible, to learn the most expedient manner of attack in the case of fire, to make any other observations as may serve the interest of the department, to make a note of each inspection in a book or other form or record provided for that purpose, and a copy of this record shall be kept at each fire station and all members of the department shall familiarize themselves with it; and 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be required of him by this subchapter, or by the board of commissioners or county administrator. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 1, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-102. - Fire chief to enforce certain ordinances; police powers. 
The chief of the fire department shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter and all state laws under his jurisdiction pertaining to the prevention, suppression, or extinguishing of fires. The chief shall have the powers of a police officer in performing his duties under this subchapter, and when he is on duty at a fire. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 4, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-103. - Authority of fire chief to cut electric wires. 
If no utility company is available on the scene of a fire, the chief of the fire department, or other person acting under his authority, is hereby authorized to cut any electric wire which is safe and necessary on the occurrence of any fire, without expense to the county for so doing; provided that nothing herein contained shall imply that the county authorizes any person to undertake the risk of cutting any such wires or renders itself liable for any injury to the person doing so. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 23, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-104. - Inspection, abatement, etc., of unsafe conditions. 
(a)  The function of the fire chief in the implementation of this subchapter shall be to inspect all commercial, industrial, and public buildings and premises, except dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any unsafe conditions which could cause fire, endanger life from fire, or any violations of the provisions of this and of any other law affecting fire safety. Residential structures shall be inspected for fire safety only upon permission of the property owner, or upon a valid, signed complaint signed by three (3) citizens constituting probable cause and a copy presented to the property owner. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department shall cause to be periodically inspected during reasonable working hours all buildings and premises, with the exception of the access restrictions in residential structures as referred to above for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions which would reasonably tend to cause fire or contribute to its spread, or any violation of the purpose or provisions of this subchapter and of any other recognized and reasonable law or standard affecting fire safety. 
(c)  All buildings or structures which are not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, for the purposes of this section, are considered unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings shall be declared public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal as provided for in the Standard Code for Elimination and Repair of Unsafe Buildings as adopted by the county. All persons cited for keeping an unsafe building will be afforded full appeals rights as specified in such publication. 
(d)  Whenever any member of the fire department or the fire marshal finds in any building or upon any premises combustible or explosive material or any dangerous matter which is likely to cause a fire or other hazard or which may endanger property, he shall order the dangerous condition to be removed or remedied by the owner or occupant of such premises within ten (10) days. Appeals of such order shall be filed with the magistrate's court of the county within forty-eight (48) hours after service of the notice to abate. 
(e)  Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within ten (10) days after said appeal shall have been determined, or if no appeal is taken, within ten (10) days after the service of the order, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  The service of such order shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of same to a person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a true copy of the order, or if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order by mailing such copy to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, §§ 5—8, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 83-26, 8-16-83) 
Cross reference— Standard Code for Elimination and Repair of Unsafe Buildings, § 3-9-61 et seq. 
Sec. 3-4-105. - Minimum size of water mains and spacing of fire hydrants for future construction and development. 
(a)  In single-family approved subdivisions, at least a six-inch pipe shall be installed, except within three hundred (300) feet of a cul-de-sac. Water flow in those lines shall provide a minimum flow of water at seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per minute. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed five hundred twenty-five (525) feet. Three-way hydrants shall be installed in all areas of the county. 
(b)  In multi-family approved subdivisions or multi-family apartment complexes, at least an eight-inch or larger pipe shall be installed, except within three hundred (300) feet of a cul-de-sac. Water flow in those lines shall provide a minimum flow of water at seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per minute. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed five hundred twenty-five (525) feet. Additional fire hydrants may be required to permit all portions of buildings to be reached by hose lays of not more than four hundred (400) feet by road travel. Three-way hydrants shall be installed in all areas of the county. 
(c)  In approved industrial and commercial areas, including, but not limited to, motels, hotels, nursing homes, hospitals, educational buildings, office buildings and other structures not listed elsewhere at least an eight-inch or larger pipe shall be installed to provide a minimum flow of water at seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per minute. A larger flow of water may be required pursuant to fire flow calculations. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed four hundred (400) feet. Additional fire hydrants may be required to permit all portions of buildings to be reached by hose lays of not more than four hundred (400) feet by road travel. Three-way hydrants shall be installed in all areas of the county. 
(d)  In approved mobile home parks at least an eight-inch pipe shall be installed, except within three hundred (300) feet of a cul-de-sac. Water flow in those lines shall provide a minimum flow of water at seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per minute. In areas of the county where county water is not available, water supplies for fire department operations shall be provided by the owner or developer to permit the effective operation of two (2) one-and-three-quarter-inch hose streams on any fire in a mobile home or elsewhere in the mobile home park. A flow of one hundred (100) gallons per minute with fifty (50) pounds per square inch nozzle per line minimum will be required. 
(Ord. No. 92-10, 12-1-92) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-10 deleted the provisions of §§ 3-4-105 and 3-4-107, derived from Ord. No. 82-11, §§ 13, 15, adopted July 20, 1982, and enacted provisions in lieu thereof. 
Sec. 3-4-106. - Location of hydrants and hydrant specifications. 
(a)  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed under water pressure and ready for firefighting before any sheathing may be installed on walls and roofs of buildings, unless said sheathing is of fire resistive construction. 
(b)  Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be of standard and accepted make approved by the county water and fire departments. Fire department connections on the fire hydrant shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches or more than thirty-six (36) inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the county fire department. 
(c)  Hydrants shall meet the requirements of NFPA No. 24, Fire Hydrants for Outside Protection, and have not less than six-inch connection with the water mains. For average conditions, hydrants should be placed at least fifty (50) feet from the buildings protected. Where it is impossible to place them at this distance, they may be put nearer, provided they are set in locations where the chance of injury by falling walls is small, and from which men are not likely to be driven by smoke or heat while attempting to hook up. 
(d)  The size and shape of the operating nut, as well as the direction the hydrant stem operates, shall be uniform with hydrants in the county water distribution system specifications. 
(Ord. No. 92-10, 12-1-92) 
Sec. 3-4-107. - Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority approval and variance. 
The Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority (authority) shall determine the size of all water lines constructed in the county. All plans for construction of water mains and supply lines shall be submitted to the authority for its review and approval. The authority shall notify the party submitting the plans of any required modification. The authority is hereby granted the authority to grant variances from the provisions of this section if the authority finds the variance to be in keeping with sound hydraulic engineering principles. 
(Ord. No. 92-10, 12-1-92) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 3-4-105. 
Sec. 3-4-107.1. - Obstructing fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place building materials within fifteen (15) feet of a cistern or fire hydrant, or do any other act which would obstruct approaches to fire hydrants or cisterns by any member of the fire department. 
No person shall put any post or installation or structure nearer than twenty-four (24) inches to any fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 92-10, 12-1-92) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-10, adopted Dec. 1, 1992, added § 3-4-108. Inasmuch as there existed a § 3-4-108, the editor has included the new provisions as § 3-4-107.1. 
Sec. 3-4-108. - Authorization required for use of fire hydrant water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the water from a fire hydrant in the county without express authorization from the fire chief, the water and sewerage authority, or the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 16, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-109. - Maintenance and repairs to fire hydrants. 
All routine maintenance of fire hydrants, such as painting, greasing, and testing shall be performed by the county fire department. Repairs to the fire hydrants will be the responsibility of the county water and sewerage authority. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 17, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-110. - False fire or ambulance alarms. 
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire or of need for ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 24, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-20-27; false bomb scares, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-10-28. 
Sec. 3-4-111. - Persons allowed in vicinity of fire; obedience to officer in command at fire. 
No person, except firemen, members of the board of commissioners, members of the police department, the owners of the property, their agents, and the agents of insurance companies shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire without being ordered there by the fire chief or the officer in charge at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief or other person in the fire department in charge of a fire shall be arrested, and on conviction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 18, 7-20-82) 
Cross reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 3-1-8. 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors, Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 17-10-3, 17-10-4. 
Sec. 3-4-112. - Crossing fire hose prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, roadway, or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 19, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 40-6-248 
Sec. 3-4-113. - Open burning, bonfires, etc. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area of the county, except as follows: 
(1)  For recreational purposes, such as cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
(2)  Fires set for the purpose of training fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the Henry County Fire Chief or Fire Marshal; 
(3)  Operation of devices using open flames, such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used; 
(4)  Small warming fires set and maintained by contractors and tradesmen for their workers; 
(5)  a.  Reduction of trash and leaves on residential or domestic premises on which they fall, set and maintained by the person in contact with the premises, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  No burning of stumps or whole trees; 
2.  No more than one (1) pile, six (6) feet by six (6) feet and five (5) feet high shall be burned at one (1) time; 
3.  All burning shall be carried out between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; 
4.  All fires shall be completely extinguished by 6:00 p.m.; 
5.  No burning on Sunday; 
6.  No burning within one hundred (100) feet of any type of structure; 
7.  All burning shall be located on private property so as not to interfere with any traffic on public streets or sidewalks; 
8.  During any open burning, a competent person of at least eighteen (18) years of age shall be constantly present to monitor and control such burning; and 
9.  During any open burning, an operational garden hose or fire extinguisher must be present within fifty (50) feet of the fire. 
b.  However, at any time the fire chief, fire marshal or their designee shall have the authority to order that any fire be extinguished if they determine that the fire or smoke produced therefrom presents a danger to public safety, a nuisance or significant environmental harm. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the fire chief or fire marshal, there are no adequate disposal facilities reasonably available for the particular combustible materials involved, the following open burning may be permitted: 
(1)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production of harvesting of crops with approval of Georgia Forestry Commission; 
(2)  Burning over of any forestland by the owners of such land with approval of the Georgia Forestry Commission; 
(3)  Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials either on-site or transported to a burning facility through the use of an air curtain destructor or other approved method of burning; 
(4)  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage; 
(5)  For weed abatement, disease, and pest prevention. 
(c)  Open burning, with permit only, is allowed in commercial or other areas that are not predominantly residential districts for the purpose of land clearing, construction or right-of-way maintenance, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are not excessive and are away from the major portion of the area's population; 
(2)  The location of the burning is at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any dwelling located in a predominantly residential area; 
(3)  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimized; 
(4)  Heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any material other than plant growth are not being burned; 
(5)  The size of the pile of material and quantity to be burned per day meet the specifications as may be required by the fire chief or fire marshal to ensure public safety, deter nuisance and prevent significant environmental harm; 
(6)  During any open burning, a competent person of at least eighteen (18) years of age shall be present constantly to monitor and control such burning; 
(7)  All burning shall be carried out between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; 
(8)  All fires shall be completely extinguished by 6:00 p.m.; 
(9)  No burning on Sunday; 
(10)  Materials such as heavy oils, gasoline, asphaltic materials, plastic, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any other material producing dense smoke and/or obnoxious odors shall not be used for starting or maintaining an open fire; and 
(11)  Domestic or commercial burning is permitted between the months of October and April extending from, up to and including, October 1 through April 30, and is prohibited at all other times. During such October 1 through April 30 time period, a "commercial" burning permit shall be issued, upon request, authorizing burning under subsection 5(c) as set forth herein. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for all "commercial" burning permits. A "domestic" burning permit shall not be required to authorize "domestic" burning under subsection 5(c) as set forth herein. 
(d)  Variances: 
(1)  Any person desiring a variance from these regulations for open burning or desiring one of the exceptions described in subsection 5(c) above shall make an application therefore to the fire chief or fire marshal. 
(2)  The fire chief or fire marshal may grant specific or general classes of exceptions to or variances of the particular requirements of any rule, regulation or general order upon such conditions as he may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, if, upon petition, he finds that strict compliance with such rule, regulation, or general order is inappropriate for one (1) of the following reasons: 
a.  Because of conditions beyond the control of the petitioner, i.e., those conditions which, though ordinary diligence is employed, remain unforeseeable or unpredictable, e.g., strikes, walkouts, or other industrial disturbances, acts of God, civil disturbances, embargoes, or other causes of like character; provided, however, that this shall not include conditions solely because they are dependent upon contingencies, i.e., including but not limited to, the variable cost or availability of maintenance, equipment, labor, raw materials, fuel or energy; or, 
b.  Because of special circumstances which would render strict compliance unreasonable, unduly burdensome, or impracticable due to special physical conditions or causes; or, 
c.  Because strict compliance would result in substantial curtailment or closing of the business operation; or, 
d.  Because no alternative method of handling is available. 
(e)  General restrictions and appeals: 
(1)  If the fire chief or fire marshal determines that certain open burning, otherwise permitted, imposes a threat to the public health, safety and general welfare, he shall have the authority to impose additional safety precautions or restrict the burning, including the issuance of a complete ban on the open burning in the particular location. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the fire chief or fire marshal may appeal in writing to the board of commissioners, via the county administrator, within ten (10) days from the date of such decision. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be deemed final. 
(3)  Except for a reasonable period to get a fire started, no smoke of a shade darker than a No. 2 of the Ringlemann chart, or equivalent opacity, shall be emitted by a source of open burning listed in subsections 5(a), 5(b) and 5(c) above. 
(4)  During an air pollution emergency declared by the board of commissioners or other proper county or state authorities, no open burning of any kind shall be permitted unless open burning is required in the performance of an official duty or any public office, or a fire is necessary to thwart or prevent a hazard which cannot be properly managed by any other means or is necessary for the protection of public health. 
(f)  Penalties: 
(1)  A written notification to a person/representative/entity of a violation shall be considered adequate notice of these regulations. 
(2)  A subsequently violation, by the same person/representative/entity, at the same or different site will result in immediately appropriate legal action. 
(3)  Persons violating this section shall be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, per violation, or sixty (60) days in jail, or any combination thereof. 
(4)  No provision of this section will restrict or prohibit Henry County from using legal remedies to recover costs associated with containing fires or extinguishing burn piles, regardless of the possession of a permit authorized under this section. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, §§ 20—22, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 05-07, § I, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 3-4-114. - Accessibility for firefighting and emergency equipment. 
(a)  Every owner of property which is neither single-nor double-family units, shall provide access to their property for fire equipment and personnel as follows: 
(1)  Every owner of property which is neither single-nor double-family units, upon which is erected thereon any structure or building located more than two hundred (200) feet from a public maintained road shall provide an access road to such building or structure of not less than twenty (20) feet wide from a public maintained road. 
(2)  Every owner of property which is neither single-nor double-family units, shall provide access to each building or structure thereon by establishing an area immediately adjacent to such building or structure for the use of fire and emergency equipment and personnel; provided, that alternate access shall be provided in the event that the distance between the access provided for herein and most distant side of the building is greater than two hundred (20) feet; provided further, that no alternate shall be required if the structure or building is equipped with an approved total water sprinkler system unless the distance between the access and most distant side of the building is greater than four hundred (400) feet. 
(3)  To comply with this section, every owner of property which is neither single-nor double-family units shall establish a fire lane in the front of each building or structure marked upon the curb, parking and driveway areas. 
(4)  The designated area shall be marked and identified as a "Fire Lane—No Parking". 
(5)  The width and route of said lanes shall be determined and approved by the county fire marshal and county sheriff. 
(6)  Copies of the description of the designated fire lanes shall be signed by the director of the fire department and county sheriff. 
(7)  The original files and approved designated fire lanes shall be maintained by the county inspection department. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct the fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 26, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 89-05, 3-21-89) 
Cross reference— Fire lanes required, § 3-7-62. 
Sec. 3-4-115. - Fire walls and partitions. 
Fire walls and partitions for wood frame construction shall comply with the provisions of the building code in force in the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 27, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-116. - Standards for fire extinguishing equipment. 
Installation in restaurants or other public food facilities having cooking equipment such as ranges, deep fat fryers, grills, or broilers, shall have installed approved fire extinguishing equipment that shall comply with established standards as set by the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 28, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-117. - Combustible roof construction. 
Combustible roof construction shall comply with provisions of the building code in force in the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 29, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-118. - Mobile home tie-downs. 
(a)  Mobile homes used as portable classrooms for educational or religious purposes shall provide adequate support for the placement of tie-downs of said portable rooms or buildings, thereby securing the superstructure against sliding, uplift, rotation, and overturning. 
(b)  Said portable building shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men," eyelets embedded in concrete slabs, runways, screw angers [anchors], arrow anchors, or other devices to be used to stabilize said portable building used for education or religious purposes. 
(c)  Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at each corner of the portable building and shall be able to sustain a minimum load of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 30, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-119. - Interpretation. 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of the Standard Code for the Elimination and Repair of Unsafe Dwellings or the Standard Fire Prevention Code, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 32, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-120. - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire chief or fire marshal shall condemn a structure, or disapprove any application or refuse any permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this subchapter do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this subchapter have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire chief or fire marshal to the magistrate's court of the county within forty-eight (48) hours after service of the notice to abate. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 11, 7-2-82; Ord. No. 83-26, 8-16-83) 
Sec. 3-4-121. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter shall, upon conviction in the Magistrate Court of Henry County, Georgia, or upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or confinement in the Henry County Detention Facility for a period of no more than sixty (60) days. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforcement, or removal of prohibited conditions, or correction of violations. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 12, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 89-06, 3-21-89) 
Cross reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 3-1-8. 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors, Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 17-10-3, 17-10-4. 
Secs. 3-4-122—3-4-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-5. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt fire prevention code, Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 36-13-1, 36-13-2. 

Sec. 3-4-131. - Adoption of Fire, Life Safety, and Accessibility Standards by reference. 
(a)  There is hereby approved and adopted by reference as if the same were set forth herein in its full entirety and complete length the following standard fire codes, including all amendments, updates and modifications of said publication, as approved by the State of Georgia, shall automatically become a part of this Code without further action by the governing authority: 
(1)  Standard Fire Prevention Code (ICC/SBCCI); 
(2)  Standard Building Code (ICC/SBCCI); 
(3)  National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101 Life Safety Code; 
(4)  National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 13, 13D, 13E, and 13R Sprinkler Code; 
(5)  National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 72 Alarm Code; 
(6)  National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Fire Protection Handbook; 
(7)  120-3-20 Georgia Accessibility Code; 
(8)  Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner of Georgia. 
(b)  Any changes or variances of said publications adopted by reference in subsection (a) must be approved by the county fire chief or county fire marshal. 
(c)  Enforcement and inspections of all of said publications adopted by reference in subsection (a) will be handled by the county fire department. 
(d)  The county fire department will issue a certificate of occupancy or completion after business or building meets the [standards set forth in] said publications adopted by reference in subsection (a). 
(e)  No person shall violate any of the provisions of the publications adopted by reference in subsection (a). 
(f)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof or upon entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto in the Magistrate Court of Henry County, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or by imprisonment for a term of not more than sixty (60) days or any combination thereof, whichever in the interest of justice is deemed just and appropriate by the magistrate court judge. 
(g)  Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a new and separate offense for which the person may be punished as provided for above. 
(h)  Should any paragraph or provision of this section by declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this section as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, §§ 2, 31, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 02-07, § I, 5-20-02) 
Cross reference— Adoption of state standards by reference, § 3-9-16. 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference authorized, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-13-3. 
Sec. 3-4-132. - Application to new and existing conditions. 
The provisions of the 1991 Edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code shall apply equally to new and existing conditions except that conditions existing as of July 20, 1982 which are not in strict compliance with the requirements of such Code may be permitted to continue if it can be proven that they do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 3, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-133. - Modifications. 
The fire chief shall have power to use discretion in a minor modification of the provisions of the 1991 Edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such Code, provided that the spirit of such Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed, shall be entered upon the records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant and a copy forwarded to the board of commissioners. If said modification deals with new construction or renovation, the proper coordination and consent must be secured through the planning and zoning and building inspection department prior to said modification approval. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 10, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-134. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the 1982 Edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean this county. Whenever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the 1982 Edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, it shall mean the attorney for the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-11, § 9, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-135. - Life safety code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out at length in this Code, the 1981 edition of the Georgia Life Safety Code, including all appendices and annotations thereto. 
(Ord. No. 85-24, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 3-4-136. - Fire, safety and accessibility fees. 
(1)  Construction, expansion permit fee. There shall be a permit fee for the construction or for the expansion of every building in the county, and said permit fee shall be calculated at following rate: 
Up to 10,000 square feet ..... $150.00 
10,001—30,000 square feet, per square foot ..... $0.10 
30,001—100,000 square feet, per square foot ..... $0.05 
100,001—500,000 square feet, per square foot ..... $0.03 
500,001 square feet and up, per square foot ..... $0.015 
Eigthy (80) percent or cover up inspection, one hundred (100) percent or final inspection, and first follow-up inspection will be allowed under the construction permit with no additional charge. 
(2)  Sprinkler system and alarm system permit fee. There shall be a permit fee for a sprinkler system or alarm system being installed in buildings in the county, and said permit fee shall be calculated at following rate: 
Up to 10,000 square feet ..... $150.00 
10,001—30,000 square feet ..... $200.00 
30,001—100,000 square feet ..... $250.00 
100,001—500,000 square feet ..... $300.00 
500,001 square feet and up ..... $350.00 
Eighty (80) percent or cover up inspection, one hundred (100) percent or final inspection, and first follow-up inspection will be allowed under the construction permit with no additional charge. 
(3)  Minimum fees. The following minimum fees shall be charged for the specific permits and services listed herein, notwithstanding the figure derived from the calculation provided by subsection (1) and (2) of this section. 
a.  Second reinspection (new or annual) ..... $100.00 
b.  Third reinspection (new or annual) ..... $150.00 
c.  Fourth reinspection (new or annual) ..... $200.00 
d.  Fifth reinspection and any subsequential follow-up (new or annual) ..... $250.00 
e.  Special event inspection/permit ..... $150.00 
f.  Commercial hood plan review and inspection ..... $100.00 
g.  Site plan review and inspection ..... $100.00 
h.  Change of occupancy or occupation tax inspection (business license) ..... $100.00 
i.  Name change or replacement of occupation certificate ..... $25.00 
j.  Blasting permit ..... $100.00 
k.  Installation or removal of underground fuel tanks ..... $100.00 
l.  Fireworks permit ..... $100.00 
m.  Administrative variance fee ..... $50.00 
n.  Returned for insufficient funds check fee ..... $35.00 
o.  Temporary certificate of occupancy (per TCO) ..... $50.00 
p.  After hours inspection, per hour ..... $75.00 
(4)  Fire watch fee. When required by the fire chief or fire marshal for buildings or special events that could be hazardous in nature, qualified personnel shall be provided to serve as an on-site fire watch. Fire watch personnel shall be provided with at least one (1) approved means for notification of the fire department and their sole duty shall be to perform constant patrols and watch for the occurrence of fire. This fee is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per hour per person, minimum of four (4) hours. 
Failure to pay fire, safety and/or accessibility fees within thirty (30) days of the date of invoice will result in a late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Failure to pay within sixty (60) days will result in an additional late of fifty dollars ($50.00). Failure to pay within ninety (90) days will result in the revocation of the certificate of occupancy. 
Further, failure to pay fees in a timely manner on all returned checks for insufficient finds will result in the certificate of occupancy not being issued, or the current certificate of occupancy being revoked. 
The business will be notified in writing by certified mail that the certificate of occupancy has been revoked. Operating a business without a certificate of occupancy is a violation of Henry County Ordinances. 
In addition to the late fees and penalties assessed above, persons violating the ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, per violation, and/or sixty (60) days in jail, or any combination. 
(Ord. No. 13-04, §§ I, II, 3-19-13; Ord. No. 16-05, 9-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— The provisions codified as § 3-4-136 were previously codified as § 3-4-222. Ord. No. 16-05, adopted Sept. 6, 2016 , directed the redesignation of said provisions. 
Secs. 3-4-137—3-4-200. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 3 - Law Enforcement[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Compensation of sheriff, employment, etc., of deputies, § 2-2-62; operation of authorized emergency vehicles, § 3-4-202. 

Sec. 3-4-201. - Duties of chief administrator and police department, generally. 
The chief administrator of the police department, or personnel under the chief administrator's direction shall: 
(1)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the county by arrest and prosecution for the violation of any county ordinance, state or federal law; 
(2)  Enforce all regulations of the department and directives of the board of commissioners or the county administrator; 
(3)  Protect the rights of persons and property; 
(4)  Guard the public health; 
(5)  Issue a report each month in writing to the county administrator for presentation to the board of commissioners on the number and type of citations issued, number of calls for assistance, number of accidents, injuries or deaths and the total monthly mileage and gasoline consumption clocked by the police vehicles; 
(6)  Maintain records of the name, assignments, residence, telephone number, date of appointment, and general conduct of each police officer; and 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be required of him or by the board of commissioners or county administrator. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 2, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 85-06, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 3-4-201.1. - Duties and powers of sheriff. 
(a)  The police powers of Henry County, Georgia, including animal control functions, shall be vested in the sheriff of the county, and the sheriff shall be designated as the chief administrator for the management and control of the Henry County Police and Animal Control Departments. 
(b)  The employment and dismissal of all county police officers and employees, animal control employees, and sheriff's department employees under the jurisdiction of the sheriff of Henry County as the chief administrator, shall be performed in accordance with the personnel policies of the County. 
(c)  The positions of chief of police, administrative assistant, major, and secretary to the chief are abolished, effective January 22, 1985. 
(d)  The chief administrator of law enforcement in Henry County shall be authorized to appoint two (2) chief deputy sheriffs and such other deputy sheriffs and assistants as he may deem necessary to fulfill the performance of his obligations of his office. The budget for these positions and for the operation of the combined departments shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for their approval. 
(e)  Any contractual agreements with municipalities within the county to provide police or animal control services for these municipalities which are funded, or may be funded, by Henry County, Georgia, shall exist and operate as may be agreed upon and funded by the board of commissioners. Any present or future agreements negotiated and funded by the board of commissioners shall be carried out by the chief administrator as named in this section. 
(Res. No. 85-05, 1-22-85) 
Cross reference— Organizational chart, § 3-2-71, sheriff as administrator of animal control department, § 3-4-3.1. 
Sec. 3-4-202. - Resisting, obstructing or following police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer, any member of the police department, or any other person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge of his duty, or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with, obstruct or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. No person shall follow any police officer, while in charge of any prisoner, after such person has been commanded to desist such following, or after any crowd has been commanded to disperse. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 13, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of law enforcement officers, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 3-4-203. - Impersonation of police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office, like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the county, unless such person is an official police officer of the county. This shall not affect the right of county employees or officials to carry authorized county identification cards. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 13, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Impersonation of officers, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 3-4-204. - False reports of crimes. 
No person within the county shall make to, or file with, the police department of the county or any police officer of the county any false, misleading, or unfounded statement, or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any ordinance violation occurring within the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 10, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— False report of crime, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-10-26. 
Sec. 3-4-205. - Intercepting police radio calls. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intercept radio calls of the police department for any unlawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 14, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-206. - Possession of weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, or carry upon the streets, alleys, or sidewalks, or in any public place in the county any of the following implements unless the same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three (3) inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and/or knives which do not close and any type knife with the blade open. 
(4)  Any razor or razor blade. 
(5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except this shall not apply to any person using such a device in pursuit of his employment, such as any person delivering ice. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 18, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Carrying concealed weapons, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-11-126. 
Sec. 3-4-207. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm within the confines of Henry County: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) yards of a public roadway; 
(2)  Within two hundred (200) yards of the dwelling house of another; 
(3)  Within any zoning district zoned and developed for residential purposes (except R-A zoning); or 
(4)  In such a manner as to endanger another's life, limb or property. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 18, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 89-13, 8-1-89) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms on or near public highway, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-11-103, discharge of firearms on property of another, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-11-104. 
Sec. 3-4-208. - Prostitution, etc. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, 
(1)  The term "prostitution" shall be construed to include the giving or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse (heterosexual or homosexual) for hire. Such term shall not include sexual intercourse between husband and wife. 
(2)  The term "lewdness" shall be construed to include any indecent or obscene act. 
(3)  The term "assignation" shall be construed to include the making of any appointment or engagement for prostitution or lewdness or any act in furtherance of such appointment or engagement. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the county: 
(1)  To keep, set up, maintain or operate any place, structure, building, or conveyance for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(2)  To offer, or to offer or agree to secure, another for the purpose of prostitution, or for any other lewd or indecent act. 
(3)  To receive, or to offer or agree to receive, any person into any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation, or to permit any person to remain there for such purpose. 
(4)  To direct, take or transport, or to offer or agree to take or transport, any person to any place, structure or building, or to any other person, with knowledge or reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking, or transporting is prostitution, lewdness, or assignation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful in the county for any person: 
(1)  To offer to commit, or to commit, or to engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(2)  To solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit prostitution, lewdness, or assignation with himself, or herself. 
(3)  To reside in, enter or remain in any place, structure, or building or to enter or remain in any conveyance, for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation. 
(4)  To aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts or things, enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 15, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Prostitution and related offenses, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-6-9 et seq. 
Sec. 3-4-209. - Public indecency. 
(a)  A person is guilty of public indecency under this section when he performs any of the following acts (heterosexual or homosexual) in a public place: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse. 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the sexual organs. 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity. 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of public indecency within the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 19, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 3-4-210. - Peeping Toms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lurk about the premises and near the private habitations of other persons, or to enter upon the private premises of another to spy or look into the houses or buildings used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 20, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Peeping toms, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-11-63. 
Sec. 3-4-211. - Injuring, defacing, etc. property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise to injure, deface, destroy, tamper or interfere with, or remove real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property belonging to or under supervision or control of a private individual or that of the county. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, disturb, or take any earth, stone or other material from any public property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface or destroy any shade tree on public property of the county unless authorized by the county administrator. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 16, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 3-4-212. - Disorderly houses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, rent or let any house, hall, or room within the jurisdiction of the county, for the congregating of disorderly, riotous or noisy persons or practices to assemble to the disturbance of the neighborhood or some part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 7, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Disorderly houses, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 3-4-213. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, or cause to be created, a disturbance which interferes with the peace, tranquility and good order of the community. Upon a valid complaint or actual observance by a police officer, the police department may abate said noise or disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 8, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Public disturbances, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 3-4-214. - False alarms. 
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 9, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-215. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, promote or play at any game of chance by lot or with dice, cards, numbers, hazards or any other gambling device whatever for the disposal of money or other thing of value, or under the pretext of a sale, gift, or delivery thereof, or for any right, share or interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 11, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Gambling and related offenses, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-12-20. 
Sec. 3-4-216. - Begging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to beg or solicit financial aid while upon any street or in any public park of the county, except for bona fide religious, civic or school purposes. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 5, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-217. - Children playing in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor child to loiter or play in the streets of the county. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the control or custody of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to become a loiterer on any street or to play in any street in the county. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 5, 7-20-82) 
Sec. 3-4-218. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of fourteen (14) years to be away from his home unescorted by a parent or guardian between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or for any person between the age of fourteen (14) years and the age of eighteen (18) years to be away from his home unescorted by a parent or guardian between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. It shall be unlawful for said persons, during said designated periods of time, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public street, highway, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public places, and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal care and custody of the minor or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business, directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the legal care and custody of a minor child coming within the provisions of this section during the time referred to therein to knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parents, guardian, or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor. 
(c)  Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Any minor violating the provisions of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with the Juvenile Court Code of Georgia and procedures authorized by said law, and in the event any minor violating the provisions of this section who is not specifically covered or dealt with in the Juvenile Court Code, such minor shall be subject, after having been charged with the same and found guilty in the probate court of the county, to the punishment as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 6, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Children wandering or loitering in public between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. declared unruly, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 15-11-2(12)(E). 
Sec. 3-4-219. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 3-4-219, which pertained to littering and derived from Ord. No. 82-10, § 21, enacted July 20, 1982, was repealed by Ord. No. 85-03, enacted April 16, 1985. 
Sec. 3-4-220. - Abandoned property. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle or other object left abandoned on the streets or on other public property within the jurisdiction of the county for a period exceeding seventy-two (72) hours, may be removed by, or at the direction of, the chief of police, and placed in storage, in order to preserve the safety of travel on the streets and the unobstructed use of public property. Any vehicle or object left abandoned in such a manner so as to create an obstruction, hazard or nuisance may be removed immediately upon direction of the chief of police. If owner can be ascertained, a letter of notification will be forwarded to the owner so that they are aware of the action taken and the location of the vehicle. 
(b)  Abandoned property which remains unclaimed for sixty (60) days or longer after removal and storage shall be sold at public outcry as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  After the expiration of sixty (60) days after removal and storage, notice of the sale of such abandoned property shall be placed in the county's official legal organ. Said notice shall describe the property and give other such information as will put the owner or other persons having knowledge thereof in possession of the facts, stating that the abandoned property will be exposed for sale at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash, on a specified date and hour, not less than ten (10) days after advertisement, at the place where same is located. The rules governing such advertisement and sale shall be governed by state law. 
(d)  On the date and hour specified by the advertisement, at the place where the abandoned property is located, said property shall be exposed to sale at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the designated wrecker company possessing a county contract in payment for the removal, storage and advertisement of the abandoned property. 
(e)  The designated wrecker company possessing a county contract shall submit to the board of commissioners through the county administrator, a written report of each such sale, including a copy of the newspaper advertisement, a description of the abandoned property sold corresponding to the advertisement, the date of removal from the streets or other public property, the date and time of the sale, the name and address of the purchases, and the sale price. Each such report shall thereafter be kept in a permanent file for such reports by the county clerk. 
(f)  If the county administrator shall, at any time, desire to purchase for the county, for lawful county purposes, any abandoned property exposed for sale as herein provided, he may authorize any officer or employee of the county to bid for the county at such sale. Such authorization shall specify the property to be bid for and maximum amount which may be bid by such officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 4, 7-20-82) 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 3-4-221. - Penalties. 
The punishment for any ordinance violation shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or sixty (60) days imprisonment, or both. In addition, costs may be assessed in an amount not to exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) per offense. 
(Ord. No. 85-06, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 3-4-222. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-05, adopted Sept. 6, 2016 , amended § 3-4-222 and redesignated said section as § 3-4-136. 
Secs. 3-4-223—3-4-300. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 4 - Traffic and Motor Vehicles[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of county governing authority to regulate traffic, § 1-1-1, junked motor vehicles, § 3-16-21 et seq., cross fire hose, § 3-8-112. 
State Law reference— Uniform rules of the road, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 40-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-4-301. - Traffic signs, signals, etc. 
The erection and location of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings which are in place on the adoption date of this Code are hereby ratified and approved by the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Authority to erect traffic control signs, etc., Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 40-6-370, obedience to traffic control devices, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 40-6-20. 
Sec. 3-4-302. - Authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle or law enforcement vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle or law enforcement vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of any contrary provisions of the Code of Henry County; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life or property; and 
(4)  Disregard regulation governing direction of movement or turning in specific directions. 
(c)  The exceptions granted by this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of an audible signal and the use of flashing or revolving blue or red lights visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 25, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 82-14, 8-17-82; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 7-18-05) 
State Law reference— Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 40-6-6. 
Sec. 3-4-303. - Speed limits on county roads. 
The following speed limits shall be enforced on county roads, unless otherwise posted: 
(1)  On paved roads, fifty-five (55) miles per hour; 
(2)  On dirt roads, thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, 2-1-83; Res. No. 84-02, § 1, 1-17-84) 
Secs. 3-4-304—3-4-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRUCK ROUTES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 84-17, enacted Sept. 18, 1984, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of §§ 1—5 of said ordinance as Subch. 4, Art II, §§ 3-4-321—3-4-325, is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-4-321. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Deviating truck is a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while travelling inside the city. 
Truck is any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds seven (7) tons (fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds). 
Truck route is a way over certain streets as designated herein, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the county must operate. 
(Ord. No. 84-17, § 1, 9-18-84) 
Sec. 3-4-322. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  Area. All trucks within the unincorporated limits of the county shall be operated only over and along the truck routes herein established and on the other designated roads over which truck travel is permitted. 
(b)  Exceptions. This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Operation on road of destination. The operation of trucks upon any road when necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided roads upon which such truck traffic is permitted within this article are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any road in the county. 
(3)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city or county public utilities, or public works, any contractor or material subcontractor while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of roads, road improvements or road utilities within the county. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(Ord. No. 84-17, § 2, 9-18-84) 
Sec. 3-4-323. - Truck routes established. 
There are hereby established within the unincorporated limits of the county the following truck routes: 
(1)  Outside origin; outside destination: All trucks entering the county for destination points outside the county shall be operated only over the following designated routes: 
a.  Expressways/limited access highways: 
1.  U.S. Interstate I-75. 
2.  U.S. Interstate 19/41. 
3.  U.S. I-675. 
b.  State highways: 
1.  Georgia Highway 155. 
2.  Georgia Highway 42 (U.S. 23). 
3.  Georgia Highway 138. 
4.  Georgia Highway 81. 
5.  Georgia Highway 20. 
c.  County roads: 
1.  Hudson Bridge Road, between Jodeco Road and Highway 42. 
2.  Quarry Road, between Hudson Bridge Road and Highway 42. 
3.  Industrial Boulevard, east of I-75 between Highway 20 and Highway 155. 
4.  Industrial Parkway, west of I-75, between Highway 155 and Highway 20. 
5.  Racetrack Road, between Highway 81 east and Highway 42. 
6.  East Noah's Ark Road, between Jodeco Road and the Clayton County line, but only if the truck utilizing said route is moving a house pursuant to a conditional use permit issued in conformity with Chapter 3-7 of this Code. All other truck traffic on said road is prohibited. 
7.  Old Dixie Highway (Old State Highway 3), between Clayton County line and Spalding County line. 
8.  Jodeco Road, between Highway 42 and Clayton County line. 
9.  McDonough By-pass (Cedar Street extension). 
(2)  Outside or inside origin; inside destination: 
a.  One inside destination point. All trucks entering or in the county for a destination point in the county shall proceed over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest possible route. 
b.  Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the county for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(3)  Inside origin; outside destination: All trucks on a trip originating in the county, and travelling in the county for a destination point outside the county, shall proceed by the most direct route in the direction of its destination to the nearest truck route. 
(Ord. No. 84-17, § 3, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 84-20, 12-4-84; Ord. No. 87-24, 12-15-87; Ord. No. 95-05, 5-1-95) 
Sec. 3-4-324. - Enforcement. 
(a)  County administrator maps. The county administrator shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the county administrator and shall be available to the public. 
(b)  County department of transportation maintains signs. The county department of transportation shall cause all truck routes to be clearly posted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(c)  Weigh-in. Any law enforcement agency of unincorporated Henry County shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over truck routes to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 84-17, § 4, 9-18-81; Ord. No. 87-24,12-15-87) 
Sec. 3-4-325. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the magistrate court of Henry County, Georgia, or upon plea of guilty or nolo contendere, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or up to sixty (60) days' confinement in the county detention facility. 
(Ord. No. 84-17, § 5, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 87-24, 12-15-87) 
Secs. 3-4-326—3-4-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKER SERVICES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-09, adopted June 6, 2017, adopted Wrecker Services Policy which is attached as Exhibit "A" to said ordinance. Therefore provisions formerly codified as §§ 3-4-331—3-4-344, as derived from Ord. No. 08-03, adopted Apr. 15, 2008, have been repealed. Said Wrecker Services Policy to be administered by county staff. 

Secs. 3-4-331—3-4-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED HUMPS 

Sec. 3-4-350. - Purpose. 
In response to an increasing number of complaints regarding speeding problems in residential neighborhoods, the Henry County Department of Transportation (the "department") has studied available alternatives and methods employed by other similarly situated communities and how effectively and successfully those communities have addressed residential speeding problems. The installation of speed humps was found to be a popular and relatively cost effective measure in reducing average speeds. When properly designed and installed, and with strong majority community backing and support, speed humps were found to be effective at reducing speeds in neighborhoods. After much experimenting and testing, including testing on Henry County roads, the use of speed humps has been widely endorsed by transportation authorities. In the United States, a policy on the use of speed humps has been developed by a special committee of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). As a result of these preliminary efforts, the following procedures have been established for groups of citizens in Henry County who want to pursue the installation of speed humps in their neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97) 
Sec. 3-4-351. - Criteria for installation. 
Henry County will consider the installation of speed humps only on streets classified by the department as local residential streets. Traffic studies conducted by the department must find that a speeding problem exists based on a standard eighty-fifth percentile of at least eleven (11) miles per hour over the posted speed limit. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97) 
Sec. 3-4-352. - Request for study; public hearing. 
An authorized officer of an organized homeowners' association or the majority of homeowners within a platted subdivision may, through an informal petition or letter, request that a subdivision be studied for the speed hump installation. The letter or petition must demonstrate that the desires of a majority of the property owners in that subdivision are represented. The results of the subdivision traffic speed study may be directed to the subdivision representative by certified mail, or, upon request, will be presented by the department to a subdivision at a public hearing organized, arranged, and publicized by the subdivision group along with a general presentation on speed humps. All property owners in the subdivision shall be notified by an authorized representative of the subdivision group of the time and place of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 3-4-353. - Preparation of the petition. 
A formal petition in such form prescribed by the department shall be filed with the department requesting the speed humps be installed within the subdivision. All property owners in the subdivision shall be notified by an authorized representative of the subdivision group and afforded an opportunity to sign the petition. Each property owner shall indicate his or her preference for the installation of subdivision speed humps by marking a "YES or "NO" on the petition. If more than one (1) person owns the property, all parties shall sign the petition, individually to be counted. Renting tenants are not an acceptable substitute for the legal property owner and may not sign petitions as related to this program. No valid signature will be withdrawn from the petition after it is filed with the department. Each person signing the petition shall sign before a witness who shall be available to verify the signature of a property owner. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 3-4-354. - Number of signatures required; filing of the petition. 
At least fifty-one (51) percent of the property owners in a subdivision must indicate an affirmative preference for speed humps before a petition will be considered by the department for recommendation to the board of commissioners The percentages shall be calculated by dividing the total number of property owners by the total number of property owners indicating an affirmative preference. For purposes of determining the number of property owners in the subdivision, the geographical boundaries of the subdivision shall be established by the department using the data base of the county's taxing authorities. In the event a subdivision is not completely built out, a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the total number of residences must be occupied before a petition for the installation of speed humps will be considered. The completed petition must state the name and address of the representative of the subdivision group, it must be signed by the representative before a notary public and returned to the department where it will be checked against property tax records to insure that all requirements are met. Those petitions failing to meet specified requirements will be returned to the representative for compliance. Petitions meeting all requirements will be presented at the next regular board of commissioners' business meeting for approval or disapproval by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 02-12, § 3, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 3-4-355. - Construction of the speed humps; warning posted. 
The geometric design of speed humps has been proven to be a critical factor in terms of their safety and effectiveness in lowering speeds. Based on extensive research, speed humps shall be constructed with the following specifications: 
Four (4) inches maximum vertical rise, twenty-two (22) feet in horizontal length, and incline-flattop-decline. 
Each individual speed hump location shall require posting of standard warning signs that will be installed along the back of the curb within the county owned rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97) 
Sec. 3-4-356. - Procedure for removal. 
The county shall remove speed humps under the following conditions: 
(1)  A formal petition in the form as prescribed in section 3-4-353 above shall be filed with the department indicating that seventy-five (75) percent of the property owners request the removal of the speed humps; 
(2)  The petition shall contain a statement acknowledging that the property owners are aware of the probability that vehicular traffic speeds within the subdivision may increase after the speed humps are removed; and 
(3)  The humps shall not have been installed less than one (1) year from the date of receipt of the petition. 
In the event a subdivision is not completely built out, a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the total number of residences must be occupied before a petition for the removal of speed humps will be considered. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 02-12, § 4, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 3-4-357. - Timing. 
The installation of the speed humps shall be completed, weather permitting, in approximately three (3) months or less from the date the petition is approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 02-12, § 5, 8-5-2002) 
Secs. 3-4-358—3-4-400. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-12, § 6, adopted Aug. 5, 2002, repealed § 3-4-358 which pertained to collection of charges for installation and maintenance of speed humps. Such section derived from Ord. No. 97-03, adopted Feb. 18, 1997. 
Subchapter 5 - Civil Defense 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-4-401. - Crisis relocation plan adopted. 
The Henry County, Georgia Crisis Relocation Plan, dated December, 1982, is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this Code. 
Secs. 3-4-402—3-4-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 84-09, enacted May 15, 1984, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of §§ 1—6 of said ordinance as Art. II, §§ 3-4-431—3-4-436, is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-4-431. - Definition of plan. 
As used in this article, the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent treat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plat protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 84-09, § 1, 5-15-84) 
Sec. 3-4-432. - Office established; director; duties. 
The board of commissioners of Henry County hereby establishes the "Henry County Emergency Management Office." The board of commissioners shall nominate, for appointment by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county and in voluntary cooperation with the cities of Henry County on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist county and city officials in organizing departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with county and city departments and agencies, the "Henry County Plan for Emergency Functions" as set forth in section 3-4-431 of this article. Such plan will be in consonance with the state "Natural Disaster Operations Plan and Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan," and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Henry County and the cities and/or towns therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management director for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit these and other reports as required by county governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g. financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To procure, with the authority of county governing officials, a facility to be used as the Henry County Emergency Operations Center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operations center staff during periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of the director, the Henry County Board of Commissioners or the county administrator. 
(Ord. No. 84-09, § 2, 5-15-84) 
Sec. 3-4-433. - Emergency management organization. 
(a)  The Henry County Emergency Management Organization shall be established around existing county and city departments and agencies, and the emergency functions listed in section 3-4-431 above are assigned as follows: 

 
*As appropriate to local organization; function can be assigned to an existing department or may be separate. 
(b)  Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Such plans will be submitted through the emergency management director to the county commission, via the county administrator and governing officials of cities where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 84-09, § 3, 5-15-84) 
Sec. 3-4-434. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of man-made or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Henry County, the chairman of the county commission, the county administrator, or the director of emergency management may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county; to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. No. 84-09, § 4, 5-15-84) 
Sec. 3-4-435. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the cities and county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 84-09, § 5, 5-15-84) 
Sec. 3-4-436. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 84-09, § 6, 5-15-84) 
Secs. 3-4-437—3-4-499. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 6 - Alarm Systems 

Sec. 3-4-500. - Definitions. 
[As used in this subchapter, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Alarm signal. A detectible signal, either audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which the Henry County Police Department, Sheriff's Department, and/or Henry County Fire Department is expected to respond. 
Alarm system. Any device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other event requiring immediate attention and to which the Henry County Police Department, Sheriff's Department, and/or Henry County Fire Department is expected to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles or fire alarms. 
Alarm systems coordinator. An employee of Henry County designated by the board of commissioners or county manager to administer this subchapter. 
Alarm user. 
(1)  The owner and/or resident of any residence in which a household alarm system has been activated; 
(2)  In the case of a commercial business, any manager or operator of a facility in which a commercial alarm system has been activated; or 
(3)  Any person(s) registered with the county as a user of an alarm system. 
Automatic dial protection device. An automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Henry County "911" Emergency Communications Center a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response. 
Calendar year. For purposes of this code section, calendar year shall be defined as beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31 of each year. 
Commercial alarm system. Any device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other event, including fire, at a commercial business or premises requiring immediate attention and to which the Henry County Police Department, Sheriff's Department and/or Fire Department is expected to respond. Apartment complexes shall be considered as commercial premises. 
False alarm. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement or emergency personnel unless response was canceled by the alarm user or his agent before personnel are dispatched to the alarm location. A false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated for the first time by unusual conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the alarm systems coordinator to test the system. An alarm is false within the meaning of this subchapter when, upon investigation or inspection by county employees, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, burglary, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted and no fire or other emergency existed in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. 
Household alarm system. Any device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other event at a residential address or premises requiring immediate attention and to which the Henry County Police Department, Sheriff's Department and/or Fire Department is expected to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles or fire alarms. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 05-03, § I, 3-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-4-501. - Standards for installation and alteration of alarm systems. 
The installation and alteration of alarm systems shall be in accordance with Article 760 "Fire Protective Signaling Systems" of the National Electrical Code, NFPA #70-1975 and the following NFPA standards: 
(1)  Standard 71—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of central station signaling systems. 
(2)  Standard 72-B—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of auxiliary protective signaling systems for fire alarm service. 
(3)  Standard 72-C—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote station protective signaling system. 
(4)  Standard 72-D—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote station protective signaling systems for watchman, fire alarm, and supervisory service. 
(5)  Standard 72-E—Standard on automatic fire detectors. 
(6)  Standard 74—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of household fire warning equipment. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 4-20-98) 
Sec. 3-4-501.1. - Registration of household/commercial alarm systems. 
(a)  No later than ten (10) business days following the activation of any household/commercial alarm system, the alarm user shall provide the following information to the director of Henry County Emergency Communications: 
(1)  The complete name, address and telephone number of the Alarm User; 
(2)  The names of all persons authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system signal as well as all telephone numbers at which such persons can be contacted; 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the alarm user's monitoring agent, if any; and 
(4)  If known, the name and telephone number of the person or entity that installed the alarm system. 
(b)  Any change in the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section must be reported to the director of Henry County Emergency Communications within five (5) business days. 
(c)  Household/commercial alarm system users utilizing alarm systems installed prior to the effective date of this code section shall provide the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section to the director of Henry County Emergency Communications no later than ninety (90) days following such effective date, unless sooner requested in writing by the chief of police or an authorized designee. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § II, 3-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-4-502. - False alarm determinations. 
(a)  Response. Whenever an alarm is activated in the unincorporated area of Henry County and Henry County law enforcement or emergency services personnel respond, a county employee on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area and determine whether the response was in fact necessary as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
(b)  Notification. If the county employee at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, he shall make a report of the false alarm. The alarm user and alarm systems coordinator shall be supplied with copies of each false alarm determination report. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 4-20-98) 
Sec. 3-4-503. - Review of false alarm determinations. 
(a)  Request for review. The alarm systems coordinator shall, when requested by an alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was false. Such review shall be conducted by the alarm systems coordinator only if the alarm user requests in writing such a review within ten (10) days of the date the alarm user was notified of the false alarm determination. The written request for review of a false alarm determination by the alarm systems coordinator shall include the following information: 
(1)  Alarm user name; 
(2)  Address at which alarm is installed; 
(3)  Date of false alarm that is being contested; 
(4)  Facts upon which the request for review of the false alarm determination is made. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 4-20-98) 
Sec. 3-4-504. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Code Section for any Alarm User to cause, allow or permit three (3) or more false alarms in any calendar year. 
(b)  Any alarm user that is not registered according to code section 3-4-501.1 shall be in violation of this code section immediately upon the first false alarm in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 99-16, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 05-03, § III, 3-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-4-504.1. - Penalties for violation of code section. 
(a)  Registered alarm users of household alarm systems found to be in violation of this code section shall be fined as follows: 
(1)  For the third false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)  For the fourth false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(3)  For the fifth and each subsequent false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  Unregistered alarm users of household alarm systems found to be in violation of this code section shall be fined as follows: 
(1)  For the first false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(2)  For the second false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(3)  For the third and each subsequent false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(c)  Registered alarm users of commercial alarm systems found to be in violation of this code section shall be fined as follows: 
(1)  For the third false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(2)  For the fourth false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00). 
(3)  For the fifth and each subsequent false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(d)  Unregistered alarm users of commercial alarm systems found to be in violation of this code section shall be fined as follows: 
(1)  For the first false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(2)  For the second false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). 
(3)  For the third and each subsequent false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(e)  False alarms shall not be counted for purposes of assessing the penalties provided in this section so long as such false alarms occur within ten (10) days following the installation of the household alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § IV, 3-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-4-504.2. - Enforcement and collection. 
(a)  All fines arising from violation of this code section shall be considered debts owed to Henry County. 
(b)  Lawful and customary debt collection practices shall be employed to collect any unpaid fines. 
(c)  Debts incurred as a result of violation of this code section shall be payable to the county within thirty (30) days of the date of notification of violation. 
(d)  Debts not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of notification of violation shall be turned over to a debt collection agency for collection and may be subject to additional fees. 
(e)  If the user of a household/commercial alarm system is turned over to a debt collector for collection action due to nonpayment within the provided thirty (30) days, the Director of Henry County Emergency Communications may revoke the registration obtained under code section 3-4-501.1. Such registration may not be renewed for six (6) months following the effective date of such revocation. 
(f)  For the purposes of this code section, an alarm user whose registration has been revoked shall be considered as an unregistered alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § V, 3-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-4-505. - Preexisting alarm systems. 
Alarm systems upon which substantial installation work has already begun on the effective date below [April 20, 1998] shall not be required to comply with the construction standards required by section 3-4-503(4) [3-4-501], yet such systems shall in all respects, be subject to the false alarm, penalty, and other provisions set forth in this subchapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 4-20-98) 
Secs. 3-5-506—3-4-550. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 7 - Emergency Management 

Sec. 3-4-551. - Definitions. 
As used in this subchapter, the following terms [shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning]: 
Locally declared emergencies. As used in this subchapter, a "locally declared emergency" or "declaration of local emergency" shall mean a declaration by the chair of the board of commissioners enacting some or all of the local emergency powers addressed in this outline. 
State declared emergencies. As used in this subchapter, a "state declared emergency" or a state of emergency" shall mean a declaration by the governor of an actual or impending emergency or disaster of natural or human origin, or pandemic influenza emergency, or impending or actual enemy attack, or a public health emergency, within or affecting Georgia or against the United States. A declaration of emergency by the governor may enact some or all of the emergency powers, local or otherwise, addressed in this subchapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 3-4-552. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(i)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the chair of the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for Henry County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(ii)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chair may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(ii)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chair finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chair shall execute and file with the clerk of the board of commissioners a document marking the end of the emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than thirty (30) days unless renewed by the chair. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(iv)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
(A)  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chair shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
(1)  The Henry County Emergency Management Agency ("EMA") Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
(2)  In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary appropriate survey of the damages caused by the emergency, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public, or private, for the purpose of evaluation sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(4)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the public's health, safety, or welfare, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(B)  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chair is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property, or to bring the emergency situation under control. 
(1)  State declared state of emergency. If the governor declares a state of emergency for the county, the chair may cause the following provisions of this subchapter to become effective: 
a.  Section 3-4-554, authority to waive procedures and fee structures; 
b.  Section 3-4-555, registration of building and repair services; and/or 
c.  Section 3-4-556, closed or restricted areas and curfews. 
(2)  Locally declared state of emergency. If the chair declares a local emergency for the county, the chair may cause the following provisions of this subchapter to become effective: 
a.  Section 3-4-554, authority to waive procedures and fee structures; and/or 
b.  Section 3-4-556, closed or restricted areas and curfews. 
If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
(C)  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 3-4-554 of this subchapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(D)  Additional emergency powers. The chair of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
(1)  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
(2)  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
(3)  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
(4)  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
(5)  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
(6)  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health, and welfare, and/or the property of citizens; 
(7)  To suspend any ordinance, resolution, order, rules or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county department, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
(8)  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals of families are unable to meet the expenses or need from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
(9)  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers, and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency", in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter that shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY' 
WHEREAS, Henry County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; 
WHEREAS, the Governor has/has not declared a state of emergency for Henry County; 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chair of the Henry County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Henry County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Henry County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event, certain actions are required. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED, that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the county's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the board of commissioners may contract with any municipality for the administration of an emergency response program. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 2, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 3-4-553. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this subchapter and/or implemented by the chair or [of] board of commissioners during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this subchapter, or with any Code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chair or [of] board of commissioners upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this subchapter. Any person who violates any provision in this subchapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations that are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this subchapter, and/or are implemented by the board of commissioners during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this subchapter may be enforced by the sheriff's office, the EMA director and board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 3-4-554. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any four (4) members of the board of commissioners without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four (4) weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any E-verify or systematic alien verification for entitlements ("SAVE") affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations, or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary permits for mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and development services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 4, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 3-4-555. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the Henry County Building and Inspections Department and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $________ per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(i)  Name of applicant; 
(ii)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(iii)  Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
(iv)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(v)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(vi)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past twelve (12) months; 
(vii)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(viii)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(ix)  Copy of license from the secretary of state, if required; 
(x)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(xi)  At least one (1) secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 5, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 3-4-556. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chair until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chair shall have discretion to impose re-entry restrictions on certain areas. The chair shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the county emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(i)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(ii)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(iii)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(iv)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(v)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(vi)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(vii)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (EMA); 
(viii)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(ix)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(x)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, the director of public safety, and/or the sheriff of the county. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 6, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 3-4-557. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions, and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this subchapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 7, 7-16-13) 
Secs. 3-4-558—3-4-600. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 8. - Portable Sanitation Contractors[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 

Sec. 3-4-601. - Applicability. 
These rules shall apply to all portable sanitation service providers except those being used in a facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the Department of Natural Resources under the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Sec. 3-4-602. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Approval" or "approved" means acceptable or accepted by the health authority in accordance with applicable specifications stated herein or with additional criteria applied by the authority. 
(b)  "Certified portable sanitation contractor" means an individual engaged in furnishing, renting, or servicing portable units, and that has met the certification requirements of this subchapter and is in good standing with the department. 
(c)  "Certified portable sanitation company" means a person engaged in the business of furnishing, renting or servicing portable sanitation units, and that has met the requirements of this subchapter and is in good standing with the department. 
(d)  "Construction site" means a development area in which building construction, repair, or land improvement is taking place. 
(e)  "Department" or ""DPH" means the Georgia Department of Public Health. 
(f)  "Health authority "means a county board of health organized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq. 
(g)  "Holding tank" means a water-tight container utilized temporarily to hold sewage from a portable sanitation unit. 
(h)  "Onsite sewage management system" means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system, whether serving single or multiple buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. It includes conventional septic tank systems and privies, as well as alternative onsite sewage management systems approved by the local health authority. 
(i)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation or association including bodies political and corporate. 
(j)  "Portable chemical toilet" means a self-contained non-flush portable toilet facility containing a solution of water and chemical intended for the collection and temporary storage of human body wastes. 
(k)  "Portable hand washing fixture" means any portable fixture containing fresh water, soap and disposable towels used for cleaning an individual's hands. 
(l)  "Portable sanitation contractor" means an individual performing services related to installation, pumping, transportation, disposal, maintenance, removal, or safe management of portable sanitation units and portable hand washing fixtures. 
(m)  "Portable sanitation unit" means any portable structure or fixture used for the collection, temporary storage and chemical treatment of human body wastes that is not connected to an onsite sewage management system or public or community sewerage system. It includes portable chemical toilets and portable hand washing fixtures. 
(n)  "Portable sanitation waste" means sewage from portable sanitation units or other equipment designed for temporary collection and storage of waste containing human excreta or residuals of such, or other waste having similar characteristics, and the ingredients used as part of operation of the portable sanitation unit. It does not include liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank or similar treatment works that receives commercial wastewater, industrial wastewater or grease removed from a grease trap. 
(o)  "Prohibited discharge" means the discharge or spillage of sewage from a portable sanitation unit in violation of law and that constitutes a public health nuisance. 
(p)  "Public health nuisance" means any condition with the potential to cause or promote pathogens, infection, or disease in any individual or the public in general. 
(q)  "Sanitary" means free of conditions with the potential to cause or promote pathogens, infection, or disease in any individual or the public in general. 
(r)  "Sewage" means human excreta, all water-carried wastes, and liquid portable sanitation waste including grey water from portable showers and hand washing fixtures. 
(s)  "Special event" means any temporary activity attracting more than fifty (50) persons and where individuals congregate to participate in or observe an activity in outdoor or portable enclosed or semi-enclosed structures for more than two (2) consecutive hours. 
(t)  "Toilet" means a sanitary fixture meeting health authority and plumbing code requirements for receipt and conveyance of human body wastes to a public or community sewerage system or an onsite sewage management system. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Sec. 3-4-603. - General provisions. 
(1)  The department shall regulate the use of temporary non-flush portable sanitation units, and shall regulate persons engaged in the business of furnishing, renting, or servicing portable chemical toilets, and portable hand washing facilities at locations where public sewage treatment systems or on-site sewage management systems are not available or lack sufficient quantities. 
(2)  No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of a portable sanitation unit without having obtained a "waste removal and disposal permit" from the health authority for the county in which the business is based. The permit must be renewed annually, and shall be valid in every county throughout the state. 
(3)  It is the responsibility of the certified portable sanitation contractor and certified portable sanitation company to maintain the portable sanitation unit in a safe and sanitary manner so as not to constitute a public health nuisance. 
(4)  The property owner and special event sponsor are responsible for all prohibited discharge and unapproved spillage of sewage associated with a portable sanitation unit. A portable restroom or portable hand wash fixture cannot be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage, dumping or discharge of sewage from such system to the ground surface, to a water course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, groundwater or other body of water. The property owner and special event sponsor must notify the portable sanitation company if any unit becomes unsanitary, unsafe, or causes a prohibited discharge. The property owner, as the originator, is responsible for ensuring that the portable sanitation unit is only used for the disposal of human excreta. Commercial waste, grease, hazardous chemicals, and nonhuman excreta shall not be discarded into portable sanitation units. 
(5)  Each special event sponsor and construction site owner utilizing a portable sanitation unit must and show proof of a service contract with a certified portable sanitation company. 
(6)  Portable sanitation unit must meet the requirements of this subchapter where sanitary facilities are needed on a temporary basis for construction sites and special events. 
(7)  Employees at all construction sites and the general public attending and participating in special events that are inadequately served by sewered toilet facilities should have easy access to portable sanitation units that are maintained in a clean, sanitary, and functional condition for the protection of human health, safety and welfare. Where a portable sanitation unit supplements or serves in lieu of sewered toilet facilities, the portable sanitation units shall meet the following guidelines: 
(a)  Must be furnished by a certified portable sanitation contractor or company holding a current "waste removal and disposal permit" issued by a health authority. 
(b)  The minimum number of portable sanitation units required during anticipated peak attendance at a construction site shall be determined in accordance with the most current Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Regulations for Toilets at Construction Sites (Appendix Table 1), after taking into consideration any sewered seated or urinal toilets that may be present at the site of the construction site. 
(c)  The minimum number of portable sanitation units required during anticipated peak attendance at a special event shall be determined in accordance with Table 2, after taking into consideration any sewered seated or urinal toilets that may be present at the site of the special event. 
(8)  Portable sanitation units shall be located as close as practical to the highest concentration of participants, observers and employees of special events. However, the units should be placed as far from the food service area as possible. The safety of users shall be a primary consideration in the placement of the units. At special events, portable sanitation units shall be accessible at all times for maintenance by truck. 
(9)  No strong bases, acids or organic solvents shall be used in the operation of a portable sanitation unit. Chemicals used in the cleaning, operation or maintenance of portable sanitation units shall be in accordance with applicable federal, state and local provisions. 
(10)  The fresh water tank on the service vehicle must be filled with potable water only. When hand wash fixtures are serviced, they must be filled with water from the fresh water tank on the truck or directly from a potable water source. All fresh water tanks on the service vehicles and affixed to hand wash fixtures must be labeled with the international symbol for "Do Not Drink". Each hand washing fixture must be sufficiently supplied with soap and paper towels adequate for the duration between servicing. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Sec. 3-4-604. - Construction of portable sanitation units. 
(1)  A portable sanitation unit shall be a portable self-contained sheltered unit equipped with a waste-receiving holding tank. The waste container shall be rigid, water-tight, made from impervious material, and capable of containing the waste in a sanitary manner. 
(2)  Portable sanitation units shall be constructed in the following prescribed manner: 
(a)  Each portable sanitation unit must have the name and phone number of the company clearly visible. 
(b)  Rooms or shelters housing the units shall be of solid construction, easy to clean, and provide privacy. The toilet room shall be ventilated to the outside and adequately lighted. All ventilation openings to the units, except vent pipes, shall be covered with a screen. 
(c)  Portable sanitation units shall have closing doors with internal latches provided to prevent inadvertent entry. 
(3)  Portable sanitation units having hand wash fixtures shall have an air gap between the water supply faucet and the flood level rim of the fixture sufficient to prevent backflow and cross contamination between the fresh water supply tank and the wastewater holding tank. 
(4)  Any defective or inadequate portable sanitation unit shall be repaired, replaced or withdrawn from service by locking or removal. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Sec. 3-4-605. - Removal and disposal of waste from portable sanitation units. 
(1)  Removal and disposal of waste from portable sanitation units shall be conducted only by a certified portable sanitation contractor in good standing with the department, pursuant to a "waste removal and disposal permit." 
(2)  The application for a "waste removal and disposal permit" shall be submitted in writing, on forms provided by the department, to the health authority for the county in which the business is based, at least ten (10) days prior to engaging in such activities. The health authority shall approve or disapprove the application within twenty (20) days after the receipt of a completed application. The application shall include the business name and address, name and address of the applicant, the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported and given final disposal, and such other documentation as required by the health authority, including evidence that waste removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall provide evidence of satisfactory compliance with the provisions of these rules. 
(3)  The permit shall be valid for no more than twelve (12) months, and shall be subject to suspension and revocation for failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations. Permits shall expire upon change in company ownership or business location. 
(4)  Removal of portable sanitation waste shall be conducted in a clean and sanitary manner by means of a vacuum hose to a leak proof tank truck on which all ports are properly valved and capped. The certified portable sanitation contractor is required to clean up all spillage during unit servicing. 
(a)  Service vehicles should be equipped with a portable sanitation waste tank adequately sized to service the units; a tank containing water for recharging the units; and when applicable or required, a fresh water tank filled with potable water to service the hand washing fixtures. 
(b)  Separate dedicated hoses shall be used for supplying potable water and servicing the portable sanitation unit. They shall be labeled or sized to prevent them from being interchanged and stored in such a manner to prevent cross contamination. 
(5)  It is the responsibility of property owners, employers, and event sponsors to ensure that portable sanitation units are serviced by a certified portable sanitation contractor or company in accordance with this rule at least once every seven (7) days, and more frequently as usage may require. 
(6)  Servicing shall include the use of a sanitizing solution for cleaning urinals and toilet seats, removing waste from containers, recharging containers with an odor controlling solution, and installing an adequate supply of toilet tissue. 
(7)  Portable sanitation waste from tank trucks must be disposed at a facility regulated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(8)  A manifest or route sheet must be maintained by the portable sanitation company for a period of twelve (12) months. The manifest or route sheet must include: 
(a)  Name or originator, event, sponsor; 
(b)  Address or route; 
(c)  Date and location of service; 
(d)  Date and location of final disposal; and 
(e)  Total of gallons being disposed. 
(9)  The county issued "waste removal and disposal permit" number, including the name of the person or firm engaging in the removal of portable sanitation unit waste, shall be lettered on both sides of each vehicle. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two (2) inches in height and shall be readily visible. 
(10)  Every vehicle used for service and removal of portable sanitation unit waste shall be equipped with watertight tanks or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained as to prevent leakage. The truck must also have adequate means to clean each unit in place with sanitizing solution. 
(11)  Signage or placard stating "Do Not Drink" shall be affixed to the fresh water supply tank and all portable hand washing fixtures. The fresh water supply tank, hand wash fixture's water supply tank and gray water storage tank must be cleaned with one (1) to ten (10) bleach to water solution (typically three (3) to six (6) percent sodium hypochlorite solution) or equivalent at least every forty-five (45) days to prohibit the growth of algae. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Sec. 3-4-606. - Certification of portable sanitation contractors and companies. 
(1)  The department shall be responsible for certifying individuals and companies performing services related to furnishing, renting, servicing, and maintenance of a portable sanitation unit. 
(2)  There shall be established an advisory committee to assist the department with certification, recertification and decertification of all individuals required to be certified under [Georgia Rules of the Department of Health] Chapter 511-3-6, this subchapter. The committee shall include at least two (2) individuals that are currently certified as portable sanitation contractors. The advisory committee will assist the department with the following: 
(a)  Establishing written tests to be administered for the various certifications, and revising such tests from time to time; 
(b)  Reviewing complaints regarding poor quality of work and unlawful or unethical practices, and recommending appropriate action by the department; 
(c)  Reviewing the content of educational programs and events and assigning appropriate continuing education units; 
(d)  Reviewing the established criteria for certification in the assigned specialties and recommending such modifications as are appropriate for the ongoing management of the process; and 
(e)  Providing such services or advice as will assist the department and health authorities in the effective enforcement of this subchapter. 
(3)  Certification of portable sanitation contractors: 
(a)  Individuals engaged in the cleaning installation and maintenance of portable sanitation units may obtain certification from the department as a portable sanitation contractor meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must be at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
2.  Must show proof of ownership or employment with a certified portable sanitation company currently operating in good standing with the department; and 
3.  Must successfully complete a written or oral examination concerning properly maintaining a portable sanitation unit in a clean, sanitary, and functional condition for the protection of human health, safety and welfare. Individuals currently certified by the portable sanitation association international as a health and safety certified portable sanitation worker are excluded from the examination requirement in this subchapter. However, all other requirements must be completed prior to receiving a certified portable sanitation contractor certificate. 
4.  The certification period is two (2) years. 
(b)  Certification may be renewed for a portable sanitation contractor upon meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary actions related to the portable sanitation industry; 
2.  Must submit a copy of business license or other verification of business or submit proof of employment with a certified portable sanitation company; 
3.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this subchapter during the certification period; 
(c)  A portable sanitation contractor whose certification has expired may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action related to the portable sanitation industry. 
2.  Must not have committed any illegal service or maintenance acts related to this subchapter following the expiration of the certification. 
3.  Must submit a copy of business license or other verification of business or submit proof of employment with a certified portable sanitation company; and 
4.  If more than two (2) years have passed since the certification expired, the applicant must take and pass the portable sanitation contractor exam in addition to meeting the continuing education requirement. 
(d)  A decertified portable sanitation contractor may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must wait at least two (2) years after decertification to re-apply: 
2.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary actions; 
3.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this subchapter during the decertification period; 
4.  Must submit a copy of business license or other verification of business or submit proof of employment with a certified portable sanitation company; and 
5.  Must take and pass the portable sanitation contractor exam with a score of seventy (70) or above. 
(4)  Certification of portable sanitation companies. 
(a)  Any person engaged in the business of cleaning, pumping, installation, and maintenance of portable sanitation units may be certified as a portable sanitation company by the department upon meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must employ at least one (1) person who is a certified portable sanitation contractor in good standing with the department; 
2.  May not associate with any person as owner, part owner, manager, or employee, whose certification has been revoked under this subchapter, unless and until such person has been recertified; and 
3.  The certification period is two (2) years. 
(b)  Certification may be renewed for a portable sanitation company upon meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action related to this subchapter; 
2.  Owner or designee must obtain at least six (6) hours of continuing education approved by the department; and 
3.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this subchapter during the certification period. 
(c)  A portable sanitation company whose certification has expired may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action related to this subchapter; 
2.  Must submit evidence of the owner's or their designee's completion of six (6) hours of continuing education as approved by the department; 
3.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this subchapter during the expiration period. 
(d)  A decertified portable sanitation company may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Must wait at least two (2) years after decertification to re-apply; 
2.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action relating to this subchapter; and 
3.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this subchapter during the decertification period. 
(5)  Fees. 
(a)  The certification examination fee is fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  The portable sanitation company fee shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the two-year certification period. Persons who achieve a passing score on the examination will be issued a numbered certificate upon receipt of the certification fee. 
(c)  The renewal fee shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Sec. 3-4-607. - Decertification of portable sanitation contractors and companies. 
(1)  The department may take disciplinary action, including suspension and revocation of the certification if the department finds that the contractor or company has failed to comply or maintain compliance with O.C.G.A. Title 31 or this subchapter, or has committed any of the following acts: 
(a)  Misrepresentation or falsification of information on any application or document submitted to the department or any health authority; or 
(b)  Conviction in any court of a felony or crime of moral turpitude. In the case of a corporation or other business entity, this provision shall apply in the event of such a conviction of any person associated with the company as an owner, partner, officer, director, or manager. 
(2)  The holder of any certification that is revoked under this rule shall not be eligible for recertification for a period of at least twenty-four (24) months. In the case of a portable sanitation company, this provision also shall apply to partners, co-owners, officers, directors, and stockholders of corporate providers involved in the company. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Sec. 3-4-608. - Appendix. 
Table 1: Maximum Number of Portable Sanitation Units at Construction Sites 

 
* The number of potable sanitation units required shall be determined by the maximum number of workers present on a regular eight-hour shift. Shifts lasting longer than eight (8) hours (forty-hour work week) should double the number of portable sanitation units. 
** "Servicing" refers to the emptying of waste and the cleaning of the portable sanitation unit. 
Table 2: Portable Sanitation Units for Special Events Planning 

 
Based on "Portable Restroom Requirements at Special Events and Crowd Gatherings" Center for Business and Industrial Studies, University of Missouri-St. Louis 
•  Determine the appropriate potable sanitation units needed from the table above. 
•  For each sewered toilet available onsite, subtract one (1) from the previously calculated number. 
•  If alcoholic beverages are to be served, add twenty-five (25) percent to the base number. 
•  For peak crowd numbers that fall between chart numbers, round up to the next base number. 
•  Units shall be provided in accordance with the Georgia Accessibility Code following state or local requirements. 
•  Table based on units being serviced daily. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 4-5-16 ) 
Chapter 3-5 - PUBLIC WORKS 
Subchapter 1 - Roads and Bridges[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Driveways and parking lots for certain buildings, § 3-6-1; signs along interstate highways, § 3-10-16 et seq.; traffic, § 3-4-301 et seq. 

Sec. 3-5-1. - Permit for roadwork. 
No person shall do any paving work, or any other related or similar road work, on, or adjacent to, a county road without a permit issued by the board of commissioners. 
(Mo. of 2-6-73) 
State Law reference— Authority of county over roads, Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 32-4-41, 32-4-42. 
Sec. 3-5-2. - Road work to comply with county specifications. 
A person doing any paving work, or any other similar or related road work, on, or adjacent to, a county road shall do such work in accordance with all specifications and requirements of the board of commissioners. 
(Mo. of 2-6-73) 
Sec. 3-5-3. - Protecting roads, etc.; trucks, etc. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to protect the county road system, bridges, and ditches from damage and excessive maintenance costs occasioned by the travel of heavily laden trucks over said road system. 
(b)  For the purpose of delivery or transport of goods, articles or wares that all such heavily laden trucks or delivery vehicles proceed over state routes, truck routes, or major highway systems for the delivery of their goods where at all possible or feasible. 
(c)  Said delivery or transport vehicles shall not proceed over residential paved streets unless the use of said residential route is essential to their delivery. 
(d)  Delivery or transport vehicles shall not proceed routinely over the county's unimproved road system during periods of rain or inclement weather when clearly, said travel causes excessive damage and maintenance to the road system such that road conditions for the passage of smaller and lighter passenger vehicles has been substantially hampered. 
(e)  Heavily laden delivery and transport vehicles are restricted from crossing county bridges, where their carted load exceeds the posted load limit of said bridge. 
(f)  All pulpwood, logging, or other timber cutting operations which necessitate the use of county roads and crossing county right-of-way ditches, shall, prior to commencement of such operation, apply for and be issued a permit to cross such ditches from the county engineering and road department. The applicant shall install and bear the entire expense of an approved culvert pipe for the purpose of crossing the ditch; and at the conclusion of the applicant's operations, the applicant shall return and bear the expense of returning the ditch to its original or better condition by the applicant. The applicant may be required to restore and shape the ditch, backslope and road shoulders. The county shall inspect the ditch prior to installation and after the removal of the culvert pipe. The fee for each permit provided for in this section shall be thirty dollars ($30.00), to be paid upon filing the application. 
(g)  Failure of any person to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 83-05, 2-1-83; Ord. No. 89-14, 9-5-89) 
Sec. 3-5-4. - Road classification system—Generally. 
(a)  Roadways may be created by: 
(1)  Dedication; 
(2)  Prescription; 
(3)  Express grant of an easement; 
(4)  Deed; 
(5)  Special statutory proceeding; or 
(6)  Condemnation. 
(b)  The board of commissioners has determined that there shall be the following classification of roadways in the county: 
(1)  Private roadways. A private road is a roadway that is created by an easement from a land owner to a certain individual or individuals and the use of said road can be controlled by the parties to the easement. It has been determined by the county zoning ordinance that there can be only one building permit issued by a private easement roadway. 
(2)  Public roadways. A public roadway is a roadway where the general public has acquired an implied easement for a roadway over the property of others by virtue of the unobstructed use of said roadway for a sufficient length of time to establish a public easement over the roadway. Public roadways are roadways over which the public has the right to travel, but have not been accepted by the governing authority of the county as county roads and the county assumes no responsibility to maintain said roadways. 
Upon compliance with all of the provisions of the county zoning ordinance, building permits will be issued for building on public roads upon the applicant signing a "statement of understanding" that said roadway is a public road and that the county assumes no responsibility for the maintenance of said road until such time as it becomes feasible and advisable to accept said roadway as a "county road." The county at such time will accept said road as a county road upon the property owners along said road conveying a right-of-way to the county conveying the minimum width required by the county. 
(3)  County roadways. A county roadway is one that has been acquired by dedication, by prescription, by the express grant of an easement, by deed, by statutory proceedings, or by condemnation, and further has been accepted by the governing authority of the county and designated as a "county road" and has assumed the responsibility to maintain said road for the general public. Upon compliance with the provisions of the county zoning ordinance, building permits will be issued on county roads. 
(Res. No. 82-36, §§ I—IV, 11-16-82) 
Sec. 3-5-5. - Same—Unpaved roads. 
(a)  Findings of fact; scope: 
(1)  Henry County encompasses an area of three hundred thirty-one (331) square miles and at the present time has approximately three hundred sixteen (316) miles of unpaved roads and approximately three hundred seventy (370) miles of paved roads; 
(2)  The county is in the process of completing a road inventory showing all of the roads in Henry County and the classification of said roads as they exist; 
(3)  The governing authority of Henry County has determined that there are certain unpaved roads within the county that are not used for the general public benefit and, it is not economically feasible or legally justifiable for the taxpayers of the county to maintain these roadways, some of which are no more than private driveways, and these roadways, if they have been maintained by the county, will be abandoned as public roads in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, Sections 32-7-1 and 32-7-2; and 
(4)  It is the desire of the governing authority of Henry County to adopt the following policy concerning the types, uses and maintenance schedule of the unpaved roads in the county. 
(b)  Creation or establishment of roadways. Roadways must be created by: 
(1)  Dedication; 
(2)  Prescription; 
(3)  Express grant of an easement; 
(4)  Deed; 
(5)  Special statutory proceeding; or 
(6)  Condemnation. 
(c)  Types of roadways. The governing authority of Henry County has determined that there shall be the following classifications of unpaved roads in the county: 
(1)  Private roadways. A private roadway is a roadway that is created by an easement from a land owner to a certain individual or individuals and the use of said road can be controlled by the parties to the easement. In addition, private roadways are roadways that are not used for the general public purpose. It has been determined by the Henry County Code that there can be only one (1) building permit issued on a private easement. These private roadways will not be maintained by the county. 
(2)  Public roadways with rights-of-way of sixty (60) feet or greater. These are roadways that are used for the general public purpose and have rights-of-way of greater than sixty (60) feet. These roadways will be maintained by the county consistent with the maintenance policy developed by the Henry County Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Public roadways with deeded rights-of-way of fifty (50) feet or greater but less than sixty (60) feet. These are roadways that are used for the general public purpose and have deeded rights-of-way of fifty (50) feet or greater but less than sixty (60) feet. These roadway rights-of-way were deeded to the county at a time when a fifty-foot right-of-way was sufficient according to the ordinances in effect in Henry County at the time of acceptance. These roadways will be maintained by the county consistent with the maintenance policy developed by the Henry County Department of Transportation and in accordance with deeded rights-of-way. 
(4)  Public roadways with rights-of-way less than sixty (60) feet. These are roadways which are used for the general public purpose and have rights-of-way of less than sixty (60) feet. These roadways will be maintained by the county in accordance with the maintenance policy developed by the Henry County Department of Transportation, but will not be maintained to the same standard as roads categorized in paragraph (b) hereof, because of insufficient rights-of-way. These roads will be upgraded to paragraph (b) as rights-of-way of sixty (60) feet or greater and deeded to Henry County by adjoining land owners. 
(d)  Inventory of roads. The county shall maintain a road inventory showing all of the roads in Henry County and the classification of such roads as they exist in accordance with this statement of policy. 
(Res. No. 85-14, 4-2-85) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 85-14, enacted April 2, 1985, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of such resolution as a new § 3-5-5 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 3-5-6—3-5-100. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 2 - Solid Wastes[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 94-04, adopted September 20, 1994, repealed Ch. 3-5, Subchpt. 2, Arts. I, II, §§ 3-5-101—3-5-103, 3-5-116—3-5-125, 3-5-136—3-5-142 and added a new Ch. 3-5, Subchpt. 2, Art. I in lieu thereof. Former Subchpt. 2, Arts. I, II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 76-14, §§ 1—17, adopted December 7, 1976; Ord. No. 84-12, adopted June 19, 1984; Ord. No. 86-19, adopted December 16, 1986 and Ord. No. 87-13, adopted June 16, 1987. 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 12-8-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-5-101. - Definitions. 
The purpose of this article and in addition to, their common meanings, the following words and/or phrases shall have the respective meanings assigned to them. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house or complex, rooming house, business, industrial, public or semi-public establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single-family dwelling unit/residential unit or condominium. 
Commercial solid waste means refuse from a commercial establishment, stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes, as defined herein, including but not limited to waste material from industry. Commercial solid waste also includes waste materials from the construction, remodeling and repair of houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures, such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust (construction/demolition waste). However, the term "solid waste" does not include yard trimmings or excluded items. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure. 
Construction/demolition waste means building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste includes, but are not limited to waste containing asbestos, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Contract hauler means a person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity which collects, transfers and/or disposes of solid waste material. 
Excluded item means any item which must carry a permit to be disposed or hauled; any item which is classified as hazardous under Subtitle C, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any item which is explosive, combustible or dangerous to handle without special equipment and training; includes but not limited to: batteries, tires, asbestos, and appliances with freon, and some paints. 
Licensee means a person, persons or entity issued a license by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, who, for compensation by those receiving services, does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, similar locations, or residential dwellings, provided this definition shall not include an individual collecting and transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling. 
Garbage. See "solid waste." 
Hauler. See "contract hauler." 
Household waste means any solid waste (including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks) derived from households (including single and multiple-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas). This terms does not included yard trimmings, excluded items, or industrial waste. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes that is not a hazardous waste regulated under Subtitle C of RCRA. Such waste may include, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/by-products; inorganic chemical; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textiles manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste, oil and gas waste, yard trimmings or excluded items. 
Landfill. See "Municipal solid waste landfill." 
Litter means nonhazardous illegally discarded solid waste which includes, but is not limited to, paper, household appliances, furniture, and tires. 
Mulch means chipped or ground yard trimmings and land clearing debris. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels, motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste landfill (MSWLF) means a discrete area of land or an excavation which receives household waste, and is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or waste pile, as those terms as defined in Subtitle D of RCRA. A MSWLF may receive other types of RCRA Subtitle D waste, such as commercial solid waste, nonhazardous sludge, small quantity generator waste and industrial solid waste. Such a landfill may be publicly or privately owned. A MSWLF may be a new MSWLF, or existing MSWLF, or a lateral or vertical expansion. 
Occupants. See "owner." 
Open dump means a disposal facility of which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity owning, leasing, renting, occupying, or managing any real property in unincorporated Henry County. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation Standard of at least 1.5 mills and not exceeding a thirty-gallon capacity, with securing twist ties. An untied plastic bag shall not be an approved container. 
Putrescible waste means capable of being decomposed by micro-organisms. Examples of putrescible waste include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and some types of garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing material from solid wastes for future use. 
Recovered materials means materials which have a known use, reuse or recycling potential; which can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the waste stream for reclamation by sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means the process by which recovered materials or other materials which could otherwise become solid waste are diverted from the waste stream and are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse. See "solid waste." 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter of any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one (1) family. 
Roofing materials means material used to roof houses or businesses; including, but not limited to, asphalt shingles, tar, nails, roofing felt. 
Rubbish. See "solid waste." 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site for solid waste which is operated in accordance with all State of Georgia laws and regulations and all federal laws and regulations, and which has been approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for such purpose. 
Sludge means any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial waste water treatment plant, water supply facility exclusive of the treated effluent from a waste water treatment plant. 
Solid waste means household, commercial, or industrial solid waste which is nonhazardous, non-medical, and in a form classified as solid by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Specially handled waste means any municipal solid waste which requires special handling or time to pickup, such as appliances, tires, yard trimmings, etc. 
Waste stream means the total flow of solid waste from residential, commercial, and industrial sources generated within unincorporated Henry County. 
Yard trimmings means grass clippings, leaves, tree and bush limbs, sticks, tree trunks and other organic matter discarded from yards and gardens. "Yard trimmings" does not include treated wood or wood products, plastic containers or any items which is considered solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-102. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall place or deposit any excluded item into the waste stream. Items such as batteries, and tires shall be recycled and may be picked up by licensee for recycling according to section 3-5-105(c) and section 3-5-108(e). 
(b)  No person, individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity may collect and dispose of solid waste for a few without first obtaining an approved license permit from the occupational tax office. 
(c)  No owner or occupant of real estate shall allow his or her solid waste to be disposed of in any manner which is inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 7, 8, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-5-103. - Licenses. 
(a)  A licensee zone area map is hereby adopted and attached to this article as Exhibit "A." Copies of this article and map shall be available for public inspection in the administration office, board of commissioners, Henry County, Georgia. 
(b)  A license for residential or commercial collection and disposal of solid waste for one (1) or more areas designated on the zone area map may be issued upon application, and approval of said application, by the occupational tax office. 
(c)  Licensees shall provide collection services for the entire zone area. In residential areas may operate only between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 9, 10, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-5-104. - Requirements for license. 
All licensees must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Permit. Prior to engaging in solid waste handling in Henry County, a licensee must have obtained a solid waste handling permit from the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or any successor agency authorized to issue permits pursuant to Official Code of Georgia 12-8-24. 
(2)  Insurance. At the time of submission of a signed license agreement and prior to engaging in solid waste handling in Henry County, and annually thereafter, or upon request, each licensee shall provide to the board of commissioners proof of insurance as follows: 
a.  Statutory Worker's Compensation Insurance. 
b.  Comprehensive general liability insurance—One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
c.  Vehicle liability. 
1.  Five-hundred-thousand dollar limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
2.  Comprehensive covering all owned, non-owned and hired vehicles. 
3.  All insurance contracts must specify vehicles for "solid waste collection." 
(3)  Indemnification. Licensee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments from third parties for damages which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortuous conduct or operations arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, whether or not the action or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article. This indemnification shall include attorneys' fees and other expenses of litigation incurred by the county. 
(4)  Financial stability. Licensee obtaining both residential and commercial licenses must meet financial stability criteria. 
(5)  Vehicles. 
a.  All vehicles and containers used for collection operations shall comply with the requirements of Rule 391-3-4.06 of Chapter 391-3-4 (Solid Waste Management) of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection division, and must be compactor-type trucks, covered or enclosed vehicles. All vehicles must be constructed of durable metal, easily cleanable and able to prevent litter from escaping during movement. 
b.  Vehicles and containers shall meet all requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation for highway safety and local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets which must be traveled for pick-up. All vehicles shall be subject to unannounced inspections by county officials for compliance with environmental and highway safety standards. 
c.  All vehicles shall be identified by displaying the name, telephone number and business license number of the licensee on both sides of the vehicle. The telephone numbers shall also be displayed on the rear of the vehicle. All identifying information must be easily readable in letters at least six (6) inches high. 
d.  Licensees shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. Nothing in this article shall prohibit licensees from sharing back-up vehicles with other licensees; provided, such sharing is adequately covered by insurance. 
e.  Vehicles used exclusively for collection and transporting recovered materials or for special waste shall be exempt from item one of this article except that an adequate cover shall be used to prevent litter from escaping during movement. 
(6)  Reporting requirements. Within thirty (30) days from June 30 and December 31, licensee shall submit to the occupational tax office reports of operation disclosing the following information: 
a.  Monthly tonnage figures reflecting total waste tonnage collected by service type; residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional. 
b.  Monthly tonnage figures reflecting total recovered materials collected by type and proof of recycling in the form of manifests, bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the material to a recognized recycling facility. 
c.  Evidence of disposal of noncovered materials at state-approved facilities and name of each such facility. 
The above information shall be complied for reporting purposes, as may be required from time to time, by the occupational tax office. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 11, 12, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-5-105. - Residential service. 
All licensees shall provide a minimum of the following services: 
(1)  Weekly curb service collection of residential waste packaged as approved pursuant to section 3-5-108 of this article, except as otherwise set forth herein. Each licensee shall set uniform fees for collection. Charges for residential collection and removal services shall be charged to the owners of the real property served, except that by requesting services, any tenant may become jointly bound to pay for the service. Uniform rates for a licensee's services shall be maintained within that zone for which the license is granted. However, in sparsely populated areas of a zone where the expenses for collection are greater, the licensee may charge a higher rate, not to exceed fifteen (15) percent over and above that amount charged all others in the same zone. 
(2)  Collection for disabled persons and senior citizens sixty-five (65) or older as defined in section 3-5-106 shall be made and billed as directed in that section. 
(3)  All residential customers shall participate in recycling. At least monthly, licensee's shall collect items from a county approved list of recyclables. The board of commissioners reserves the right to change the type and number of recovered materials, and to re-determine collection and disposal of yard trimmings. Licensees shall provide a proper mechanism for recycling. Licensees shall not dispose of recovered materials in landfills. All licensees shall participate fully in recycling. It is the intent of this section, all zones and licensees will have recycling at the curb no later than July 1, 1996. 
(4)  Upon recovered materials being placed in designated recycling containers for collection, they shall become the property of the licensee. During the twenty-four-hour period commencing at 7:00 p.m. on any day preceding a day designated for collection of recovered materials, no person other than an employee or agent of licensee shall remove recovered material from the designated recycling container. Any unauthorized person collecting or attempting collection of a recovered material in violation of this section shall constitute a violation of this ordinance, and shall be punishable as provided in section 3-5-113. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any individual, organization or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recovered materials, if such disposal does not violate any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance. 
(5)  Provide total service to zone or zones selected. Accommodations for pickup of special wastes within that zone shall be made by licensee. Special fees to cover the service can be charged but must be announced to the customer at the time fees for service are considered by customer. 
(6)  The board of commissioners reserves the right, to direct and control the time, place and manner of solid waste handling. Nothing in this article is intended to abridge Henry County's right to own or regulate the waste stream. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-106. - Elderly and disabled. 
(a)  Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit the licensee form offering discounts to senior citizens or the disabled. 
(b)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit as described above and who is disabled to the extent he or she is incapable of moving refuse to the curbside shall obtain a physician's certificate as to such disability. Disabled persons shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This subsection shall not apply unless all of the adult persons in a residential unit are disabled and obtain such physician's certificate. The certificate shall be mailed to the licensee with a copy to the director of the department of public health. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed ninety (90) days. Licensees may make reasonable rules for noncurbside collection for elderly and disabled persons. 
(c)  Licensees shall provide recycling services to disabled persons to the same extent such services may be provided under section 3-5-105. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-107. - Other disposal methods. 
Owners of record of all single residential units, condominiums, or multiple residential units not serviced by commercial container shall obtain service for each such unit from county-approved licensee, unless such owner disposes of solid waste by self-hauling of solid waste to a state-approved landfill. Failure to provide evidence of proper disposal upon request by county officials (receipts, canceled checks, etc.) shall be a violation of this article, punishable as set forth in section 3-5-113. No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump or may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his/her property. All disposal and burial of trash must comply with Georgia State Law "Rules for Solid Waste Management" Chapter 391-3-4. Contractors, builders, developers and others in the construction business shall be required to comply with this Code section, except as noted in Code section 3-5-109(c). 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-6-95) 
Sec. 3-5-108. - General conditions of residential collection. 
(a)  Owners of single residential units, condominiums, or multiple residential units not served by commercial container, shall place refuse receptacles, plastic-lined paper bags or plastic bags securely tied, rubbish and bundles on assigned collection days, at front curbside locations in such a manner as not to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian passage. Owners shall place such refuse at appropriate curbside location at or before 6:30 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. This placement shall not be made before dusk on the day prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after departure of the licensee's pickup crew shall subject the owner to prosecution for violation of this article. 
(b)  Owners shall remove container from curbside location to a storage location, which shall be unit behind the building line located on the premises. Removal should be accomplished with twenty-four (24) hours following collection. 
(c)  Owners shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon their property or the public thoroughfares bounding upon owners property. 
(d)  It shall be a violation for this ordinance to place or cause to be placed for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(e)  Private used, inoperative and worn out special waste: household appliances (refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, etc.), discarded furniture, and tires shall be collected at least weekly as designated by the licensee with additional charge if necessary and disposed of in compliance with all current state and federal regulations. 
(f)  Solid waste generated from conducting customary home occupations as defined by the building and licenses department of Henry County shall be collected on a residential fee basis. 
(g)  All trash and refuse will be collected by the licensee if placed in plastic receptacles or metal garbage cans of not more than thirty-five-gallon capacity, in bags of not more than thirty-nine-gallon capacity, or tied in bundles of not larger than thirty (30) inches. The licensee may also provide a fifty-to one hundred-gallon wheeled container with lid if so desired. No open containers shall be permitted. 
(h)  Yard trimmings consisting of grass clippings, leaves, etc., shall be placed in suitable containers for separate pickup at a time specified by licensee. Licensees shall provide for pickup of yard trimmings at least once per week. Limbs and yard trimmings shall not be disposed of in a landfill; but taken to a facility that recycles trimmings as mulch or compost. Limbs must be tied in bundles not exceeding a weight fifty (50) pounds nor diameter of thirty (30) inches and length of thirty-six (36) inches. This paragraph shall become effective September 1, 1996. 
(i)  Specially handled waste shall be placed at or near the dwelling in such a manner it can easily be picked up by licensee, or shall be placed in the street or at curbside prior to an agreed upon pick up date. 
(j)  Nothing in this article shall prevent customers from contracting with licensees for additional services. 
(k)  A list of all current licensees and the license zones will be available for public inspection in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(l)  Property owners shall not be responsible for the cost of solid waste collection during any service period when the property is vacant for thirty (30) days or more and they have notified the licensee providing service to them of that fact in writing in advance of that service. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-109. - Commercial and industrial collection. 
(a)  Applicants for commercial license permits are subject to the same requirements for a solid waste handling permit as residential licensees under section 3-5-104 of this article. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any real estate, office, business establishment, institution, industry, or similar commercial establishment shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at such real estate, establishment or facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with state regulations, and must arrange for service with an approved licensee. No business license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the owner or occupant of such premises provides the business license officer of the county department of permits and licenses with the name of the licensee which provides collection for that business. Holders of a valid solid waste handling permit from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources shall be exempt from such contracting but shall comply with the requirements of section 3-5-104(4) and (5). 
(c)  Contractors, builders, developers, and others in the construction business are responsible for the proper disposal of waste from the job or construction site. Waste shall not be buried on site except as provided in this Code section. All other waste shall be disposed of as required by Code section 3-5-107. The following rules shall apply to on-site waste disposal by contractors, builders, developers, and others in the construction business: 
(1)  Inert construction waste may be buried on a construction site provided the rules set out in this subsection are followed. As used in this Code section, "inert construction waste" means waste building materials and other waste resulting from the construction, remodeling, or repair of houses, buildings, and other structures which will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such waste is limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes all waste not specifically listed above. 
(2)  Waste materials buried on construction sites shall be spread in layers and compacted to the least practical volume. A uniform compacted layer of clean earth cover no less than two (2) feet in depth shall be placed over buried waste material. Burial sites shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff and to prevent erosion. A vegetative cover shall be placed over the area when the burial site is completed. 
(3)  The existence of all inert waste burial sites shall be disclosed on the face of the deed conveying title to the property on which the same are located from the contractor, builder, developer, or other person in the construction business to the next person to whom the property is conveyed, and this disclosure shall be repeated on all deeds in the chain of title thereafter. If a plat of the property is prepared, the location of the site shall be shown on the plat, and a copy of the plat shall be supplied to the building inspection department before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the principal structure on the property. If no plat is prepared, a sketch or drawing shall be supplied to the building inspection department showing the approximate location of the burial site before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(4)  No inert construction waste shall be buried in a public right-of-way or in a natural or engineered surface water drainage area. Inert waste sites shall be allowed only in rear and side yards. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Proof of approval of all locations for inert waste burial by the county health department, department of environmental health shall be provided to the county building inspection department before any such site is utilized. 
(7)  Inert waste burial sites shall be allowed only in RA, R1, R2, office-institutional, commercial, and industrial zoning districts. The same are prohibited in all other zoning districts. 
(8)  Only one (1) inert waste burial site shall be allowed on each lot and shall be utilized only for construction waste generated on that lot, unless a common burial site for multiple lots is approved in advance by the county department of public health and the county building inspection department. 
(9)  Inert waste may be burned only with a permit from the county fire department, and only using an air curtain destructor. 
(10)  No portion of any trash pit, waste disposal area, or inert waste burial site shall be located within one hundred (100) linear feet of any property line or enclosed structure. 
(d)  The county reserves the right at all times to regulate solid waste handling. Nothing in this article is intended to abridge the county's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(e)  When the code enforcement department receives two (2) complaints from different addresses within a thirty-day period regarding noise generated by dumpster servicing, staff will notify the sanitation company whose collection generated the complaint and enact the following conditions: 
(1)  No person or entity shall engage in the collection, transportation or disposal of any solid waste or recyclables from dumpsters, containers or receptacles of any kind or type in any residentially zoned area or any location adjacent to a residentially zoned area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in those locations where compliance would pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, which must be identified by the person or entity engaged in the collection, transportation or disposal of any solid waste or recyclable material and approved by the code enforcement official. 
(2)  In those locations where compliance could pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the code enforcement official shall consult with the sanitation company and the property owner to determine if compliance would constitute such a threat. If compliance would not pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, collection must comply with the time prohibition listed above. 
(3)  If the code enforcement official determines that collection during prohibited times is warranted, staff will work with the sanitation company to minimize noise generated by collection. This would include but not be limited to modifying equipment to muffle noise, increasing driver educational and safety and service issues through better training, and evaluation of possible dumpster relocation. 
(4)  If the sanitation company fails to cease collection during prohibited times or to minimize the noise generated by collection, the person(s) directing/managing the operation of the company and the employee(s) whose acts violated the terms of this article will be considered in violation of this article and subject to prosecution through the county's nuisance ordinance procedure. 
(f)  Inert landfills (off-site sources). 
1.  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter certain words and terms used herein shall be defined and interpreted as follows. All other terms not defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions. 
Inert construction waste. Waste building materials and other waste resulting from the construction, remodeling or repair of houses, buildings and other structures which will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such waste is limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes all waste not specifically listed above. 
2.  Inert landfills receiving inert construction waste from off-site sources shall only be permitted in the C-3, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts subject to the standards of the district, the supplemental standards set forth in this subsection 3-5-109(f), and the rules and regulations of the State of Georgia, particularly Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rule 391-3-4-.06. 
3.  A plat shall be required to be recorded bearing the approval of the environmental compliance and plan review department. No operation shall be conducted that shall not have been approved as a feature of the plat, as described below. The following features shall be delineated on the plat: 
a.  Zoning (for the subject property and all abutting properties), buffers, and setbacks. 
b.  Conditions of zoning, if any; and a notation if none. 
c.  Office location. 
d.  Truck scale. 
e.  Observation platform location. 
f.  Loading and unloading area(s). 
g.  Stockpile area(s) for inert construction waste, clean fill, excluded items, and hazardous materials. 
h.  Burn pit. 
i.  Equipment storage location. 
j.  Henry County Environmental Health Department letter of approval of the burial site(s). 
k.  Henry County Department of Transportation (HCDOT) letter of approval of the travel routes. 
l.  Stream, wetland, floodplain, and protected watershed location(s) and notation. 
m.  Burial site location and notation that the location shall or shall not be used for future development. 
n.  Lighting plan. 
o.  Security and monitoring plan. 
p.  Fencing location and detail. 
q.  Sign location. 
4.  Only inert construction waste may be placed in an inert landfill. The licensed operator of the inert landfill shall visually inspect the fill items before placement in the burial site. Excluded items shall be prevented from being placed in the burial site, and any excluded item shall be removed immediately. Excluded items and hazardous materials shall be removed from the site immediately. 
5.  Burial sites not to be developed. Inert construction waste shall be compacted to the least practical volume. Inert construction waste shall be placed in the burial site in compacted layers. The burial site shall be completely capped with a cover of clean, uniform, compacted fill placed in layers to reach a minimum depth of two (2) feet. Burial sites approved to be de-commissioned shall provide well-drained grade levels while minimizing runoff and soil erosion. A decommissioned burial site shall be planted with a suitable vegetative cover and left in a mowable condition. 
6.  Burial sites for future development. A geo-technical report providing requirements for the development of the burial site and a copy of the inert landfill plat shall be required at the time of application for a development permit for the development of a decommissioned burial site. At a minimum, the requirements of the geo-technical report shall be completed by the applicant. Yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, leaves, wood, and wood products are prohibited from burial sites proposed for future development. 
7.  The existence of all burial sites shall be disclosed on the face of the deed conveying the title to the property on which the same are located. This disclosure shall be repeated on all deeds in the chain of title hereafter. 
8.  The applicant or owner shall obtain a letter of approval from HCDOT which shall be required to be copied on the front page of the required plat. The applicant or owner shall provide calculation of the volume of the landfill as well as the estimated volume of material projected to be brought onto the site and taken out of the site. The applicant or owner shall provide an estimated number of loaded trucks per day coming to the site per each expected route. The expected routes shall require review and approval from HCDOT with limitations determined using input from applicable agencies as determined by HCDOT. The applicant or owner shall maintain coordination with HCDOT concerning the number of loads per approved route. Each approved route shall be analyzed to determine whether there are any roadway issues that must be addressed by the applicant or owner due to the site's impact. The information provided by the applicant or owner shall include, but not be limited to, the following data to the satisfaction of HCDOT in order to facilitate the required analysis: 
a.  Roadway pavement sections (including base). 
b.  Lane widths. 
c.  Average daily traffic. 
d.  Existing truck percentages. 
Bonding of a route, or routes, may be required as determined by the required analysis. HCDOT shall determine approval or denial within 30 days. 
9.  No portion of any inert landfill operation shall be conducted within one hundred (100) feet of any property line or enclosed structure. All operations shall be completely screened from the public right-of-way of any segment of an improved roadway meeting county standards according to that segment's functional road classification (table 8.01.05). Should existing vegetation be determined to be inadequate, enhanced screening shall be required by the environmental compliance and plan review department. Methods of screening may include, but shall not be limited to: additional plantings, berms, solid fencing, and any combination to achieve and maintain one hundred (100) percent opacity. At a minimum, additional plantings, when required, shall include eight (8) evergreen trees per fifty (50) linear feet of road frontage within a 20-foot buffer strip along the public right-of-way. 
10.  Hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
11.  Any burning shall require a permit from the Henry County Fire Department, and only using an air curtain destructor. Should any burning be permitted, such burning shall only take place between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
12.  A monument based ground sign not to exceed eight (8) feet in height with a sign face not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet may be permitted at least one (1) foot from the public right-of-way and at least ten (10) feet from electrical lines. 
13.  Monitoring. Inert landfills receiving material from off-site sources shall only receive inert construction waste from private contractors and shall not be open to the public. A manifest shall be kept on site and readily available to county staff for reviewing. In addition inert landfills receiving materials from off-site sources shall provide security adequate to prevent the contamination of the burial sites with excluded items and hazardous materials. A security and monitoring plan shall be submitted to the environmental compliance and plan review department prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. The plan shall be copied onto the front page of the approved plat. Failure to maintain security and monitoring standards as specified in the approved security and monitoring plan shall constitute a violation enforceable under section 12.06.00 and all other applicable code sections having the penalties provided under section 12.07.00 and all other applicable code sections. 
14.  All activity must be in conformance with the Georgia Environmental Protection Division rules. A violation of any such rules shall be a violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 01-03, § I, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 5-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-09, § I, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 12-15, § III, 7-17-12) 
Sec. 3-5-110. - Accumulation. 
No owner or occupant shall allow the accumulation on his or her premises of solid waste material where such material creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a separate violation of this article for each day the solid waste material remains on the premises and shall be punishable as set out in section 3-5-113. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-111. - Transportation across county lines. 
All licensees must keep accurate records of the amount of waste tonnage transported in and out of Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-112. - Termination of licenses. 
(a)  A license may be revoked, suspended or canceled by mutual agreement between the county and license at any time. Licensees may surrender licenses by giving a sixty-day notice to the occupational tax office, as agent for board of commissioners, and furnishing proof all advance payments of customers have been used by providing a service or the unused portion of the period service has been refunded. 
(b)  The occupational tax office, as agent for the board of commissioners, shall notify a licensee of any violations of this article. Upon notification of the alleged violation, a licensee shall have four (4) calendar days to cure such condition of violation. If licensee fails to cure the violation within four (4) days, a hearing shall be held before the board of commissioners with the licensee being notified in writing as to the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the violation. The hearing shall be conducted within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  Licenses are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 13, 14, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-5-113. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation or an employee or agent of any firm or entity pleading guilty, nolo contendere or having after trial being found guilty of violating any provision of this ordinance may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or sixty (60) days in jail per violation. Each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from seeking civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition [to] the criminal prosecution. It being the intent the county has both civil and criminal right of prosecution in this area. 
(b)  In the case of an improper waste disposal site, the owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person managing the property shall clean up the site and come into full compliance with this article. Henry County shall not be responsible for any costs of remediation. The offender may be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation continues to exist, and business license may be revoked, or suspended, as deemed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-114. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this article regarding collection and removal of solid waste shall be enforced by the board of commissioners through its agent, the code enforcement department. All such provisions regarding the collection and removal of solid waste may also be enforced by the Henry County Police Department or Sheriff's Department. 
(b)  Provisions regarding applications for and termination of licenses, shall be enforced by occupational tax office, as agent for the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Violations of any provisions of this ordinance shall be reported initially to the board of commissioners which office is now charged with administration, interpretation, and enforcement. Enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations and prosecute violations of this article. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall designate and publicize a special telephone number to be called to report violations. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 15—18, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 3-5-115. - Exceptions. 
The board of commissioners may make exceptions to these rules, provided, the licensee makes written application showing the following: 
(1)  The method proposed utilizes a new experimental, cost effective or innovative technological concept or theory of solid waste storage, collection, transportation or disposal; 
(2)  The method proposed has been certified by the Henry County Board of Health and Georgia Environmental Protection Division of Department of Natural Resources as not to create a health hazard to the public; 
(3)  The method proposed is to be utilized by at least ten (10) customers; and 
(4)  Any exception granted does not violate the requirements of sections 3-5-104 or 3-5-107 of this article. 
Any exception granted by the board of commissioners shall be for a one-year term and shall be nonrenewable. At the end of six (6) months of operation of the excepted method, the licensee shall submit date to the board of commissioners sufficient enough to enable a determination of success of the method. If found to be acceptable to the board of commissioners, this article may be amended to allow such method without exception. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Sec. 3-5-116. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, 9-20-94) 
Secs. 3-5-117—3-5-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY LANDFILL 

Sec. 3-5-161. - Compliance. 
A county landfill shall not accept materials unless the person bringing such materials have complied with all the regulations of the county pertaining to such materials. 
(Res. No. 76-14, § 1(e), 12-7-76) 
Sec. 3-5-162. - Right of county to revoke privilege of use. 
The use of the county landfill is a privilege and not a right. This privilege may be revoked by the board of commissioners without prior notice. 
(Res. No. 76-14, § 4, 12-7-76) 
Sec. 3-5-163. - Limitations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or any other legal entity to dispose of any solid waste of any kind or nature which has an origin other than Henry County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 92-02, 2-18-92) 
Sec. 3-5-164. - Vehicle registration; license and sticker. 
Vehicles utilized by governments, governmental agencies, sanitation companies, individuals who use said vehicles for hire, charge or fee, or private enterprises depositing the contents of a vehicle into any county landfill, whether through ownership, lease, or otherwise, must first have their vehicles registered with the Henry County Business License Department. The owner of each vehicle shall specify the materials intended to be transported to the landfill. No vehicle shall be allowed to deposit its materials into any county landfill unless a license shall have been issued and a valid sticker shall have been attached to the vehicle. Persons using their own vehicles for transportation of their own residential waste shall not be required to obtain a sticker or license. 
(Res. No. 76-14, § 1(a), (d), 12-7-76; Ord. No. 84-12, 6-19-84; Ord. No. 86-19, 12-16-86; Ord. No. 87-13, 6-16-87) 
Sec. 3-5-165. - Registration of users. 
No contract hauler or business shall place materials in a county landfill unless they have registered with the county and obtained a business license. 
(Mo. of 3-17-81, § 2) 
Sec. 3-5-166. - Signing in at landfill office before use. 
A contract hauler shall sign in at the landfill office before dumping solid wastes in the landfill. 
(Mo. of 3-17-81, § 3) 
Sec. 3-5-167. - Hours for use. 
The hours for utilization of a county landfill shall be as posted at site and it shall be unlawful for anyone to utilize these areas except during the hours so posted. 
(Res. No. 76-14, § 1, 12-7-76; Mo. of 3-17-81, § 2) 
Sec. 3-5-168. - Materials totally prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall deposit any hazardous, toxic or nuclear waste in the county landfill. 
(b)  Tires may be deposited at the county landfill as follows: 
(1)  Tires will be deposited at a designated area of the landfill and shall be separated from any other material. 
(2)  Wheels shall be removed from all tires prior to depositing at the landfill. 
(3)  Tires larger than an 1100 series shall be cut into quarter sections prior to deposit in the landfill. 
(Mo. of 3-17-81, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 88-08, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 89-11, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 92-05, 9-1-92) 
State Law reference— Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 12-8-60. 
Sec. 3-5-169. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Small dead animals (dogs and cats) may, in limited numbers, be disposed of in the daily working face of the landfill alongside other trash and garbage. Large dead animals may be accepted under certain and limited circumstances by the road superintendent and shall be disposed of by excavating a hole at the toe of the slope and immediately covering the animal with earth or other incoming waste material. 
(Res. No. 76-14, § 1(f), 12-7-76; Ord. No. 84-12, 6-19-84) 
Sec. 3-5-170. - Fees. 
Persons using a county landfill shall pay to the county such fees as are established by the board of commissioners. 
(Mo. of 3-17-81, § 7) 
Secs. 3-5-171—3-5-200. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 3 - Water, Sewers and Sewage Disposal[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Local constitutional amendments relating to water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 1-5; tax for support of water and sewer system authorized, § 1-5-2; local acts relating to water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 2-10; plumbing, § 3-9-116 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-5-201. - Water and sewer taps generally. 
(a)  Transfers—Permitted. Unissued water or sewer tap-ons to the water and sewage system of the county which have been fully prepaid for use on a given tract or parcel of land in Henry County may be transferred for use on another tract or parcel of land located in the same drainage basin in Henry County, subject to the availability of capacity in the sewage treatment plant and conserving that basin, provided that a petition is submitted stating the following facts. 
(1)  The type of tap to be transferred; 
(2)  The owners of the taps to be transferred; 
(3)  The total number of taps owned by the transferors; 
(4)  The number of taps to be transferred; 
(5)  A legal description of the property that the taps are appurtenant to ("the transferor property"); 
(6)  The legal description of the property to which the taps are to be transferred ("the transferee property"); 
(7)  The names and addresses of all of the owners of the transferee property; 
(8)  If the taps are being transferred in conjunction with or in contemplation of the conveyance of the transferee property, all of the proposed purchasers of said property; 
(9)  That the transferor property and the transferee property are located in the same drainage basin; and 
(10)  That petitioners are all of the owners of any interest in the taps to be transferred and will indemnify and hold harmless the authority and the county against the claims of any person or persons asserting any claim of interest in and to said taps, including attorneys fees and costs of defending such claims. 
Such petition shall be sworn to by all of the proposed transferors and transferees of said taps 
(b)  Same—Filing of petition Petitions for transfer of said taps shall be filed with the authority ten (10) days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the authority. The authority will review the petition for transfer at its next meeting and will approve or disapprove the transfer 
(c)  Same—Approval If the authority approves the transfer, all legal documents for the transfer of the taps shall be prepared by the authority's attorney 
(d)  Interpretation. Nothing contained herein shall require the authority to extend any sewer or water lines of the Henry County water and sewage system 
(e)  When transfer not permitted No water or sewer tap-on to the water and sewer system of Henry County which is issued for use on a given tract or parcel of land in Henry County shall be transferred to or used any other tract or parcel of land in a different drainage basin. 
(f)  Resale to authority The owner of any unused water or sewer tap-on purchased from the authority may offer such tap-on for resale to the authority. The authority may repurchase said unused water or sewer tap-on from the owner thereof if the authority has a present or future anticipated need for tap-ons, and if the authority has sufficient funds to repurchase said tap-on Nothing contained herein shall require the authority to repurchase any said tap-on 
(Ord. No. 83-24, §§ 1—4, 6-28-83; Res. No. 85-34. §§ 2—7, 12-10-85) 
Sec. 3-5-202. - Water quality control. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) Section 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local governmental entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local government entity shall pass an ordinance mandating the retail sale of low phosphorous household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the county to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than five-tenths (0.5) percent phosphorus by weight. The county finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect Georgia's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Household laundry detergent section: Means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
a.  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for non-laundry cleaning purposes; 
b.  A detergent used in dairy, beverage or food processing cleaning equipment; 
c.  A phosphorous acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner; 
d.  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
e.  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
f.  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
g.  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological, laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory and engineering laboratory; or 
h.  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital. 
(2)  Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(3)  Person means any person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
(c)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than five-tenths (0.5) percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(d)  Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and incarceration in the county detention facility for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Additional legal remedies. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (d), the county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this section. 
(f)  Rights and liabilities. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right to any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this ordinance and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Ord. No. 89-20, 11-21-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-20, enacted Nov. 21, 1989, amended the Code by adding thereto a new § 2-10-29 (1)—(8). For classification purposes, such provisions have been included herein as a new § 3-5-202, at the discretion of the editor. Subsections (7) and (8), pertaining to separability and effective date, were omitted. 
Secs. 3-5-203—3-5-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 86-10, enacted June 17, 1986, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of Arts. I—XXII of such ordinance herein as superseding former Art. II was at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. II, which consisted of §§ 3-5-216—3-5-236, also pertained to water service and derived from Ord. No. 83-27, enacted Aug. 23, 1983, as amended by Ord. No. 84-18, enacted Nov. 6, 1984. 
Cross reference— Minimum size of water main, § 3-4-105 et seq.; stormwater runoff, § 3-6-61 et seq. 

Sec. 3-5-216. - Definitions. 
[For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:] 
Authority shall mean the members of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority and its agents and employees. 
Consumer shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or public body that uses, has use of, has use for, or seeks to use water furnished by the authority. 
County shall mean the members of the board of commissioners of Henry County, and its agents and employees. 
Developer shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, joint venture, public body or legal entity that is selling, offering for sale, dividing, subdividing or developing property for residential, commercial or industrial use. 
Those definitions as set forth in the Code of Henry County, Chapter 3-9, Article VIII, (Plumbing Code) and those definitions as set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Plumbing Code, published by Southern Building Code Congress International are hereby incorporated as part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. I, 6-17-86; Ord. No. 87-05, 6-2-87; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 6-24-98) 
Sec. 3-5-217. - Access to consumer's premises by agents and employees of authority. 
Duly authorized agents and employees of the authority shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer and developer for the purposes of installing and removing the property of the authority, inspecting the authority's facilities, reading and testing meters, repairing and maintaining the facilities of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. II, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-218. - Water service. 
(a)  Application. Any customer or developer desiring to be provided water services by the authority shall make an application for water services in person at the office of the authority located at the Administration Building, Phillips Drive, McDonough, Georgia. 
(b)  Contract; fee. If the water distribution system is adjacent to or directly across the road from the consumer's property and no water line extension is required, service will be provided upon the customer executing the water subscription contract and payment of the connection fees. 
(c)  Placement on meter installation list. Upon complying with the above-stated items, the customer will be placed upon the meter installation list. The connection and the meter will be installed by the authority as soon as practicable thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. III, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-219. - Water line extensions. 
(a)  Generally. Water lines may be extended along presently existing county roads which have a dedicated sixty-foot right-of-way or along presently existing county roads where easements acceptable to the authority for the installation and maintenance of the water line have been obtained at no expense to the authority. 
(b)  Information required. Any person, firm or corporation seeking to obtain service must submit to the authority the following: 
(1)  Such right-of-way deeds and/or easements that are required by the county and the authority; 
(2)  An executed line extension application provided by the authority; 
(3)  The required water line extension fees; 
(4)  The required connection fees; and 
(5)  An executed water subscription contract. 
(c)  Application fee. The customer will pay to the authority at the time of the filing of the application the sum of four dollars and eighty cents ($4.80) per linear foot of water line that is to be laid by the authority from its existing water line which has sufficient capacity to serve the customer to a point that is perpendicular to the center of the residential, commercial or industrial facility to be served by the water line. 
(d)  Approval by authority. Once the application has been completed, it will be submitted to the authority for its approval. If the application is approved by the authority, an estimated date of completion will be given to the customer; however, a date of completion cannot be guaranteed due to changes in work schedule, weather conditions, equipment breakdown, delays in delivery of materials, improvement of right-of-way or other unpredictable circumstances. 
(e)  Residential subdivision developments. If the water line extension is to serve a residential subdivision development, the applicant shall, in addition to the above, submit to the authority the following: 
(1)  An application for line extension. 
(2)  Three (3) copies of a plat or accurate drawing of the property to be served. The plat or drawing shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location of the closest existing water line of the authority which is of sufficient size to serve the property; 
b.  Location of the existing roads and proposed roads to serve the property; 
c.  Exact footage of water line that will have to be installed in order to serve the property; 
d.  Location of all water lines and appurtenances to be constructed in the area to be developed. 
(3)  The required water line extension fee. 
(f)  Industrial and commercial development. If the water line extension is to serve an industrial or commercial development, the applicant shall submit to the authority the following at the time of filing the application: 
(1)  Line extension application to serve industrial/commercial development. 
(2)  A letter from the county and municipal planning board stating that the property has been properly zoned for the proposed use. 
(3)  Three (3) copies of a plat or accurate drawing of the property to be served. The plat or drawing shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location of the closest existing water line of the authority which is of sufficient size to serve the property; 
b.  Location of the existing roads and proposed roads to serve the property; 
c.  Exact footage of water line that will have to be installed in order to serve the property; 
d.  Location of all water lines and appurtenances to be constructed in the area to be developed. 
If units served will require fire lines and/or sprinkler systems to the structure, expenses for same shall be borne by the developer. 
(g)  Line extensions within municipalities. 
(1)  The authority will contract with municipalities located within the county for the construction of extension of water lines. The contract price will be the amount the authority is paying under its existing labor contract for water line extensions plus the cost of all materials if the same are purchased from the authority. The work will be performed by the authority's contractor at a time that is acceptable to the authority, the contractor and the city. 
(2)  The municipality may elect to purchase its own materials or may purchase the materials from the authority at their actual cost. 
(3)  The municipality shall be responsible for obtaining all construction permits, rights of way, road repairs, relocation of other utilities and required insurance coverage. 
(h)  Water line services inside residential subdivisions, industrial sites and commercial sites. 
It shall be the developer's responsibility to construct the complete water system inside the subdivision. The developer shall: 
(1)  Submit the required application to the authority for its approval. 
(2)  Pay for all labor and materials in the construction of the water line inside the area to be developed, which cost shall include supply lines, fire hydrants, tees, gate valves, reducers and regulators, together with all meter service connection material, including corporation and curb stops, wyes, inserts and service lines to meters, and any other pertinent structure that may be needed for proper construction of said lines and appurtenances thereto. 
(3)  Construct all water lines according to plans and specifications of the authority and have the same construction. 
(4)  In the event it becomes apparent to the authority that construction of the line will cost more than the estimated costs, the authority may terminate work until such time as adequate funds or additional letters of credit acceptable to the authority have been placed with the authority. 
(5)  An estimated date of commencement will be given to the consumer, but date of completion cannot be guaranteed because of the changes in work schedule, weather, ground conditions, equipment breakdown, delay in delivery of materials, and other unpredictable circumstances. The consumer may consult the authority's office to acquaint themselves with changes or reasons for delay in the work schedule. 
(6)  Upon completion of the construction but prior to commencement of water services by the authority, the consumer shall: 
a.  Execute an affidavit stating the actual cost of all labor and materials expended in the construction of all water lines and appurtenances thereto; 
b.  Execute a deed conveying the water line, appurtenances thereto, and a twenty-foot permanent easement to the county; 
c.  Submit three (3) copies of "as-built" plans of said water line and appurtenances thereto showing the exact location of the water lines and appurtenances thereto; 
d.  Execute an affidavit prescribed by the authority stating that the cost of all labor and material has been paid in full. 
e.  Pay the required connection fee set forth in section 3-5-221 hereof. However, the line extension connection fees of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) do not apply to this section. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. IV, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 87-05, 6-2-87; Ord. No. 92-09, 11-3-92) 
Sec. 3-5-220. - Water subscription contracts required. 
Prior to commencement of water service by the authority each consumer must execute a water subscription contract with the authority. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art V, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-221. - Charges for initial water service.[5] 
(a)  Each consumer subscribing for use of water services of the authority shall pay a nonrefundable connection fee as follows: 
(1)  Size of meter:       Fee 
a.  ¾-inch on existing water line, on line extension petition approved by the authority where the consumer did not execute the petition and make required contributions towards the construction of the line extension, or on the property that is developed by a developer ..... $700.00 
b.  ¾-inch on line extension where the consumer executes a line extension petition and pays the contribution towards the cost of the line extension ..... 300.00 
c.  1-inch on existing water line or on line extension petition approved by the authority where the consumer did not execute the petition and make required contributions towards the construction of the line extension ..... 750.00 
d.  1-inch on line extension where the consumer executes a line extension petition and pays the contribution towards the cost of the line extension ..... 350.00 
(2)  Relocations of water lines, meter boxes, fire hydrants and appurtenances to the water system of Henry County: Any relocation of the above-stated items that are requested by the customer or required by the authority will be billed to the owner at the actual cost of the removal or relocation of each of said items. 
(3)  Any meter larger than one inch: Connection fee of seven hundred dollars ($700.00), plus authority's cost of the meter, labor, material and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Duplexes, quadraplexes, apartments: A duplex, quadruplex, or an apartment building shall have a meter installed for each unit and the prevailing tap-on fee shall be paid for each unit. 
(5)  Professional buildings: A professional building shall have a meter installed for each unit and the prevailing tap-on fee shall be paid for each unit. 
(6)  Security deposits: A fifty-dollar ($50.00) security deposit shall be collected for water from renters and mobile homes. A fifty-dollar ($50.00) deposit shall also be collected for sewer from renters and for mobile homes. 
(b)  Property owners shall be responsible for any unpaid water or water and sewer bills. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. VI, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 87-05, 6-2-87) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 92-13 adopted a fee schedule set out in App. A to the ordinance, which ordinance is on file in the offices of the county. 

Sec. 3-5-222. - Authority's responsibilities and liabilities. 
(a)  Upon meeting the requirements of section 3-5-218, the authority will run a water distribution line to the property of the consumer. 
(b)  The authority may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the authority's option, on the consumer's property within three (3) feet of the property line. 
(c)  The authority reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. 
(d)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. VII, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-223. - Consumer's responsibilities and liabilities. 
(a)  Water furnished by the authority shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. The consumer shall not allow anyone else to connect onto the water system serving the consumer. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard of this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  The consumer has the following additional responsibilities and duties: 
(1)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, which is unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense so as to prevent backflow. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the authority's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the authority's water system; and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the authority, covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the authority, they will not permit the connection of any private wells to the authority's water system. 
(Ord. No. 886-10, Art. VIII, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-224. - Turning on or connections to authority's water by persons other than authority personnel. 
Only authorized authority personnel can connect or tap on to the water distribution system. No person or consumer will be authorized to connect or tap-on to any water distribution system owned by the authority or on to any water lines carrying water owned by the authority. Violation of this provision of this article shall authorize the authority to immediately terminate water services without notice to the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. IX, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-225. - Rate schedules. 
(a)  All water and sewer rates for the consumers of the authority shall be set from time to time by the authority without the approval of the county. However, water rates will not increase without thirty (30) days' notice to the consumer. Notice will be sufficiently given to the consumer by a publication of the rate changes once a week for four (4) weeks in the official newspaper of Henry County prior to the rate increase. 
(b)  Effective March 1, 1993: 
(1)  The water rates for residential, industrial and commercial customers with a meter of one inch or less shall be as follows: 

 
(2)  The minimum monthly charge for water meters in excess of one inch in diameter for residential, industrial and commercial customers shall be as follows: 

 
(3)  The sewer rates for residential, industrial and commercial customers shall be as follows: 

 
(c)  Effective March 1, 1993, the fire line monthly minimum rates for industrial and commercial customers shall be as follows: 

 
(d)  Municipal consumers of the water authority located in Henry County shall pay on a monthly basis one dollar and fifty-five cents ($1.55) per thousand gallons for water purchased by a municipality from the authority; however, said rate shall be phased in as follows: 
March 1, 1993       $1.08 (per thousand gallons)  June 1, 1993       1.31 (per thousand gallons)  September 1, 1993       1.55 (per thousand gallons) 
(e)  Water meters shall be classified as either "active meters," "inactive meters," "cancelled meters," "line extension meters" or "subdivision meters." Said meters are further defined as follows: 
(1)  Active meters are defined as meters that are in use or that were purchased after August 1, 1983. All "active meters" will be charged on a monthly basis the rates set forth above. If an "active meter" is not used for a period of six (6) months after installation, or if the customer requests in writing that service be temporarily discontinued, then the meter shall be classified as an "inactive meter" and shall be treated as hereinafter provided. A customer can maintain an "active meter" status by paying a monthly minimum water bill provided for herein. 
(2)  Inactive meters are defined as meters that are installed, but have not been used by the customer for a period of six (6) months or the customer has notified the authority in writing to temporarily terminate service. If a meter remains unused for a period of six (6) months, or the customer requests in writing that service be temporarily terminated, the authority will seal the meter and declare the meter an "inactive meter." If a customer desires to obtain water services after the meter has been declared inactive, the customer shall pay the authority a reconnection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) together with any previous bills assessed against said meter prior to obtaining any additional service from the authority. Once the connection fee and any past due bills have been paid, the meter will be re-classified as an "active meter" as defined above. 
(3)  Canceled meters are defined as meters that are installed but are not used for a period of twelve (12) months, or the customer has notified the authority that the customer does not desire to obtain any further water service from the authority. If a meter is declared a "cancelled meter," the meter will be removed and the connection sealed. A customer desiring reconnection of a "cancelled meter" shall pay the tap-on fee that is in effect as of the date of the application. 
(4)  Line extension meters are defined as meters purchased to aid in line extensions, but the customer has not requested that the meter be installed. At the time of the purchase of the meter, the authority anticipated that the customer would connect on to the water system within a reasonable time. A number of "line extension meters" have been purchased, but the customer has not requested that the meter be installed. Due to the customer's failure to connect on to the line extension, pay the minimum monthly water bill, the authority cannot recoup the cost of the line as originally anticipated. Any customer holding a line extension meter who fails to connect on prior to January 1, 1985, shall be assessed an additional connection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) at the time of connection. The customer may avoid the payment of the additional connection fee by paying the minimum monthly water bill until such time as the meter is connected, at which time the meter will be classified as an "active meter" as defined above. 
(5)  Subdivision meters are defined as meters that were purchased for installation in subdivisions in which the water lines were constructed and installed at no expense to the authority. Any "subdivision meters" that were purchased prior to August 1, 1983, that are not installed prior to January 1, 1985, shall be charged [for by] an additional connection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). This charge is assessed because of the increased cost of operation and maintenance of the water system of Henry County. "Subdivision meters" that are installed but do not become "active meters" by January 1, 1984, will be classified as "inactive meters" and shall be governed as such. 
(f)  All customers who pay a connection fee to the authority after August 1, 1983, will be required to pay the minimum monthly charge as set forth above commencing ninety (90) days after the date of payment of the connection fee or on the next billing date after connection, whichever occurs first. The monthly minimum charge set forth above shall be paid whether the meter has been installed or not. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. X, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 93-01, 2-16-93) 
Sec. 3-5-226. - Meter readings. 
The water meter serving the consumer's property shall be read on a monthly basis and official records of each reading thereof shall be kept for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XI, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-227. - Billing and collections. 
(a)  The consumer shall pay promptly on a monthly basis all water registered by the meter serving said property at the rate or rates set by the authority from time to time, which shall include water used, water wasted, or leakage, except for water that may be traced by the authority to the authority's system. 
(b)  Said bill shall be paid within fifteen (15) days from the date of said bill. In the event that the bill [charges] assessed thereon are not paid within twenty (20) days from the date of said bill, the authority shall have the right to commence procedures to terminate the water service. 
(c)  If water service is discontinued for nonpayment of the bill, the authority will not resume water service to the consumer until the bill and all penalties have been paid in full and a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) nonrefundable reservice fee has been paid to the authority by the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XII, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-228. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in writing to the authority, at the office of the authority before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  Settlement of claims and adjustments of bills are subject to the following additional provisions: 
(1)  Any consumer who fails to notify the authority in writing within thirty (30) days after the date of said bill of any irregularities or errors that may be in said bill shall waive any right or claim for correction or refund under said bill. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer. If the meter is found to be malfunctioning, no charge will be made. However, if the meter is found not to be malfunctioning, the consumer will be required to pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Said fee will be added to the next month's billing. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by any person other than the authority's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount which is the average of the three (3) previous months' bills. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XIII, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-229. - Termination of water service for failure to pay bill. 
(a)  The authority shall be empowered to terminate water services for the failure of consumers to pay their water bills. The following procedure shall be followed prior to termination of water service: 
(1)  The following written notice shall be forwarded to the consumer and same shall appear on the current billing when said consumer has a previous balance: 
"If there is a previous balance (on your account) and it is not paid within 10 days, you are hereby required to appear at a hearing to be held at the Water Authority office located in the Administration Building, Phillips Drive, McDonough, Georgia, 15 days from date of this bill (or next working day if this date is a holiday or weekend) at 9:30 a.m. to show cause why your service should not be terminated. You have 10 days from said hearing date to file for injunctive relief in Superior Court of Henry County; if not, service at this location will be terminated until account is paid in full." 
(2)  The hearing shall be set no earlier than ten (10) days from the date of the letter and not later than fifteen (15) days from the date of the letter. 
(3)  If the consumer and the clerk are unable to resolve any discrepancies that may appear in the bill, the consumer shall have ten (10) days from the date of the hearing in which to file for injunctive relief in the superior court of Henry County, Georgia. If no injunction is filed within said time, water service to the consumer shall be terminated. 
(b)  If the consumer fails to pay the bill and penalties prior to ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, then said water service shall be terminated. 
(c)  The clerk of the authority is hereby appointed and authorized to conduct in behalf of the authority the above-stated hearings. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XIV, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-230. - Suspension of services. 
(a)  When water service is discontinued either by written notice from the consumer to the authority, or by acts of the authority, the authority shall apply the refundable deposits to the balance of the bill owed by the consumer and refund the difference, if any exists, to the consumer. 
(b)  The authority reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of authority's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond authority's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident, actions of others, or acts of God. 
(c)  The authority reserves the right to terminate the services granted by the authority for any other reason other than those stated above by giving the subscriber ten (10) days' written notice of the date of termination, and further providing the subscriber with a right to hearing prior to termination of the service. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XV, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-231. - Plans and specifications for construction of water lines. 
The authority shall have the right to specify the requirements, plans and specifications for the construction of water lines in Henry County. All water lines constructed by any consumer, owner or developer shall be constructed according to the plans and specifications established by the authority for the construction of water lines in Henry County. No water line shall be covered without first being inspected and approved by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XVI, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-232. - Cross-connection control and backflow prevention. 
(a)  Installation of backflow prevention device required. All consumers shall have in place a backflow prevention device of the type, design, and specifications set forth in paragraph (c) of this section. Purchase, installation and inspection of the backflow prevention device shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
(b)  Designation as high, medium, or low risk consumer, monthly surcharge. 
(1)  The authority is authorized to categorize and designate consumers as high, medium, or low risk consumers. Said designation shall be made by the backflow prevention program manager, based upon his/her evaluation of the consumer's property's use and potential for contamination of the public water supply. 
(2)  The authority is authorized to charge each high-risk consumer of the system an amount not to exceed two dollars ($2.00) monthly as a surcharge to maintain and administer the cross-connection and backflow prevention program. 
(c)  Type of backflow prevention device required, approval of devices. 
(1)  The backflow prevention device shall be of the following types and installed in the following manner: 
a.  Low and medium risk consumers: The low or medium risk consumer or property owner shall provide a double check valve (DCV) backflow prevention device in a size to match that of the required service meter. 
1.  Specifications. The DCV checks shall have replaceable seats, capture springs and the device assembly shall include a full-port ball valve on the inlet and outlet sides, with a union or swivel coupling nut between the device and each valve. Unions or swivel nuts must be integral with the device or valves. Devices shall have three ball-valve test cocks in the vertical position fitted with brass or plastic threaded plugs. A fourth vertical test cock shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shut-off valve. All components of the assembly, including ball valve handles and assembly bolts, shall be equal in corrosion resistance to bronze or stainless steel in order to resist electrolysis. Access to both checking devices shall be by top and/or side entry for maintenance and repair of all interior parts. Valve handles, except T-type, shall turn up to close and in board (90 degrees) to open. 
2.  Installation. The DCV backflow prevention device shall not be buried in earth, but models with ready access to both checks may be installed in meter boxes, pits or vaults, provided ball valve test cocks seated with threaded plugs are used. All components of a DCV installed below ground should be resistant to electrolysis. A resilient seat shut-off valve should be near the inlet and outlet side of the device, and three approved test cocks provided on the device. Test cocks below ground shall be chlorinated before use. 
3.  Sample approved devices: 
Hersey Model # FDC/Unions 
Watts Model # U-007-QT 
b.  High risk consumers. The high risk consumer or property owner shall install a reduced pressure zone (RPZ) backflow prevention device. 
1.  Specifications. The RPZ shall be of a size to match that of the required service line or meter. The RPZ assembly shall consist of a pressure differential relief valve located between two (2) positive seating check valves. The relief valve shall function automatically by sensing the pressure differential across the first check valve and discharge the backflow to atmosphere should the check valve become damaged or fouled. The relief and check valves shall have replaceable seats, and the check valves provided with captured springs. A full-port ball valve in sizes through two (2) inches, and resilient-seat OS & Y gate valve in sizes over two (2) inches shall be on the inlet and outlet sides of the device, with a union, swivel coupling nut, or flanges between the device and each valve. Unions and swivel nuts must be integral with the device or valves. The device shall be provided with three ball valve test cocks and a fourth test cock shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shut-off valve. Sizes through two (2) inches shall have all test cocks in the vertical position. Test cocks on all assemblies shall be provided with brass or plastic threaded plugs, and relief valve vent-ports shall have suitable connections for an air gap. When a meter or other device with bronze strainer, integral or attached, is not immediately upstream of the backflow preventer, a bronze strainer shall be provided between the inlet shutoff valve and the RPZ on sizes through two (2) inches. All components of the assembly, including ball valve handles and assembly bolts shall be equal in corrosion resistance to stainless steel. Access to both checking devices shall be by top and/or side entry for maintenance and repair. 
2.  Installation. The RPZ backflow prevention device shall not be buried in earth but shall be installed above ground in a structure that permits positive drainage, has freeze protection, and is located as close as practical to the outlet side of the meter. In lieu of above ground installation, the RPZ may be installed immediately inside the facility provided no intervening connections exist between the meter and the device. Where relief valve discharge could cause water damage, it shall be piped via an air gap at the relief valve vent-port to a floor drain. 
3.  Sample approved devices: 
Hersey Model Nos. FRP II-U; 6CM; 6CM-RPDA 
Watts Model Nos. U-009-QT; 909OSY; 909DDC. 
(2)  All backflow prevention devices shall be approved by the American National Standards Institute, the American Society of Sanitary Engineering, the American Water Works Association, the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, or the Canadian Standards Association. All shut-off valves used with backflow prevention devices shall be resilient seated. 
(d)  Time for compliance, authorization for installation services by the authority. 
(1)  Upon application for new water service from the authority, a consumer shall be categorized as a low, medium, or high risk consumer and shall install the designated backflow prevention device required for that category prior to receipt of water services. 
(2)  Existing high risk consumers shall install the designated backflow prevention device within thirty (30) days of the adoption of this section. 
(3)  Existing low and medium risk consumers shall install the designated backflow prevention device within sixty (60) days of the adoption of this section. 
(4)  The authority is authorized to provide service for the installation of backflow prevention devices in compliance with the standards set out in paragraph (c) of this section. Installation shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
(e)  Inspection of backflow prevention devices required, maintenance and submission of records by property owner. 
(1)  All backflow prevention devices shall be maintained in proper working order. Reduced pressure zone (RPZ) devices shall be tested immediately after installation and not less than annually thereafter. Double check devices (DCV) in use by low or medium risk consumers shall be inspected and tested immediately after installation and at not less than five-year intervals following installation. 
(2)  The backflow prevention device shall be tested by a nationally recognized testing laboratory in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Double check valve device: ASSE standard 1015, and shall bear the ASSE seal. 
b.  RPZ: ASSE standard 1015, and shall bear the ASSE seal. 
c.  Synthetic (i.e. rubber or nylon) components within a backflow prevention device shall be replaced not less than every five (5) years. 
(3)  Each consumer and owner of property which receives water services from the authority shall maintain a written record of the location, testing, and maintenance of each backflow prevention device on his/her property. Said records shall be provided to the authority upon written request by the backflow prevention program manager. 
(4)  High risk consumers shall submit backflow prevention device inspection and test reports annually to the backflow prevention program manager, or more frequently upon written request. Said report shall be submitted within fourteen (14) days of completion of the inspection or written request. 
(5)  The authority is authorized to suspend water service to the consumer's premises in the event backflow prevention device inspection and test reports are not provided as required. 
(f)  Entry upon premises for purposes of inspection. The authority shall be authorized to conduct inspections to determine compliance with this section at the discretion of the program manager. Agents and employees of the authority shall be authorized to enter the premises of the consumer without notice during daylight hours for the purpose of inspection and testing of the backflow prevention device. 
(g)  Installation of thermal expansion device. An auxiliary release valve, or expansion chamber, shall be installed where water is heated and stored in a consumer's water system, or a branch of the system, which has been closed by the installation of a backflow prevention device. Said auxiliary release valve or expansion chamber shall be installed to limit thermal expansion of the heated water to not more than eighty (80) psi static (no-flow) pressure at any fixture on the system. 
(h)  Lawn sprinkler or irrigation systems. 
(1)  Lawn sprinkler or other irrigation systems, when connected to the authority water system, shall include adequate provision for drainage and backflow prevention. 
(2)  Where chemicals, pesticides, fertilizer, or other additives are utilized with a sprinkler system, said system shall have an approved reduced pressure zone (RPZ) backflow prevention device. 
(i)  Penalties for failure to comply with section. 
(1)  In the event a backflow prevention device is found not to be in compliance with those standards set forth in paragraph (c) of this section, the property owner or consumer shall cause said device to be repaired or replaced so as to meet the standards set forth in paragraph (c) within five (5) days of written notice by the authority. In the event the backflow prevention device is not repaired or replaced within five (5) days after written notice by the authority, the authority is authorized to suspend water service to the consumer's premises without further notice until such time as the device is repaired or replaced such as to be in compliance with paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  Violation of this section by the consumer or the property owner may be punished by a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence. 
All existing industrial and commercial customers of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority shall, within thirty (30) days of March 11, 1986, install at their own expense a backflow prevention valve approved by the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority and all future industrial and commercial customers of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority shall be required to install at their own expense a backflow prevention valve approved by the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority prior to the commencement of service. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XVIII, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 98-09, § 2, 6-24-98) 
Sec. 3-5-233. - Allocation of water services. 
The authority shall have the right from time to time, if necessary, to allocate water to the consumer under specific rules and regulations that may hereinafter be adopted by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XVIII, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-234. - Amendments to article. 
Since special circumstances frequently occur which require changes, amendments or modifications to this article, this article may be amended without notice upon the approval of said changes, amendments or modifications by the authority and the county. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XIX, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-235. - Promulgation of rules and/or policies. 
The authority is authorized to develop, implement, and administer such rules, regulations, and policies as are necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation of the water facilities of Henry County, including but not limited to achieving and maintaining compliance with the rules, regulations and policies of all federal or state agencies having jurisdiction over same. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XX, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 98-09, § 3, 6-24-98) 
Sec. 3-5-236. - Enforcement, generally. 
The authority shall enforce the terms of this article through the administrative procedures hereinbefore set out or through legal actions in a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XXI, 3-11-86) 
Sec. 3-5-237. - Tampering with authority and county property prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  Any consumer, person, firm or corporation who, without the authorization of the authority: 
(1)  Connects onto a water line of the authority; 
(2)  Disconnects a water line from a water line of the authority; 
(3)  Connects onto a water meter of the authority; 
(4)  Disconnects a water meter of the authority; 
(5)  Moves, removes, changes, or alters the location of a water meter; 
(6)  Changes, alters, or damages any water meter or water line so as to prevent proper registration of water passing through said water meter or line; 
(7)  Obtains water; 
(8)  Prevents any other person from obtaining water; 
(9)  Obstructs or otherwise interferes with the reading or maintenance of any water meter; 
(10)  Obstructs or otherwise interferes with any water line, fire hydrant, pumping station or any appurtenances to water facilities of Henry County; 
(11)  Creates a hazardous or unsafe condition to the water facilities of Henry County; 
shall be issued a citation and, if found guilty, shall be subject to a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a minimum of thirty (30) days to a maximum of sixty (60) days. 
(b)  The Magistrate Court of Henry County, Georgia, shall have jurisdiction to hear, try and dispose of citations that are issued for said violations. 
(c)  All consumers, persons, firms, or corporations who are charged with having violated this article shall be issued a citation by the Henry County Police Department, Henry County Sheriff's Department or a representative of the authority. Said citation shall require the appearance of the violator in the magistrate court of Henry County, Georgia, to answer said charges. 
(Ord. No. 86-10, Art. XXII, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 87-05, 6-2-87) 
Secs. 3-5-238—3-5-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-09, adopted Dec. 3, 2001, pertained to sewer use, and purported to amend Ord. No. 89-12; however, the county has advised that the intent was to amend Ord. No. 89-01, adopted Feb. 7, 1989, which pertained to similar subject matter and was codified as Ch. 3, Subch. 5, Art. III. The provisions of Ord. No. 01-09 have been set out in lieu of that former Art. III and designated as §§ 3-5-261—3-5-270, 3-5-276—3-5-304, 3-5-311—3-5-318 for the derivation of a specific section in the article, see the history note following such section. 

GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-5-261. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains; private sewage disposal; the installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer system; and the removal, transportation and disposal of scavenger wastes; and provides penalties for the violation thereof and establishment of fees and other matters, in Henry County, Georgia. 
(b)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for Henry County, Georgia, and enables the authority to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). 
(c)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system. 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system. 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(d)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be pre-empted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(e)  This article shall apply to Henry County, Georgia and to persons outside the county who are, by contract or agreement with the authority, users of its wastewater collection and treatment system. 
(f)  The operation and enforcement of this article shall be overseen by the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority, the governmental entity charged with the construction, operation, and maintenance of the water and sewerage system of Henry County. Nothing in this article shall be construed to change or in any way alter the powers and authorities granted by legislation to either the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority or the governing authority of Henry County, Georgia. The Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority shall be authorized to set and enforce, by resolution, judicial action, or otherwise, such rates, charges, penalties, policies, rules, and regulations as are deemed appropriate by said authority, and to otherwise take any other action, for the purposes of constructing, operating, and maintaining the water and sewerage system of Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. I, § 1.1, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-262. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC 1251), et. seq. 
Approval authority: The term "approval authority" shall refer to the State of Georgia's Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
Authority (the corporate entity): The term "authority" shall mean the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority, which is the governmental body having jurisdiction over the construction, maintenance and operation of the water and sanitary sewer system within Henry County, Georgia, and adjacent areas. 
Authority members: Members of the authority shall mean the persons duly appointed to serve as members of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
Authorized representative of user: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: A general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: A director or highest official or his or her designee, appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the authority. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approved laboratory procedure, after five (5) days and at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in terms of concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/L)). 
Board: Board shall mean the governing body of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority unless otherwise indicated as the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
Board of commissioners: The Board of Commissioners of Henry County (also referred to as county) shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, Georgia, the county governing body, and its members, agents, or representatives pertaining to matters of this article. 
Building drain: That part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system which received the discharge of all soil, waste, and other drainage from inside the walls of any building and that conveys the same to the building service sewer five (5) feet outside the foundation wall of such building. 
Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Categorical standards: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA (as hereinafter defined) in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
Cesspool: A covered soak pit constructed in the soil for the disposal of domestic waste. 
Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Commercial user or contributor: A premises that discharges commercial wastes similar in characteristics discharged by households but distinct from industrial wastes. 
Commercial wastes: Wastes which are discharged from an office, store, restaurant, or other commercial establishment that are similar to domestic waste in terms of characteristics. 
Composite sample: A sample which is composed of several individual grab samples collected at regular intervals and mixed together. The time period over which the composite sample is collected shall be stated. Either an eight-hour or a twenty-four-hour sample composited every two (2) hours, collected by an automatic sampler, will be acceptable. 
Control authority: The term "control authority" shall refer to the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
Cooling water: The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Developer: Developer shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, joint venture, public body, or legal entity that is selling, offering for sale, dividing, subdividing, or developing property for residential, commercial, or industrial use. 
Direct discharge: Any discharge directly to the waters of the state. 
Domestic waste: Any liquid wastes from the noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food and/or containing only human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions. 
Easement: A right afforded a person to make limited use of another's real property. 
Effluent: The discharge flow of a pretreatment facility. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): A governmental agency of the United States of America having jurisdiction over certain matters stated herein. 
Environmental Protection Division, Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia (EPD): A governmental division of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources having jurisdiction over certain matters stated herein. 
Existing source: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act. 
Flammable: Flammable shall mean any material which is easily ignited and burns with unusual rapidity. 
Floatable oil: Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection and/or treatment system. 
Flush toilet: The common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparing, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
General manager: The term general manager shall mean the General Manager of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative, appointed by the authority, and authorized by the authority to fulfill the requirements of these rules and to be responsible for the operations of the water and sewer system. 
Grab sample: A sample which is taken on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow and without consideration of time. 
Henry County: The public entity located in the State of Georgia, governed by the Board of Commissioners of Henry County. 
Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge: The term indirect discharge refers to any discharge into the public sewer system maintained by the authority. 
Industrial user or contributor: An industry which discharges process wastewaters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes. 
Industrial waste: Any liquid, solid, or gaseous waste, including suspended solids resulting from the processes employed in industrial or commercial establishments. 
Interceptor line: Interceptor line, trunk line, or outfall line shall mean the sewer line leading from owner's/developer's property to the authority's existing sewer line, treatment plant, or treatment plant site. Said line normally collects sewage or could collect sewage from more than one (1) property owner and transport the sewage to the sewage treatment plant. 
Interference: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act [RCRA] and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or pretreatment standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES): A permit administered by the Environmental Protection Division, State of Georgia. 
Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or (1)c above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Nitrification: Nitrification shall mean the conversion of nitrogenous matter into nitrates. 
Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the county's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Penalty: Any amount of monies set forth by the authority to be levied against an industrial, commercial, or residential user of the waste system who does not comply with any article set forth in this article. 
Person: Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, group, or society, and includes the State of Georgia, and agencies, districts, commissions, and political subdivisions created by or pursuant to state law. 
pH: The negative logarithm (to base 10) of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Phosphorus: Phosphorous shall mean the chemical element phosphorous and its several compounds. "Phosphorous removal" shall mean the removal of phosphorous and phosphorous compounds by biological or chemical treatment or combination of both. 
Polluted water or waste: Any water, liquid, or gaseous waste containing any of the following: Soluble or insoluble substances of organic or inorganic nature which may deplete the dissolved oxygen content of the receiving stream; settleable solids that may form sludge deposits; grease and oils; floating solids which may cause unsightly appearance; color; phenols and other substances to an extent which would impact any taste or odor to the receiving stream; and toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, solution, or gases. 
Pretreatment or treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes or process changes and other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Private sewage disposal system: Any on-site facility approved for the disposal of domestic sewage and commercial wastewater. Such a facility shall only serve buildings affixed to the lot of record on which the facility is located. Sewer systems that are not controlled by the authority and that serve more than one parcel or tract of land shall not be permitted under any circumstance. 
Privy: A separate enclosed shelter or building containing a floor slab and seat riser constructed over an excavation in the earth and having no water connections, used as a toilet. 
Privy vault: Excavation in the earth below a privy to receive human waste. 
Properly shredded garbage: The waste from the preparation of cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned, operated, or managed in this instance by the authority. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW but does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For purposes of this article, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the county who are, by contract or agreement with the authority, users of the county's POTW. 
Receiving waters: Those waters into which wastes are discharged. 
Residential domestic user or contributor: A premises or person that discharges domestic wastewaters and occupying a single-family residential unit or a multifamily residential unit or an apartment unit or any other type of residence. 
Sanitary sewer: A sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and admissible industrial waste but to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Scavenger waste: Putrid or offensive matter in the contents of all privies, septic tanks and cesspools. 
Septic tank: A water-tight tank designed or used to receive the discharge of sewage from a building sewer. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer surcharge: A charge for sewer service and treatment service for wastes having characteristics different from sanitary wastes and for which additional charges must be assessed in order for the waste to be processed properly and to compensate the authority for additional expenses incurred. 
Shall is mandatory. May is permissive. 
Significant industrial user: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day (GPD) or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blow-down wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance: Violations which meet one (1) or more of the following criteria are defined as significant noncompliance (SNC): 
(1)  Chronic violations—Sixty-six (66) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit for the same pollutant parameter in a six-month period (any magnitude of exceedance constitutes a chronic violation). 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations—Thirty-three (33) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit for the same pollutant parameter or the same average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period (exceeding the pretreatment limit by a factor of 1.4 for BOD, total suspended solids (TSS), fats, and oil and grease (O&G) and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH constitutes a TRC). 
(3)  Any other violation(s) of effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the authority believes has caused alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through or endangered the health of plant personnel or the public. 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health and welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date. 
(6)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, and periodic reports) within thirty (30) days from the due date. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation(s) that the authority considers to be significant. 
Slug load: A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC): The classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, or the most recent such manual. 
Standard methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published jointly by American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer): A sewer or drain which carries stormwater, surface water, and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Street: Construed to embrace streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys, and lanes, and via ducts, and all other public highways in the sewer system area. 
Suspended solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN): The total of organic and ammonia nitrogen as defined in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
Total suspended solids (TSS): The sum of suspended matter and settleable matter, both volatile and nonvolatile. 
Toxic pollutant: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA section 307 (a) or other acts. 
Trunk line: Interceptor line, trunk line, or outfall line shall mean the sewer line leading from owner's/developer's property to the authority's existing sewer line, treatment plant, or treatment plant site. Said line normally collects sewage or could collect sewage from more than one (1) property owner and transport the sewage to the sewage treatment plant. 
Unpolluted water: Water not containing any pollutants limited or prohibited by the effluent standards in effect, or water whose discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards. 
Unsanitary: Unsanitary shall mean unclean, unhealthy, or harmful to public health. 
User: Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the county's POTW. 
Wastewater contribution permit: As set forth in sections 3-5-276 through 3-5-299 of this article. 
Wastewater or sewage: The liquid- and water-carrying industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, which is contributed to or allowed to enter the wastewater treatment plant. 
Wastewater system: Any part of the authority-operated system from the sewer collector lines, transportation on through and including the treatment plant. 
Wastewater treatment plant: The treatment facilities owned or operated by the authority. 
Watercourse: A channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, and drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. I, § 1.2, 12-03-01; Ord. No. 06-07, § I, 7-18-06) 
Sec. 3-5-263. - Abbreviations. 
(a)  The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
•  ASTM—American Society for Testing Materials 
•  C—Degrees Centigrade 
•  CFR—Code of Federal Regulations 
•  COD—Chemical Oxygen Demand 
•  EPA—Environmental Protection Agency 
•  °F—Degrees Fahrenheit 
•  MBAS—Methylene Blue Active Substance 
•  mg/L—Milligrams per Liter 
•  USC—United States Code 
•  WEF—Water Environment Federation 
All other words or abbreviations shall be construed as having the meaning defined in Glossary, Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published by the Water Environment Federation, Washington, D.C., or by their general usage if undefined. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. I, § 1.3, 12-03-01) 
Sec. 3-5-264. - Authority. 
The authority to administer the pretreatment program has been appointed in the general manager of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority. The general manager has in turn delegated the authority to the industrial pretreatment monitor for managing the day-to-day functional aspects of the pretreatment program, while still retaining the authority for overall pretreatment program administration. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. I, § 1.4, 12-03-01) 
Sec. 3-5-265. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the county, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the authority, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the county or in any area under the jurisdiction of the authority any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended to be used or used for disposal of sewage where public sewers are available. 
(d)  The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose situated within the county or in any area under the jurisdiction of the authority, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now or shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the county, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within ninety (90) days after date of written notice from the general manager to the property owner requiring the property owner to make connection thereto, provided that the public sewer shall be within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(e)  In the event that the property owner can demonstrate, because of the property owner's financial condition, that the property owner is not able to pay up front all fees due to the authority for connection onto the sewer facility, the manager, at his discretion, may set a payment schedule for such connection fees. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 2, 12-03-01) 
Sec. 3-5-266. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under provisions of section 3-5-265(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, septic tank, privy, privy vault, or cesspool for single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the county health department sanitarian. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the county sanitarian. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with all recommendations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources or other local or state agencies having jurisdiction. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the authority. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 3-5-265(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this section, and any septic tank, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt within ninety (90) days of notification to do so by the general manager or other county or state agency having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(g)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or county regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 3, 12-03-01) 
Sec. 3-5-267. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the general manager. 
(b)  There shall be three (3) classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential service, (2) for commercial service, and (3) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In all cases, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the authority. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent to the judgment of the authority. Before connection is made to the public sewer, all connection fees shall be paid as required by the authority. Said permit and connection fees shall be in addition to any building permits and other fees required by the county. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the county and the authority from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each building except as otherwise approved for and for unusual circumstances, primarily involving existing buildings. A separate and independent building sewer and connection shall be provided for each residential, commercial, and industrial business unit of multi-unit buildings except as otherwise approved. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and tested by the authority, to meet all the requirements of this section. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and back-filling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or the county standards. In the absence of code provisions or amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement or first floor. No building sewer shall be made parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobile, etc.) which may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. The building sewer shall be constructed to that point as directed by the general manager. 
(h)  No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, area-way drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Before any underground portions thereof are covered, the applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be conducted under the supervision of an authorized representative of the authority. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the authority. 
(k)  The authority shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth, and direction of all new sewer connections including any landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
(l)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the authority, based on sound engineering standards, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. The owner shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal of material captured in the interceptors. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 4, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-268. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage to any sewer. Connection directly or indirectly to roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of surface runoff is not permitted to a building drain or building sewer connected to a public sanitary sewer. Existing connections of such items to a building sewer shall be disconnected at no expense to the authority when the building sewer is connected to the public sewer system. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. Cooling or condensing water may be allowed to be discharged into a storm sewer system provided an NPDES permit is obtained from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarter horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the general manager. 
(d)  A user may not introduce into the authority's POTW any pollutant(s) which can cause pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a wastewater system whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to any wastewater system: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater system or the operation of the wastewater system. Any waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR part 261.21. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) percent, nor any single reading be over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides, and any other substances which the authority, state, or EPA has notified the user, is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half-inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissue, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, lint or textile fibers, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 8.5 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the sewers or wastewater treatment plant. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singularly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process or sludge disposal, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act. 
(5)  Any liquids, gases, or solids which are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair or interfere with the collection system or create a condition deterious to structures and treatment processes either alone or by interaction with other wastes. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the sewers or wastewater treatment plant effluent or any other product of the sewers or wastewater treatment plant, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the sewers or wastewater treatment plant cause the sewers and wastewater treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not sufficiently removed in the treatment process which causes problems or adverse effects to receiving water alters the plant effluent from that which would be expected from domestic sewage, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(8)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the sewers or wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewers which exceeds 149 degrees Fahrenheit (65° C) or wastewater treatment plant which exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40° C). 
(9)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants or unusual chlorine demanding substances released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which can cause interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(10)  Any high-level radioactive wastes or isotopes whose concentrations may exceed limits established by Public Law 92-100, section 301 (33 U.S.C. section 1311), or amendments thereto, and the federal regulations promulgated thereunder or state regulations, or exceed limits established by the authority. 
(11)  Any waters or wastes containing more than one (1.0) part per million by weight (ppm or mg/L) of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide or nitrous oxide, or any other noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entrance into sewers for their maintenance inspection and repair. 
(12)  Any waters or waters containing concentrated acid, iron, pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(13)  Materials which exert or cause (a) unusual concentration of inert suspended solids such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or (b) of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
(14)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(15)  Wastewater containing more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit (0° C) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (65° C). 
(16)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety. 
(17)  Disposal of trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the general manager. 
(18)  Discharge of hazardous wastes: 
a.  The industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste-stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of this rule shall provide the notification no later than one hundred (180) days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under sections 3-5-285(3) [and] 3-5-287. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR article 6(v). 
b.  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (18)a of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
c.  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
d.  In the case of any notification made under subsection (18)a of this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practicable. 
(18)  Water or wastes containing taste or odor-producing contaminants in such quantities that after treatment of sewage these contaminants impart their tastes or odors to receiving waters to a detrimental degree. 
(19)  Any contaminant which the authority or its designated agent deems harmful to the operation or efficiency of wastewater treatment plants or to the health and welfare of the residents of Henry County. 
(20)  Ground paper products shall be prohibited from being discharged into the public sewer system, unless otherwise approved by the authority. 
(21)  Discharges of materials or substances which would cause the effluent quality from sewage treatment plants to violate state and federal standards including NPDES permit limitations and water authority standards. 
(22)  Any other circumstances that from time to time may be listed by the authority. 
(e)  The following technically based local limits apply for industrial discharges into the authority's wastewater treatment systems: 
Conventional Pollutants—All Facilities 

 
Direct Discharge Systems 

 
Land Application Systems 

 
Most Stringent Limitation at Springdale WWTP 

 
(f)  The general manager may issue permits specifying concentration limits greater than the local limits in the sewer use ordinance (SUO) based on special agreements with the authority, provided that all applicable state and/or federal categorical pretreatment requirements are met and provided that treatment plant headworks loadings are not violated. The permission to exceed concentration limits will be revoked if local treatment plant mass loadings are exceeded. The authority may levy surcharge for the treatment of such waste. Additional testing requirements will be necessary for an industry which seeks permission to exceed concentration limits and may include testing of the waste treatment plant influent and effluent as well as the user's own effluent. The costs associated with such testing will be paid by the user for the parameter they seek permission to exceed. 
(g)  The authority reserves the right to modify the industrial discharge limits and conditions at the time of the permit renewal. Industrial users requesting a permit variance must do so at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of their discharge permit. 
(h)  Any person, upon written application to the authority, who shows, in the case of the activity being conducted or operated, that compliance with a section of these rules should either be impossible or would constitute an undue hardship because of time limitations may be granted a variance. If a variance is granted by the authority, it shall be only for such reasonable period of time as determined by the authority under the specified conditions set by the authority. In the event that the person to whom the variance is granted fails to comply with the specifications of the authority within the time set, the authority shall have the right to revoke the variance granted and terminate all service (water and sewer) to the customer until all requirements of the authority have been complied with. A variance shall not be granted under the provisions of this section where the person applying, therefore, is causing a nuisance or other injury to the public. Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall not relieve the person receiving the variance from any liability or penalties imposed by law for the commission or maintenance of a public nuisance. 
(i)  Should a customer (user) be found to be in violation of the restrictions on public sewer use as provided in this article, the authority may take appropriate action to terminate the customer's water and sewer service until such time as the violation is abated and payment is made to the authority for any damages caused thereby to the sewerage system. 
(j)  Should any person who is not a customer of the authority be found in violation of the restrictions on public sewer use as provided in this article, the authority may take appropriate action to have civil and/or criminal action taken against said person violating the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 5, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-269. - Protection from damage. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest for violation of laws of the state. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall become liable to the authority for any loss, damage, or expense incurred by the authority including, but not limited to, all costs of labor, material expenses, loss of income, attorney's fees, expert witness fees, court costs, surveying/engineering expenses and any out of pocket funds expended by the authority, by reason of such violation and shall be punished as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 9, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-270. - Amendments. 
The authority does hereby reserve the right to amend this article in cases of emergency, in cases in which the authority is required to adopt immediate rules or regulations to comply with federal, state or regulatory agency rules, regulations, and laws, and in those portions of this article that apply to construction, operation and maintenance of the water and sewer system of Henry County without notice and without consent of the Board of Commissioners of Henry County. Except as set forth above, all other amendments to this article will be made jointly by the authority and the Board of Commissioners of Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 16, 12-03-2001) 
Secs. 3-5-271—3-5-275. - Reserved. 
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMITS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3-5-276. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge industrial wastes to the sewer or the wastewater treatment plant except as authorized by the general manager pursuant to a permit to discharge issued by the authority. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or contribute to the sewer collection system or wastewater treatment plant shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting or contributing wastewater. All existing significant industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this ordinance and all proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting or contributing wastewater to the wastewater system. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(a), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-277. - Application. 
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file an application form prescribed by the authority. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address). 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in section 3-5-268 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. (Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR part 136, as amended. Results collected within the previous year will be acceptable). 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by county, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(b), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-278. - Permit appeals. 
The general manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the general manager to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance. The following conditions shall apply to the appeal process: 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the general manager fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered as a final administrative action. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Superior Court of Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(c), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-279. - Permit modification. 
The general manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance. 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters. 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting. 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13. 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(d), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-280. - Term of permit. 
Wastewater discharge permits will be issued for a term or duration not to exceed five (5) years. The user must reapply for the permit renewal a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to permit expiration. The authority retains the right to modify allowable discharge limits for specific pollutants if federal or state standards are changed in the interim or for other just cause. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(e), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-281. - User responsibilities. 
The permit will specify the user's responsibilities that shall be required of the user. Failure of the user to comply with the permit requirements will result in penalties and/or discontinuance of sewerage service. Permits will provide the following information: 
(1)  Statement of permit duration (in no case more than five (5) years). 
(2)  Statement of nontransferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator. 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, federal categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and federal law. 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on applicable general pretreatment standards, federal categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and federal law. 
(5)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
In addition, the permit may also contain the following information: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user's charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedule. 
(6)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(7)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the authority, and affording authority access thereto. 
(8)  Requirements for notification of the authority of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituent being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(9)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges. 
(10)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the authority to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(f), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-282. - Permit specificity. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without prior notification (at a minimum) to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(g), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-283. - Pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Industrial users may be required by the general manager to install, in their effluent waste system immediately prior to entrance into the county sewer, a stainless steel automatic mechanically cleaned screen of either a vibration or brush type. The owner must maintain the screening facility in proper working condition at all times. 
(b)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the authority shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the authority for review, and shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the authority under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the authority prior to the user's initiation of the changes. The authority, in no way, shall be responsible for the design or operation of the plant; the review is intended only to ensure compatibility of the pretreatment system with the POTW. 
The industrial user must appoint a State of Georgia certified industrial operator to be in responsible charge of its pretreatment system. The operator should have a Class III or higher industrial operator license. 
"Operator in responsible charge" means any operator who has direct general charge of the day-to-day field operation of a wastewater treatment plant, wastewater collection system, water distribution system, or public water supply system, and who is responsible for the quality of the treated water or wastewater effluent. 
"Wastewater treatment" means biological, physical/chemical, or settling processes which remove pollutants from industrial or domestic wastewaters prior to discharge to a stream, sewer, or land. It includes only those processes permitted by the authority and specifically excludes those processes that consist solely of screening, pH adjustment, sedimentation processes without mechanical solids removal, septic tanks, grease traps, or oil-water separators. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(h), (i), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-284. - Publication of significant noncompliants. 
The authority may annually publish in the local newspaper a notification of the users that were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards during the previous twelve (12) months. The notification shall summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(j), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-285. - Periodic reporting. 
The user will be required to submit to the general manager reports indicating the nature and concentration of effluents on a periodic basis. Specific reporting requirements will be indicated in the user's permit. 
(1)  Analytical requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and procedures approved by EPA. 
(2)  Sample collection: 
a.  Except as indicated in subsection b, below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the general manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
b.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  Timing: Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(4)  Record keeping: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the authority, or when the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(k), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-286. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  No industry will exceed the pretreatment limits as established by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applied to a specific category of industrial users. 
(b)  No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any other way dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The authority may impose mass limitations on industrial users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(l), (m), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-287. - Reports of changed conditions. 
(a)  Each user must notify the general manager of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least ninety (90) days before the change. 
(1)  The general manager may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 3-5-277. 
(2)  The general manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 3-5-280 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(n), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-288. - Confidentiality. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and inspections shall be available without restriction unless the user contends such information and data constitutes a trade secret, in which case the information may be withheld from the general public. The effluent data will never be considered as confidential information. Information accepted by the authority as confidential portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes, shall be available for review by a governmental agency, when required to document compliance with the pretreatment program. In matters of judicial review or enforcement proceedings against an industrial user, the authority shall provide all available information pertaining to that industry to the reviewing court or governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(o), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-289. - Monitoring facilities and flow measurement. 
The authority shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the authority may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(p), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-290. - New standards; notification. 
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The general manager shall notify all affected users of the new standard and applicable reporting requirements. 
When the authority's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the authority may apply to the state for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system and ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) (or title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulation, part 403) "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the act. The authority may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(q), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-291. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the general manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR Part 03.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the general manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR Part 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR Part 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(r), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-292. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the general manager a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the general manager a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b) (1) to (5), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information: The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits: A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations: A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants: 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, when required by the standard or by the general manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, when required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with accepted procedures. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures provided in article 3-5-285(2). 
(6)  Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in the ensuing section. 
(8)  Signature and certification: All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(s), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-293. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation). 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the general manager no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (4) months elapse between such progress reports to the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(t), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-294. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the general manager a report containing the information described in section 3-5-292(b)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Part 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(u), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-295. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the general manager, but in no case less than two (2) times per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 3-5-276. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the general manager, using the procedures prescribed in this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(v), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-296. - Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation of wastewater discharge limitation, the user must notify the general manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the authority resamples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling or if the authority performs sampling at the industrial user's facility at a frequency of at least once per month. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(w), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-297. - Accidental discharge. 
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge or slug loading of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug loading of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the authority for review before construction of the facility. The authority shall evaluate all industrial users for the need for developing a slug discharge plan at least every two (2) years. Industrial users shall complete such a plan within ninety (90) days after being notified by the authority. No user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge or slug control procedures have been approved by the authority. A slug control plan shall contain (at a minimum) the following elements: 
•  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges. 
•  Description of stored chemicals. 
•  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under section 3-5-268(d) with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days. 
•  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, training of workers, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containment of toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
Review of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge or slug loading, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the authority of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(1)  Written notice: Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge or slug loading, the user shall submit to the general manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(2)  Notice to employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause to occur or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(3)  Upset: 
a.  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards or the local limits because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
b.  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection c below are met. 
c.  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
1.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset. 
2.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures. 
3.  The user has submitted the following information to the general manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days). 
i.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance. 
ii.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue. 
iii.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
4.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
5.  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
6.  Users shall control production of all discharges, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternate method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(4)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions of this article or the specific prohibitions if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
a.  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
b.  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the authority was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(5)  Bypass: 
a.  For the purposes of this section: 
1.  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
2.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
b.  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. 
1.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the general manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
2.  A user shall submit oral notice to the general manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The general manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
3.  The general manager may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
i.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. 
ii.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment. 
iii.  The industrial user submitted notices as required in subsection(5)b.2. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(x), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-298. - Feasibility study and construction expenses. 
(a)  Any owner/developer desiring sewer service to his or her property shall deliver to the authority a plat of survey of the property to be sewered along with a letter setting forth the intended use or uses of the property. The authority shall review said documents and with the assistance of the authority's engineer determine the costs to be incurred to perform the necessary engineering studies and requirements of carrying the sewer from the owner/developer's property to the authority's nearest existing facility having sufficient capacity to process the sewage to be generated from said property. Once said costs have been determined, the general manager shall notify owner/developer, and owner/developer shall deposit said funds with the authority. After said funds have been deposited with the authority and the authority's engineer has commenced with the Sewerage Feasibility Study, said funds shall become nonrefundable. The results of the completed study shall be provided to the owner/developer. 
(b)  The owner/developer of the property will be required to construct, at his or her own expense, any and all sewer lines and sewerage facilities that are located on the owner/developer's property that are determined by the authority to be needed for the adequate sewering of said property or that are required to service owner/developer's property. 
(c)  The owner/developer may, with prior authorization from the authority, employ its own contractor to construct the sewer lines from owner/developer's property to the authority's nearest facilities having capacity to process the sewage generated from said property. The sewer lines appurtenances thereto, and other facilities required, will be constructed according to the specifications of the authority and will be inspected by the authority prior to covering. If the authority allows the owner/developer to employ its own contractor, then said contractor shall deliver to the authority prior to commencement of work a certificate of insurance which will insure and protect the authority from all claims of damage to person or property occurring as a result of said construction. The amount of insurance shall be set by the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(y—aa), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-299. - Easement acquisition. 
(a)  If the authority determines that it is in the best interest of the authority to enlarge the sewer lines and sewerage system facilities from the owner/developer's property line to the sewerage system facilities, the authority will pay the additional costs for the increased size of sewer line and sewer facilities. 
(b)  The owner/developer shall make a good faith effort to obtain all easements required to install the sewer lines and sewerage system facilities from the owner/developer's property to authority's facility. In the event an owner/developer is unable to obtain the sewer easements required, said owner/developer shall notify the authority in writing. The authority will then determine the anticipated cost for condemning the easements required and notify the owner/developer in writing. Upon the owner/developer depositing with authority the estimated costs, the authority will authorize its attorney to proceed with condemnation of the easement. If the costs as hereinafter defined exceed the amount estimated by the authority, the owner/developer shall pay to the authority the additional costs within ten (10) days from receipt of notification. Failure to pay said funds within said time will result in the authority placing a fi.fa. on owner/developer's property. If estimated costs paid to the authority do not exceed the actual cost incurred, the excess funds will be returned to the person initially paying said funds within thirty (30) days after date of determination of actual costs involved. Costs referred to above shall include, but not be limited to, the amount paid by the authority for the easement or title to property, all attorney's fees, expert witness fees, court costs, litigation expenses, survey and engineering expenses, and any out-of-pocket funds expended by the authority. 
(c)  The authority will employ its own surveyor or engineer to survey the property on which the easement or title to property is required to carry the sewer line from owner/developer's property to authority's existing facility. An estimated cost of such expense will be provided by the general manager to the owner/developer in writing, and the owner/developer shall deposit said funds with the authority. Upon receipt of said estimated costs, the authority will proceed to survey said property and have said easements prepared by the authority's attorney. If the costs as hereinafter defined exceeds the amount estimated by the authority, owner/developer shall pay to the authority the additional costs within ten (10) days from receipt of notification. Failure to pay said funds within said time will result in the authority placing a fi.fa. on owner/developer's property. If estimated costs paid to the authority do not exceed the actual costs incurred, the excess funds will be returned to the person initially paying said funds within thirty (30) days after date of determination of actual costs involved. Costs referred to above shall include, but not be limited to, the amount paid by the authority for the easement or title to property, all attorney's fees, expert witness fees, court costs, litigation expenses, surveying and engineering expenses, and any out-of-pocket funds expended by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 6(bb—dd), 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-300. - Removal, transportation, and disposal of scavenger wastes. 
(a)  The authority may require a formal permit for the discharge of scavenger wastes after submission of an application on forms supplied by the county. All other materials and substances, chemicals or chemical compounds, and/or industrial wastes will not be permitted to be discharged into the public sewerage system except as heretofore provided. 
(b)  The discharge of the wastes in subsection (a) above and trucked or hauled pollutants shall be made only at a location in the sewage treatment plant as shall be designated by the general manager. 
(c)  Scavenger wastes will be admitted into the sewerage system only by permit and subject to payment of fees or fixed charges. The fee or charge shall be based on the full capacity of each scavenger vehicle for each discharge. 
(d)  The applicant shall be the owner of the vehicle discharging the wastes. Any false, misleading, or untruthful statements as to the nature of the material shall be cause for termination of any further discharge from the applicant. 
(e)  Discharges in subsection (a) above may also be suspended or terminated at any time by the general manager for willful, continued, or persistent violations of these rules and regulations. 
(f)  All equipment, such as trucks, tanks, pumps, and hoses used in the collection and/or transportation of scavenger wastes shall be modern equipment in good condition. When more than one (1) vehicle is used by an applicant, each vehicle shall bear an identifying number. 
(g)  All applicants for a permit shall furnish the following information with each application: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Volume of scavenger waste for each numbered vehicle. 
(3)  Number of scavenger vehicles in collection service. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 7, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-301. - Powers and authority of inspector testing. 
(a)  Search warrants and orders from superior court. If the general manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the authority designed to verify compliance with this article any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, the general manager may seek issuance of a search warrant or order from the Superior Court of Henry County. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, any claims resulting from injury or death to the general manager or duly authorized employees of the authority shall be compensated by the company when there is negligence on the part of the company. 
(c)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The general manager or his or her representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the general manager or his representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  When a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the general manager or his or her representative will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The general manager or his or her representative shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installations of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operation. 
(3)  The general manager or his or her representative may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated (once a month) to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the general manager or his or her representative and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the general manager or his or her representative access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  At the order of the general manager, all persons discharging wastewater into the authority's sewer system shall have their discharge tested by an authority-approved independent testing laboratory at said person's expense at a frequency specified by the general manager at his or her discretion. 
(e)  In the event of a violation of any provision of this article, the general manager shall have the authority to terminate water and sewer services to the violator until such violations have been brought into compliance. 
(f)  The general manager shall have the right to assess and collect fines and restitution penalties authorized by this article, and shall have the right to terminate water and sewerage services as set forth in paragraph (e) above, until all fines and restitution costs have been paid. 
(g)  The clerk of the authority shall have the right to issue fi.fas. for the collection of fines, fees and restitution costs for damages due to the authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 8, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-302. - Sewerage fees and rates. 
(a)  Henry County as a whole shall be considered one sewerage district. The authority, from time to time, shall review and set all impact fees, connection fees, sewerage user fees, surcharges and penalties which they deem reasonable and financially appropriate. 
(b)  Impact fees, as that term is defined by the Impact Fee Ordinance of Henry County, shall be set from time to time by the authority, and governed by said ordinance. 
(c)  The impact fee is set at the time of connection on to the sewerage system and based on the present anticipated usage. The authority from time to time will determine whether or not the customer is using more capacity in the sewage treatment plant and the sewer lines than was originally purchased. If the authority determines that there is an increase in usage by the customer, the authority will assess additional impact fees based on the impact fee rate that is in existence at the time of the determination by the authority. The customer shall notify the authority thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of any additions to the customer's present facilities to determine if sewage treatment facilities and sewage facilities are available and have adequate capacity to accommodate the anticipated additional usage. 
(d)  A connection fee is charged to the customer for connection to the authority's sewerage system. The connection fee shall be set from time to time by the authority. 
(e)  A sewerage user fee is charged to the customer on a monthly basis for the sewage processed by the authority. The sewerage user fee is set by the authority from time to time. The authority will charge a minimum monthly charge to all sewer users. 
(f)  The authority from time to time may set and collect additional fees and surcharges as it deems appropriate. 
(g)  The authority from time to time may set and collect deposits from customers. Any deposit so collected will be deposited in the general operating account and used for the operation of the authority. The authority shall not be required to pay interest on any deposit collected. Upon termination of services, the deposit shall be applied to any balance owed to the authority, and the balance of any deposit, if any, shall be returned to the customer within ninety (90) days of termination of services. 
(h)  If the payment of the sewer fees or any surcharge assessed is allowed to go into default by the customer, the authority may take appropriate action to terminate the customer's water and sewer service until all sums due the authority, including penalties, are paid in full. 
(i)  The authority shall from time to time review the fees set forth above and adjust same as may be necessary to defray operational and maintenance costs and provide for financial capitalization including replacements and other system improvements. The authority shall have the right from time to time to increase or decrease any sewer fees or sewer rates charged by it without further approval of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(j)  Except as otherwise negotiated and approved, the authority reserves the right to refuse sewer service to any person not using authority water. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 10, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-303. - Construction and extension of sewer lines. 
(a)  Prior to construction or extension of any sewer line, a property owner shall prepare and deliver to the authority for review and approval plans of the proposed sewer line. At a minimum, the plans for the proposed sewer line shall show: 
(1)  The line's proximity to existing sewer lines; 
(2)  The location of the sewer line; 
(3)  The location of all outfalls; 
(4)  The location of all interceptors; 
(5)  The estimated amount of sewerage to be processed on a day-to-day basis and the capacity of the sewer lines to be installed; 
(6)  Such other information as is required by the authority from time to time. 
(b)  Any plans submitted to the authority for review and approval shall be prepared by a registered engineer. 
(c)  All gravity flow sewer lines constructed in Henry County shall have a minimum diameter of eight (8) inches. 
If the general manager desires to enlarge the diameter of a sewer line to better serve the drainage basin, the authority or its designee shall determine the routing for said line and shall install it. In such an event, the authority shall estimate the cost of an eight-inch line (not including unfit soil and rock) and shall deliver said estimate to the developer. Upon receipt, the developer shall pay the estimate of cost for the eight-inch line within thirty (30) days of receipt. 
(1)  If rock and/or unfit soil is encountered by the authority during installation of the enlarged line, the developer will pay the increased cost caused by said soil or rock within thirty (30) days of receipt of a bill from the authority. 
(d)  Property owners desiring to extend lines to existing authority sewer lines shall be responsible for paying all costs of the line extension. Further, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to build within the property to be served, sewerage lines according to the specifications of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 11, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-304. - Industrial waste surcharges. 
(a)  If the authority authorizes any customer to discharge industrial wastes into the public sewers, said customer shall be charged and assessed a surcharge in addition to any sewer service charges, if these wastes have a concentration greater than the following concentrations: 
(1)  A five-day, twenty-degree Celsius biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) concentration of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter (mg/L), which is also referred to as parts per million (ppm). 
(2)  A total suspended solids (TSS) concentration of three hundred (300) mg/L. 
(3)  For wastewater discharging to a treatment plant where nitrification is required, a Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) and/or ammonia (NH3-N) of two (2) mg/L (separately or in combination). 
(4)  For wastewater discharging to a treatment plant where phosphorous removal is required, phosphorous and/or phosphorous compounds (as P) of twenty-five (25) mg/L. 
The above constituents shall be sampled and analyzed in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater or other analytical procedure approved by the U.S. EPA or the regulatory agency of the state having jurisdiction. The surcharge shall be based on an average of at least three (3) twenty-four-hour composite samples (or composite samples during the daily discharge) or based on an average of at least six (6) grab samples taken at different hours of operation over at least a three-day period. Where different processes are used or different products are manufactured, the highest strength discharge over a five-day period, as sampled above, shall be used as the basis of the surcharge. The amount of such surcharge, which may be charged and assessed against persons discharging industrial waste into the public sewers, shall reflect the cost incurred by the authority in handling the excess of the previously listed constituents. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of the operational and maintenance costs and replacement costs on the portions of the plant and affected sewerage system and other incidental expenses (monitoring, testing, and other) including salaries and other administrative expenses. 
(b)  When any or all of the total suspended solids, BOD, phosphorous, TKN, or ammonia of the wastewater accepted for admission to the authority's sewerage works exceeds the aforementioned values of these constituents, the excess concentration in any or all, as the case may be, shall be subject to a surcharge on the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: 
Amount of surcharge in dollars = (pounds of excess constituent) × (prorated facility replacement cost per excess pound + prorated operational, maintenance, and incidental costs per excess pound). 
Excess poundage shall be calculated as follows: 
(Wastewater discharged in MGD × excess concentration in mg/L × 8.34 lbs/gallons) 
Example: 
1 MGD of wastewater 
200 mg/L excess BOD (500 mg/L - 300 mg/L) 
Excess poundage = 1 MGD × 200 × 8.34 = 1,668 pounds 
(c)  The rates of surcharges shall be reviewed annually by the authority in order that the above factors may correctly represent current treatment costs and may be modified at any time. The current surcharge rates are available at the authority. 
(d)  Industrial waste surcharges provided for in this article shall be prepared and rendered with the regular water and sewerage bill. The manager or other duly authorized employee of the authority shall be permitted to enter any property for the purpose of inspection, observation, measuring, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The volume of flow used to compute industrial waste surcharges shall be based on metered, estimated, or prorated water consumption as shown in the records of meter reading maintained by the authority. In the event that a person discharging waste into the public sewerage system produces evidence to the manager that a significant portion of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the public sewer system, an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing charges may be agreed on between the manager and persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewer. 
(f)  The industrial waste of each person, corporation, or legal entity discharging into the public sewerage system shall be subject to annual inspection and determination of character and concentration of said waste; such action may be made more often as may be deemed necessary by the authority. Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the actual quality of the waste. The laboratory methods used in examination of said waste shall be those set forth in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
(g)  In the event that an analysis of waste, determined by the sampling and gauging of waste from a person or industry by the authority is disputed, a program of resampling and gauging, with subsequent chemical determinations, may be instituted as follows: 
(1)  The person or industrial user interested must submit a request for resampling and gauging of its waste to the manager by letter and bind itself to bear the expenses incurred by the authority in the resampling and gauging the subsequent chemical determination of the waste. 
(2)  The chemist or engineer employed by the company or person responsible for the request submitted to the authority must confer with the authority's person in charge of gauging and sampling. He or she will establish the length of the return and the methods to be employed to determine the flow and to sample the flow. 
(3)  The chemist or engineer engaged by the person or industry may be present during the gauging and sampling operation and also in the laboratory during the determination of the analysis. 
(4)  The results of the analysis, determined from the quantity and quality of the flow, shall be considered by analysis of record and shall be used to establish current billing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 12, 12-03-2001) 
Secs. 3-5-305—3-5-310. - Reserved. 
PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 3-5-311. - Administrative remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the authority finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, the authority may serve upon said user written notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the authority. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The general manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as the compliance orders issued pursuant to subsection (d) below. 
(c)  Show-cause order. The general manager may order any industrial user which causes or contributes to a violation of this article or wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principal executive, general partner, or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly notified industrial user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued. 
(d)  Compliance order. When the general manager finds that an industrial user, has violated or continues to violate this article or a permit or order issued thereunder, he or she may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements deemed reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. 
(e)  Cease-and-desist orders. When the general manager finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, the general manager may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to do one of the following: 
(1)  Comply with the order. 
(2)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 13, § 13.1, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-312. - Termination of service. 
(a)  Termination for cause. 
(1)  The general manager and his designees are hereby authorized to terminate water and sewerage services to customers who violate any provision of this article. 
(2)  The following procedures shall be followed prior to termination of water and sewerage services: 
a.  The authority, through its employees, shall forward to each violating customer notice of the violation of which the customer has been charged. The notice shall state the cutoff date on which the water and sewerage services will be cut off if the violation is not remedied by that date. 
b.  If a violating customer has not cured the violation by the date shown on the notice, the authority will cut off water and sewerage service. The general manager or his designee is authorized to direct personnel of the authority to terminate water and sewerage services without notice to any customer that the general manager has reason to believe is willfully violating this article. 
c.  Once service has been discontinued, a customer can re-establish service by remedying the violation and paying the total amount due the authority in fees, fines, restitution and penalties together with any other applicable charges. 
d.  If a customer disputes violation of the article, the customer may request a hearing. A request for hearing may be made as follows: 
1.  In writing, addressed to the general manager and mailed to the authority at 1695 Highway 20 West, McDonough, Georgia 30253; 
2.  In writing, addressed to the general manager and delivered to the authority at 1695 Highway 20 West, McDonough, Georgia 30253; or 
3.  By contacting the general manager by telephone during normal business hours at (770) 957-6659. 
e.  A hearing date and time will be set. The general manager or his designee shall conduct the hearing and determine whether a violation of the article has occurred. If a violation is found, the same shall be cured by 4:30 p.m. on the following business day. If the violation is not cured by said date and time, water and sewerage services shall be terminated. 
(b)  Emergency termination of service. The general manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge and water use, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The general manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge and water service, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the general manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of water and sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The general manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the general manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 3-5-312(c) of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the general manager prior to the date of any show-cause or termination hearing. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(c)  Termination of discharge. The authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the general manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Failure to notify the general manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(7)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(8)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(9)  Refusing to allow the general manager timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(10)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(11)  Failure to pay fines; 
(12)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(13)  Failure to met compliance schedules; 
(14)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(15)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(16)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 13, § 13.2, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-313. - Administrative penalty. 
(a)  (1)  Any person including, but not limited to, industrial users that perform any of the following acts or omissions shall be subject to a administrative penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation for each day during which the act or omission continues or occurs: 
a.  Violates any effluent standard or limitation imposed by a pretreatment program. 
b.  Violates the terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant to a pretreatment program. 
c.  Fails to complete a filing requirement of a pretreatment program. 
d.  Fails to allow or perform an entry, inspection, monitoring, or reporting requirement of a pretreatment program. 
e.  Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed by a pretreatment program. 
f.  Violates a final determination or order of the authority. 
g.  Violates any provisions of this ordinance, the pretreatment permit, or any order. 
(2)  Any administrative penalty shall be assessed in the following manner: 
a.  The general manager may issue an assessment against any person or industrial user responsible for the violation. 
b.  In assessing the administrative penalty, the general manager may consider the following factors: 
1.  Whether the administrative penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity. 
2.  Damages to the authority, including compensation for the damage or destruction of the facilities of the POTW, which also includes any penalties, costs, and attorneys' fees incurred by the authority as a result of the illegal activity, as well as the expenses involved in enforcing this section and the costs involved in rectifying any damages. 
3.  Cause of the discharge or violation. 
4.  The severity of the discharge and its effect on the facilities of the POTW and on the quality and quantity of the receiving waters. 
5.  Effectiveness of action taken by the violator to cease the violation. 
6.  The technical and economic reasonableness of reducing or eliminating the discharge. 
7.  The economic benefit gained by the violator. 
c.  Any person or industrial user against whom an assessment has been issued may secure a review of such assessment by filing with the general manager a written petition setting forth the grounds and reasons for his or her objections and asking for a hearing on the matter involved before the board. If a petition for review of the assessment is not filed within ten (10) days of the date the assessment is served, the violator shall be deemed to have consented to the assessment, and it shall become final. 
d.  When any assessment becomes final because of a person's failure to appeal to the general manager, the general manager may apply to the Superior Court or State Court of Henry County for a judgment and seek execution of such judgment and the court, in such proceedings, shall treat a failure to appeal such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment. 
e.  In addition, the clerk of the authority may file a fi fa with the superior court against all property of the person or industry against whom the assessment was made. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 13, § 13.3, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-314. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Civil penalties are obtained through the Superior Court or State Court of Henry County by maintaining a civil action against the person or industrial user who is in alleged violation of the pretreatment ordinance [this article]. When the authority pursues a civil action, it is generally seeking compensatory and punitive damages against the person or industrial user for alleged harm resulting from the industrial user's violations. 
Any user who is found to have violated or continues to violate an order of the authority or who fails to comply with any provision of this article, or the orders, rules, regulations or permits issued hereunder shall be liable for civil penalties in at least the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. In addition, the authority may recover reasonable attorneys fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, expert witness fees and other expenses of litigation from the industrial user who is the losing party in the civil litigation. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 13, § 13.4, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-315. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  The authority may request the county district attorney's office or state court or county solicitor's office to pursue a criminal action against any person and industrial user in the following circumstances: 
(1)  A user who violates any provision of this article will be prosecuted and sentenced as authorized by the laws of the state. 
(2)  A user who violates any provision of this article to the extent that the same does not otherwise qualify as a felony or misdemeanor under the laws of the state, shall be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to any other criminal penalties, to the extent that the authority is required to pay any fines, penalties, or other fees or charges by any federal or state governmental agency, division or other entity, the violating user shall pay as restitution the amount of whatever fine, fee, penalty or charge has been assessed against the authority as a result of the violator's violation together with costs incurred by the authority in collection of said restitution. Costs shall include but not be limited to all attorney's fees, expert witness fees, court costs, litigation expenses, survey and engineering expenses, and any out-of-pocket funds expended by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 13, § 13.5, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-316. - Injunctive relief. 
When the authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may petition Superior Court or the State Court of Henry County for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 13, § 13.6, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-317. - Billing and service disconnection. 
(a)  Sewer charges shall be billed with water charges, and failure to pay sewer charges shall be treated in the same manner as for failure to pay water charges as defined in the Henry County Water Ordinance [see articles II and IV of this subchapter 3]. 
(b)  The authority shall levy a BOD5 surcharge for industrial users whose BOD5 concentrations exceed a certain minimum value called the surcharge concentration. Surcharge will be levied up to a maximum concentration, which is the local limit. Beyond the local limit, escalating levels of enforcement action will be pursued by the county. The current surcharge amount and the surcharge basis may be found in the fee schedule on file with the county offices. The authority reserves the right to revise the surcharge concentration for BOD5 and the surcharge rate by providing a thirty-day notice to the industrial users. 
(c)  The authority reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  A governmental agency informs the authority that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the authority as normal domestic treatment; or 
(2)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; or 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; or 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(d)  The general manager and his designees are hereby authorized to terminate water and sewerage services to customers who violate any provision of this article. 
(1)  The following procedures shall be followed prior to termination of sewerage services: 
a.  The authority, through its employees, shall forward to each violating customer notice of the violation of which the customer has been charged. The notice shall state the cutoff date on which the water and sewerage services will be cut off if the violation is not remedied by that date. 
b.  If a violating customer has not cured the violation by the date shown on the notice, the authority will cut off water and sewerage service. The general manager or his designee is authorized to direct personnel of the authority to terminate water and sewerage services without notice to any customer that the general manager has reason to believe is willfully violating this article. 
c.  Once water and sewerage service has been discontinued, a customer can re-establish service by remedying the violation and paying the total amount due the authority in fees, fines and penalties together with any other applicable charges. 
d.  If a customer disputes violation of the article, the customer may request a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of said notice. A request for hearing may be made as follows: 
1.  In writing, addressed to the general manager and mailed to the authority at 1695 Highway 20 West, McDonough, Georgia 30253; 
2.  In writing, addressed to the general manager and delivered to the authority at 1695 Highway 20 West, McDonough, Georgia 30253; or 
3.  By contacting the general manager by telephone during normal business hours at (770) 957-6659. 
e.  A hearing date and time will be set. The general manager or his designee shall conduct the hearing and determine whether a violation of the article has occurred. If a violation is found, the same shall be cured by 4:30 p.m. on the following business day. If the violation is not cured by said date and time, water and sewerage services shall be terminated. 
(e)  The authority reserves the right to discontinue its water and sewer service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Customer's willful or negligent disregard of the terms of the article and any amendments thereto or any of the rules of the authority. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply because of circumstances beyond authority's control. 
(5)  Insufficiency of sewage treatment system. 
(6)  Legal processes. 
(7)  Direction of public authorities. 
(8)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident, actions of others, or acts of God. 
(f)  The authority reserves the right to terminate all services granted by the authority for any other reason other than those stated above by giving the customer ten (10) days' written notice of the date of termination and further providing the customer with a right to hearing prior to termination of the service. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 14, 12-03-2001) 
Sec. 3-5-318. - Fees, penalties and fines, etc., collection. 
The authority shall be authorized to file of record fi fas to collect any outstanding fees, penalties, fines, restitution and other costs due the authority. In addition, the authority shall be authorized to terminate water and sewerage service to any customer who has been found to violate any provision of this article, and said service shall remain terminated until all fines, fees, penalties, restitution and other charges due the authority have been paid and all violations have been brought into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Art. 15, 12-03-2001) 
Secs. 3-5-319—3-5-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 3-5-351. - Definitions. 
The definitions in article II of this subchapter shall apply to this article. 
Sec. 3-5-352. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  The rate schedule used for the authority is set from time to time. However, water rates will not increase without thirty (30) days' notice to the consumer. Notice will be sufficiently given to the consumer by a publication of the rate changes for once a week for four weeks in the official newspaper of the county prior to the rate increase. 
(b)  The water rate shall be as follows: 

 
(c)  Municipal consumers of the authority located in the county shall pay on a monthly basis eighty-five cents ($0.85) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for water purchased by a municipality from the authority. 
(d)  Since sewer rates are based on the amount of water used, the sewer rate for consumers of the authority shall be as follows: 

 
(e)  Water meters shall be classified as either "active meters," "inactive meters," "cancelled meters," "line extension meters" or "subdivision meters." Said meters are further defined as follows: 
(1)  Active meters are defined as meters that are in use or that were purchased after August 1, 1983. All active meters will be charged on a monthly basis the rates set forth above. If an active meter is not used for a period of six (6) months after installation, or if the customer requests in writing that service be temporarily discontinued, then the meter shall be classified as an "inactive meter" and shall be treated as hereinafter provided. A customer can maintain an active meter status by paying a monthly minimum water bill provided for herein. 
(2)  Inactive meters are defined as meters that are installed, but have not been used by the customer for a period of six (6) months, or the customer has notified the authority in writing to temporarily terminate service. If a meter remains unused for a period of six (6) months, or the customer requests in writing that service be temporarily terminated, the authority will seal the meter and declare the meter an inactive meter. If a customer desires to obtain water services after the meter has been declared inactive, the customer shall pay the authority a reconnection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), together with any previous bills assessed against said meter prior to obtaining any additional service from the authority. Once the connection fee and any past due bills have been paid, the meter will be re-classified as an "active meter" as defined above. 
(3)  Cancelled meters are defined as meters that are installed but are not used for a period of twelve (12) months, or the customer has notified the authority that the customer does not desire to obtain any further water service from the authority. If a meter is declared a cancelled meter, the meter will be removed and the connection sealed. A customer desiring reconnection of a cancelled meter shall pay the tap-on fee that is in effect as of the date of the application. 
(4)  Line extension meters are defined as meters purchased to aid in line extensions, but the customer has not requested that the meter be installed. At the time of the purchase of the meter, the authority anticipated that the customer would connect onto the water system within a reasonable time. A number of line extension meters have been purchased, but the customer has not requested that the meter be installed. Due to the customer's failure to connect onto the line extension, pay the minimum monthly water bill, the authority cannot recoup the cost of the line as originally anticipated. Any customer holding a line extension meter who fails to connect on prior to January 1, 1985, shall be assessed an additional connection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) at the time of connection. The customer may avoid the payment of the additional connection fee by paying the minimum monthly water bill until such time as the meter is connected, at which time the meter will be classified as an "active meter" as defined above. 
(5)  Subdivision meters are defined as meters that were purchased for installation in subdivisions in which the water lines were constructed and installed at no expense to the authority. Any subdivision meters that were purchased prior to August 1, 1983, that are not installed prior to January 1, 1985, shall be charged an additional connection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). This charge is assessed because of the increased cost of operation and maintenance of the water system of Henry County. Subdivision meters that are installed but do not become "active meters" by January 1, 1984, will be classified as "inactive meters" and shall be governed as such. 
(f)  All customers who pay a connection fee to the authority after August 1, 1983, will be required to pay a minimum monthly payment as set forth above commencing ninety (90) days after the date of payment of the connection fee or on the next billing date after connection, whichever occurs first. The monthly minimum charge set forth above shall be paid whether the meter has been installed or not. 
(Ord. No. 83-27, Art. IX, 8-23-83; Ord. No. 84-13, 8-21-84) 
Sec. 3-5-353. - Meter readings. 
The water meter serving the consumer's property shall be read on a monthly basis and official records of each reading thereof shall be kept for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 83-27, Art. X, 8-23-83) 
Sec. 3-5-354. - Billing and collections. 
(a)  The consumer shall pay promptly on a monthly basis all water registered by the meter serving said property at the rate or rates set by the authority from time to time, which shall include water used, water wasted, or leakage, except for water that may be traced by the authority to the authority's system. 
(b)  Said bill shall be paid within fifteen (15) days from the date of said bill. In the event that said bill is not paid within fifteen (15) days from date thereof, ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance on a monthly basis will be assessed as a penalty. In the event that the bill and any penalties assessed thereon are not paid within twenty (20) days from the date of said bill, the authority shall have the right to commence procedures to terminate the water service. 
(c)  If water service is discontinued for nonpayment of bill, the authority will not resume water service to the consumer until the bill and all penalties have been paid in full and a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) nonrefundable reservice fee has been paid to the authority by the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 83-27, Art. XI, §§ 1—3, 8-23-83) 
Sec. 3-5-355. - Complaints and adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in writing to the authority, at the office of the authority before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  Settlement of claims and adjustments of bills are subject to the following additional provisions: 
(1)  Any consumer who fails to notify the authority in writing within thirty (30) days after the date of said bill of any irregularities or errors that may be in said bill shall waive any right or claim for correction or refund under said bill. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer. If the meter is found to be malfunctioning, no charge will be made. However, if the meter is found not to be malfunctioning, consumer will be required to pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Said fee will be added to the next months billing. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by any person other than the authority's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount which is the average of the three (3) previous months bills. 
(Ord. No. 83-27, Art. XII, 8-23-83) 
Secs. 3-5-356—3-5-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOWALIGA WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Towaliga Watershed Protection zoning district, § 3-7-159; stormwater runoff, § 3-6-61 et seq. 

Sec. 3-5-376. - Intent. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to create a zoning district to be known as The Towaliga Watershed Protection District, which such area has a unique environmental importance to the county. This article is intended to maintain the current high water quality of the surface water (rivers, creeks, streams and springs) and underground water of the Towaliga River Basin and to preserve and ensure the same continuing high water quality of said basin for the future. The zoning for this district is intended to provide for certain permitted uses as hereinafter provided and to protect the underground and surface water of said basin from polluting effects of more intense development and from encroachments of those uses that are not compatible with a protected watershed. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § I, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-377. - Definitions, etc. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this article: 
(1)  The Towaliga Watershed Protection District shall hereinafter be designated as T.W.P.D. 
(2)  The T.W.P.D. shall hereinafter be described and designated as all that parcel of tract of land that lies in the 2nd, 3rd, 6th and 7th Districts of Henry County, Georgia, as designated by the shaded area shown in Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance No. 83-23 and made a part hereof. 
(3)  Any setback measurements hereinafter stated shall be measured from the outer edge of any river, creek, stream, spring or body of water that is located within T.W.P.D., or the outer property line of any property owned, operated, managed or maintained by the county or the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority as a water source, whichever is greater. 
(4)  The words "surface water" as herein used shall mean and include any river, creek, stream, spring or body of water located within T.W.P.D. 
(5)  The words "underground water" as herein used shall mean and include any water located underground in the T.W.P.D. 
(6)  The word "toxic" as herein used shall mean any chemical or substance that has been defined as toxic by the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States (E.P.A.), environmental protection department of the state (E.P.D.), or the department of agriculture of the state (A.D.). 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § II, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-378. - Preexisting conditions. 
All parcels of land within the T.W.P.D. that do not conform or come within the permitted uses or the minimum standards provided by this article shall be governed by section 3-7-159 chapter 3-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § III, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-379. - Zoning and building permits. 
(a)  This section must be complied with prior to obtaining rezoning or building permit within the T.W.P.D. 
(b)  Should the owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land, included in the T.W.P.D. propose to divide any portion of his property that lies within the T.W.P.D., the owner or his authorized agent shall submit a plat or drawing to scale showing the exact location of any surface water that is located on or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property to be zoned or permit to be issued upon. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § IV, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-380. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses of the property located within T.W.P.D. are permitted provided they meet all the requirements stated in this article and Chapter 3-7 of this Code: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multi-family dwellings that are served by public sewerage. 
(3)  Row crops and pasture. 
(4)  Commercial agriculture so long as the commercial agricultural activity and any other activity associated therewith complies with Georgia Pesticide Act of 1976, Georgia Pesticide Use and Application Act of 1976, and O.C.G.A.2-1-4. 
(5)  Non-commercial agriculture, poultry, horse and livestock raising as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof. 
(6)  Riding stables and academies. 
(7)  Sale of products and commodities raising on the premises only. 
(8)  Accessory buildings. 
(9)  Home occupations. 
(10)  Public, private or parochial, elementary and high schools and publicly owned and operated community structures, lands and athletic fields. 
(11)  Public utility structures. 
(12)  Privately operated day nurseries, preschools and kindergartens. 
(13)  Churches and other places of worship and accessory facilities. 
(14)  Public and private golf courses and accessory facilities. 
(15)  Fishing clubs and fishing lakes, swimming pools, hunting and hunting clubs, gun clubs, golf driving ranges and similar recreational uses. 
(16)  Lakes and impoundments built to soil conservation service specifications. 
(17)  Authorized commercial activities that are not hereinafter prohibited. 
(18)  Authorized industrial activities that are not hereinafter prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § V, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-381. - Prohibited uses. 
The following are prohibited uses in the T.W.P.D. 
(1)  No sewage treatment facility shall be constructed in the T.W.P.D. unless prior approval is granted by Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority and E.P.D. 
(2)  No commercial business which uses, sells, stores or maintains any toxic chemicals, toxic wastes or toxic products. 
(3)  No agricultural business which uses, sells, stores or maintains any toxic chemicals, toxic wastes or toxic products. 
(4)  No agricultural activity that does not strictly comply with Georgia Pesticide Act of 1976, Georgia Pesticide Use and Application Act of 1976, and Georgia O.C.G.A.2-1-4. 
(5)  No industry, business or facility which uses, makes or creates as a product or byproduct any toxic wastes, heavy materials, grease, animal fat or organic loading. 
(6)  No dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products onto the land, into the atmosphere or in a stream or body of water located in the area above described. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § VI, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-382. - Land below reservoirs, dams, etc. 
(a)  This section shall apply to land lying in the T.W.P.D. that is located below any existing water reservoir, dam or any planned water reservoir or dam. 
(b)  No buildings or accessory buildings shall be constructed any lower than the maximum flood elevation for a distance of one mile downstream from said reservoir dam. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § VII, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-383. - Restricted use of certain land. 
(a)  Any property lying adjacent or within one thousand (1,000) feet to any property owned, managed, maintained or operated by the county or the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority as an existing water reservoir within the T.W.P.D. or any property that is designated by the county or the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority as a reservoir within the T.W.P.D. shall have in addition to the restrictive uses hereinafter set out the following restrictions: 
(1)  Permitted Residential Uses: 
a.  Minimum lot size: three (3) acres. 
b.  Minimum Setback Lines for Buildings or Structures: two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
c.  Minimum Setback Lines for Nitrification Field Lines: two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
(2)  Permitted Agricultural Uses: 
a.  Minimum Setback Lines for Building or Structures: Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
b.  Minimum Setback Lines for Nitrification Field Lines: Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
c.  Minimum Setback Lines for Cultivation: Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
(3)  Commercial: No commercial structures or uses of any nature. 
(4)  Industrial: No industrial structures or uses of any nature. 
(b)  The following restrictions and limitations shall apply to all other properties that are not located in specified areas set forth in subsection above: 
(1)  Permitted Residential Use: 
a.  Single-Family Dwellings—Minimum Lot Size: One and one-quarter (1¼) acres (unless served by public sewerage). 
b.  Multi-family dwellings which are served by public sewerage. 
c.  Minimum Setback lines for Building or Structure for Single and Multi-Family Dwellings: One hundred (100) feet. 
d.  Minimum Setback lines for Nitrification Field Line for Single Family Dwelling: One hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  Permitted Agricultural Use: 
a.  Minimum Setback Lines for Building or Structure: One hundred (100) feet. 
b.  Minimum Setback Lines for Nitrification Field Line: One hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Permitted Commercial Use: 
a.  Minimum Lot Size: One and one-quarter (1¼) acres. 
b.  Minimum Setback Lines for Structure, Accessory Building or Parking Lot: Two hundred (200) feet. 
c.  Minimum Setback lines for Nitrification Field Lines: Two hundred (200) feet. 
(4)  Permitted Industrial Use: 
a.  Minimum Lot Size: Five (5) acres. 
b.  Minimum Setback Lines for Structure, Accessory Building or Parking Lot: Two hundred (200) feet. 
c.  Minimum Setback Lines for Nitrification Field Lines: Two hundred (200) feet. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § VIII, 7-5-83) 
Sec. 3-5-384. - Variances. 
Variances may be made by the board of commissioners or by any municipal governing authority located in the T.W.P.D. as to lot sizes, uses and activities, provided that sewage generated by the facility located on said property is serviced by an approved public sewage facility. However, variances cannot be made as to any residential, commercial, agricultural or industrial facilities which uses, makes or creates as a product or byproduct any toxic substance or wastes. 
(Ord. No. 83-23, § IX, 7-5-83) 
Secs. 3-5-385—3-5-450. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 4 - Utilities 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-5-451. - Relocation of utility lines, pipes, mains, etc. 
(a)  Application for permit; bond. Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the county, the utility shall make an application in writing to the licensing department of Henry County and shall specifically describe the nature, extent, and location of the portion of the utility effected and shall specifically describe the type of work to be done and shall attach to the application a detailed engineer's drawing providing specifications for work to be done. The applicant shall also furnish the projected dates for the work to be started and finished and an estimated cost of the work. The applicant shall also furnish an indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the licensing department to pay any damages to any part of the county road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for the permit application shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  Notice to remove. When the governing authority of the county shall reasonably determine that any pipe, main, conduit, cable, wire, pole, tower, or other signal and equipment, facilities, or appliances of any utility, in, on, along, over, or under the public roads of the county should be removed or relocated, because it has become an obstruction or interference with the use and operation of a county road or will become an obstruction or interference with the use and safe operation of a county road, which the governing authority has undertaken to improve or intends to improve, a written notice shall be directed to the utility company, giving at least sixty (60) days' notice in which to make such change as is necessary for the removal or relocation as may be necessary. The removal or relocation shall be at the expense of the utility company. If the utility does not thereafter begin removal within a reasonable time sufficient to allow for engineering and other procedures reasonably necessary to the removal and relocation of the utility facility, the governing authority may give the utility a final notice directing that such removal shall commence not later than ten (10) days from the receipt of such final notice. If such utility does not, within ten (10) days from receipt of such final notice, begin to remove or relocate the facility, or, having so begun removal or relocation, thereafter fails to complete the removal or relocation within a reasonable time, the governing authority may direct that its department remove or relocate the same with its own employees or by employing or contracting for the necessary engineering, labor, tools, equipment, supervision, or other necessary services or materials and whatever else is necessary to accomplish the removal or relocation; and the expenses thereof shall be charged to said utility. Such expense shall be certified to the county attorney, who shall have the authority to proceed with suit against the utility for same if payment or arrangements to make payment are not made within sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 85-20, 11-19-85) 
Cross reference— Cable television franchise, § 3-3-101 et seq.; roads and bridges, § 3-5-1 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, § 3-5-201 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-452. - Theft of utilities. 
(a)  That the following practices or acts are hereby declared to be illegal and are prohibited by the Henry County Board of Commissioners: 
(1)  The cutting, removing or in any manner making ineffective any seal, locking band, or lock on an electrical or natural gas meter. 
(2)  Restoration of service by any means after service has been terminated for nonpayment, or obtaining electricity or natural gas, without making the proper deposit with a utility company or receiving proper authorization from the respective utility company. 
(3)  Obtaining electricity or natural gas by use of jumper wires, or by any other means which bypass a metering device either partially or completely. 
(4)  Damaging or tampering in any manner with any part of a metering device belonging to a utility company. 
(5)  Changing or altering the normal installed position of a metering device in any fashion which causes the normal accurate recording of utility service received to be altered and inaccurate. 
(6)  Obtaining electricity or natural gas by use of a metering device which is not authorized by a utility company. 
(7)  Interfering with the automatic registration, recording and transmission of electricity or natural gas consumption when readings are recorded and/or transmitted electronically. 
(8)  Fraudulently obtaining, or attempting to obtain service from a utility company by using a false name or identification. 
(9)  Fraudulently obtaining, or attempting to obtain service from a utility company by placing the account in the name of someone else after the service has been disconnected for nonpayment or theft of service while the person in whose name the service was in when disconnected is still living at the location of the service; the utility company may refuse or discontinue service to an applicant in this case. 
(10)  Any other reception of electrical power or natural gas service without proper authorization from the respective utility company. 
(b)  Alleged violations of this section shall be tried in the magistrate court of Henry County. Any person found guilty of violating any section or part of this section shall be fined a sum not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on each count. Each day that the violation continues is a separate count. 
(c)  Any person found violating any section or part of this section will be required to make full restitution to the utility company for the cost of the services obtained in violation of this section, for damage to equipment of a utility company and for all associated costs of the investigation. In calculating the amount of restitution to be paid, the court is authorized to consider the following evidence: 
(1)  The cost of the service rendered as a result of violating this section shall be computed by the utility company. 
(2)  The cost of any damage to utility equipment shall be based on the actual costs. Costs may be computed and updated annually. 
(3)  Investigative and any associated costs will be computed and updated annually by the utility company. 
(d)  Any person in possession of any premises as owner, occupant, or tenant who is found to have an electric or natural gas meter which has been tampered with or altered in violation of this section or found to be receiving electricity or natural gas as a result of any of the methods described above shall be presumed to have knowingly violated the terms of this section. Such receipt of electricity or natural gas shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to defraud or deprive the utility company of recovering proper charges for payment for such service. 
(e)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of said conflict. 
(f)  That the provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, phrase or provision shall be declared or held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder of the sections, phrases or provisions. 
(g)  The Henry County Board of Commissioners finds that there is a continuing problem by individuals illegally obtaining electricity and natural gas service by various means and that this results in a loss of revenue to utility companies and creates a dangerous situation that can result in the loss of life or property. 
(h)  This section shall be cumulative to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25, and is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25(c) which states: 
" O.C.G.A. 16-7-25 Damaging, injuring, or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities, or political subdivisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, or other public services; intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; intentionally to divert any services of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company, municipality, or political subdivision, any service manufactured, sold, or distributed by the company, municipality, or political subdivision. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (a) of this Code section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charges as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(c)  This Code section shall be cumulative to and shall not prohibit the enactment of any other general and local laws, rules, and regulations of state or local authorities or agencies and local ordinances prohibiting such activities which are more restrictive than this Code section. 
(d)  Any person who violates this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ga. L. 1897, p. 69; Penal Code 1910, 783; Ga. L. 1916, p. 153, 1; Code 1933, 26-3801, 26-3802; Ga. L. 1957, p. 490, 1—5; Code 1933, 26-1507, enacted by Ga. L. 1976, p. 773, 1; Ga. L. 1978, p. 1658, 1.) " 
(i)  For purposes of this section solely, the term "utility company" shall be defined as: Any company, electrical membership corporation, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity or provision of natural gas service. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, 2-2-10) 
Secs. 3-5-453—3-5-489. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-10, adopted Oct. 5, 2010, deleted art. II, which consisted of §§ 3-5-490—3-5-498, pertained to street light districts and derived from Ord. No. 94-01, adopted Jan. 14, 1994. 

Secs. 3-5-490—3-5-498. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-19, adopted November 20, 2012, amended §§ 3-5-499—3-5-511 in their entirety to read as herein set out. Former §§ 3-5-499—3-5-511 pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 09-06, adopted December 9, 2009. 

Sec. 3-5-499. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia finds as follows: 
(a)  Henry County is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and III thereof and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the stormwater management utility service area as defined in this article. 
(b)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this article, Henry County is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia to provide for stormwater management services. A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater which provides services to all properties within the stormwater service area. 
(c)  Henry County presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities that have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater management systems owned and operated by the county, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the county to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, maintain, and construct stormwater management systems and facilities in concert with the management of other water resources in the county. The county must have adequate, stable, and dedicated funding for its stormwater management program operating, planning, maintenance, infrastructure development, and capital investment needs. 
(d)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff from these systems and facilities may: 
1.  Cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within, and downstream of, the county. 
2.  Adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by Henry County thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. 
3.  Contribute to the potential degradation of the quality of both surface water and groundwater resources. 
(e)  Henry County is required under federal and state regulations (i.e., the Federal Clean Water Act, the county's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter "NPDES") Phase II Stormwater Permit) to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and stormwater conveyance system into State of Georgia or United States' waters. Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the county's NPDES Phase II Stormwater Permit, the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD), the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and the other applicable regulatory programs will affect the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities above what is currently being spent for stormwater management program implementation, water quality management, drainage system maintenance, floodplain management, capital construction and other program activities. 
(f)  The professional engineering and financial analysis submitted to the county by ARCADIS properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities of the county. 
(g)  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems in Henry County, Georgia, in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(h)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout unincorporated Henry County. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within unincorporated Henry County is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(i)  The stormwater needs in Henry County include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. The provision of stormwater management programs and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of Henry County in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analysis. The service and benefit rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management systems and facilities may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands, and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, as well as risk exposure. 
(j)  The Henry County Board of Commissioners finds, concludes, and determines that a stormwater management utility provides the most effective and appropriate means of properly delivering and funding stormwater management services in Henry County in a fair and equitable manner. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-500. - Establishment of a utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater management utility under the operational control of the Henry County Board of Commissioners, which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the county's service area, which shall comprise the unincorporated area of the county. The Henry County Stormwater Management Utility shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems and facilities in the service area. 
(b)  The county manager shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the county budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the board of commissioners. Any revenues and receipts of the stormwater management utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund in trust and be expended solely for stormwater management related purposes and services. Stormwater management utility revenue shall only be used for operating expenses and/or capital investments of the stormwater management program. Other forms of revenue and/or financial resources, not accounted for in the stormwater management utility revenue, may be allocated as deemed appropriate by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, upon recommendation of the county manager, to provide supplemental funding to the county stormwater management program and for the provision of stormwater management services. 
(c)  The Henry County Board of Commissioners shall place responsibility with the county manager (or his/her designee) for the delivery of stormwater management program services as well as for the operation, maintenance and regulation of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the county and other related assets, including, but not limited to, county-owned properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-501. - Service recipients/beneficiaries. 
The service recipients and beneficiaries of the stormwater management utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities served by or creating a demand and an associated cost for stormwater management services and/or benefiting directly or indirectly from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, or improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities, and the regulation of public and private stormwater management systems and facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities that will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-502. - Definitions of special terms. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Credit: Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater management utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater management systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the stormwater runoff from the site. 
Customers: Customers of the stormwater management utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater management systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Developed land: Developed land shall be all real property altered from a natural state by grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures, impervious surfaces, or drainage works so that the hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped condition. 
Hydrologic response: The hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious: Impervious means not allowing the passage of water through the surface of the ground or ground covering or a substantial reduction in the capacity for water to pass through the surface of the ground or ground covering as it would under natural conditions. The following types of surfaces will be considered "impervious" for purposes of this chapter: the vertical projected area of buildings; asphalt, concrete, brick or stone paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; compacted gravel surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
Impervious unit (IU): Given the direct and primary relationship between stormwater runoff and imperviousness, an impervious unit is defined to serve as a common reference point for comparing various properties and attaining an equitable distribution of the cost of services and facilities through a stormwater management service charge. The impervious unit in Henry County has been determined through engineering analyses to be represented by the average area of imperviousness of the developed single-family residential parcels of record in 2005 in Henry County. The unit has been determined to be four thousand seven hundred eighty (4,780) square feet of impervious area. The unit of four thousand seven hundred eighty (4,780) square feet of impervious area is hereinafter referred to as the impervious unit (IU) and is the metric that shall be used to determine and compute the service charge for all properties within Henry County. 
Service charges: Service charges shall mean the periodic rate, fee, or charge applicable to a parcel of land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the Henry County Stormwater Management Utility. Service charges are based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater management utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one (1) or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater management utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by the county. 
Stormwater management systems: Stormwater management systems shall include facilities, operations, and programs that address the issues of drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion, and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs through improvements, maintenance, regulation, and funding of plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties used or useful in the collection, retention, detention, and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage. 
Undeveloped land: Land in an unaltered natural state or land that has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures that create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-503. - Defining the service area, purposes, and powers of the utility. 
The stormwater management utility shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the unincorporated areas of Henry County. The stormwater management utility shall provide for the conservation, management, protection, control, use, and enhancement of stormwater through planning, acquisition, construction, installation, management, operation, maintenance, regulation, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater systems to collect, control, convey, store, detain, retain, recharge, and treat stormwater and through regulation of stormwater management systems on private property. It shall be the primary objective of the county to provide a level of service that is comparable and consistent to similarly situated properties throughout the service area and the cost to provide those services shall be allocated proportionate to the services received and demands imposed by a parcel on the county stormwater management program. 
(a)  The county stormwater system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the county that control and/or convey stormwater through which the county directs, regulates or otherwise controls surface waters from its public streets and properties. The county owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance, and improvements to those segments of this system that: 
(b)  (1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way, and easements; 
(2)  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(3)  Are located on public lands to which the county has adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities. 
(c)  Operation and maintenance of stormwater management systems and facilities that are located on private property or public property not owned by the county and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and shall remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as that responsibility may be assumed by the stormwater management utility through written agreement or otherwise affected by the laws of the State of Georgia and/or the United States. 
(d)  It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or outside the boundaries of Henry County. The county expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the county, its officers, employees, and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the county as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the county, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the county or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the county, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-504. - Requirements for privately owned stormwater management systems. 
(a)  The appropriate and efficacious management of the stormwater management system by the county on behalf of its citizens and in compliance with applicable state and federal law places necessary and appropriate obligations on private property owners as well. All property owners and developers of developed real property within Henry County shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all county development regulations and state and federal law. Failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the county in a court of proper jurisdiction. 
(b)  In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the county may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From the date of the filing of such action, the county shall have lien rights that may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of Henry County. The county shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the county, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-505. - General funding policy. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the county that funding for the stormwater management utility is fairly and equitably derived through methods that have demonstrable relationships to the varied demands and costs imposed by developed parcels of land on the stormwater management systems and programs and/or the level of service provided as a result of the provision of stormwater services and facilities. 
(b)  Service charges for stormwater management shall be fair, equitable and reasonable and the service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. The cost of stormwater services and facilities may include administrative, operating, capital investment, debt service, engineering and planning, and reserve expenses, and may also include related regulatory expenses associated with watershed management requirements. Properties shall be charged rentals, rates, charges, fees, or licenses in general proportion to their related cost of service impact. 
(c)  Service charge rates shall be designed to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management by the county, whether within or outside the stormwater management utility, including, but not limited to, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges, and special assessments, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-506. - Stormwater management utility service charges. 
(a)  There are hereby established stormwater management utility service charges, which shall be billed to all developed properties in the service area, except as specifically exempted by this article or as shall be allowed in future ordinances or amendments to this article. The stormwater management utility user fee charges shall be based primarily on the amount of impervious surface located on each developed property since impervious surface is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the county. Stormwater management utility user fee charges may be designed with specific modifiers to further enhance customer equity, as well as customer understanding of the user fee charge rate structure, while at the same time minimizing the county's customer account management and maintenance efforts. 
(b)  All developed properties within the service area shall receive a stormwater user fee charge bill because each parcel receives stormwater management services from the county at varying service levels from which they derive some degree of benefit even through the benefit may be indirect and immeasurable. The stormwater management utility service charges may, but are not required to, include a "service rate charge" applied to each property. The service rate charge, if applied, shall be related generally to the amount and quality of runoff discharged from the developed parcel to the downstream drainage conveyance systems and/or receiving waters as well as to the cost of providing stormwater management services to that parcel. The service charge may also include a "base rate charge" for certain costs of service common to all stormwater management accounts, and/or "special service charges" to persons, entities, or properties that require services and/or facilities unique for that parcel of land and are not commonly needed by all persons, entities, or properties. 
(c)  The "service rate charge," if applied, shall be reflective of the cost of providing services and facilities to manage and control stormwater runoff quantity and quality from developed parcels. The three (3) most important factors in the county's present cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities to individual properties are: 
(1)  The size of each property; 
(2)  The amount of impervious area on each property because the amount of impervious surface on each improved property is the most important factor influencing stormwater runoff characteristics; and 
(3)  The number of parcels in the service area. 
(d)  A "base rate charge," if applied, shall be structured to recover stormwater management costs of service that are not related to the size of individual properties or the amount of impervious area on individual properties, and may include, but are not limited to, the cost of billing and accounting for service charges to each account and other administrative and overhead expenses. 
(e)  "Special service charges," if applied, shall be structured to recover the cost of providing to certain persons, entities, and properties types or levels of stormwater management services that are not commonly required by all stormwater service charge ratepayers. Such services may include, but are not limited to, private development plan review and inspection, site inspections to verify the operational condition of on-site stormwater management systems such as private detention/retention and conveyance facilities, monitoring and mitigative activities related to conditions on individual properties that impact water quality, and actions to abate conditions on private properties that do not comply with adopted county standards and/or that interfere with proper stormwater management and have been determined to constitute a public nuisance. 
(f)  The professional engineering and management analysis conducted for the county determined that properties within the service area that are classified as single-family residential property can be equitably and fairly charged based on the average amount of impervious area for all properties within this class. One (1.0) impervious unit (IU) has been established as four thousand seven hundred eighty (4,780) square feet of impervious area. This method greatly simplifies the computation of charges and eliminates the significant costs associated with individual parcel measurements while at the same maintaining equity. The Henry County Board of Commissioners hereby adopts one (1.0) IU as representative of the conditions of a typical single-family residential property in the Henry County service area. 
(g)  Properties classified as non-single-family residential shall be billed on the basis of the number of IUs and acres calculated or measured to exist. Each acre or fraction thereof and IU or fraction thereof shall be charged a service rate charge at the rate per IU of impervious area and each acre unit as defined below. 
(h)  The method of calculating the service rate charge for all properties shall be as follows: 
Fee = (IR) x (IUs) + (AR) x (AU) + (AF) 
IR is the impervious unit rate as established by this article or by amendment to this article. It is applied to the number of IUs rounded to the next whole number. One (1.0) IU is defined as four thousand seven hundred eighty (4,780) square feet of impervious area. 
AR is the gross area rate as established by this article or by amendment to this article. It is applied to the number of acre units (AUs) in the parcel rounded to the next whole acre. 
AF is the administrative cost factor established by this article or by amendment to this article. The AF is applied as a fixed uniform flat charge to each parcel. 
(i)  The annual IR per IU for the service rate charge applicable to each property shall be thirty-nine dollars eighty-three cents ($39.83) unless modified to equitably account for special conditions on an individual property, adjusted for a particular property through the appeal process specified in this article, or changed hereafter by ordinance. 
(j)  The annual AR per AU for the service rate charge applicable to each property shall be zero dollars ($0.00) unless modified to equitably account for special conditions on an individual property, adjusted for a particular property through the appeal process specified in this article, or changed hereafter by ordinance. 
(k)  The annual base rate charge AF per each account shall be zero dollars ($0.00) unless changed hereafter by ordinance. 
(l)  All developed parcels meet the threshold criteria for billing. The minimum annual charge for any developed parcel shall be at least equivalent to the charges for a single-family residential parcel. 
(m)  Undeveloped parcels shall be considered to not have any impervious area. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-507. - Billing and collection of services charges. 
(a)  Stormwater management utility service charges shall be billed and collected in the manner and at the interval deemed most efficient by the county, and shall be payable in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State of Georgia and the Henry County Finance Department as applied generally to all bills. A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through U.S. mail or by an alternate means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall ultimately be obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent, the county may back bill for a period of up to one (1) year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A one and one-half (1.5) percent per month late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater management utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(b)  Any stormwater management utility service charge or portion of a service charge not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the county. Unpaid stormwater management utility service charges shall be collected in any manner permissible by Georgia law, including, but not limited to: utilizing the services of a collection agency; by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account; or by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. The county shall assess all costs of collection, including attorneys' fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this or any other ordinance of Henry County, failure to pay any utility service charge when billed in conjunction with another utility bill may result in a discontinuance of any or all other utility services provided by the county or by others with which contractual agreements provide for discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-508. - Exemptions or credits applicable to service charges. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section or by amendment to this article, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater management utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exemption or reduction in the stormwater management utility service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax or economic status, race, or religion of the property owner, or other condition unrelated to the cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. The following exemptions shall be allowed: 
(1)  Lands lying within the cities of Stockbridge, McDonough, Hampton, and Locust Grove shall be exempt from service charges unless the cities adopt an interlocal agreement for stormwater management services with Henry County. 
(2)  Parcels which meet the definition of undeveloped property shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(3)  Linear railroad rights-of-way (i.e. tracks, rails, roadbed) outside of the defined yard limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by the railroad company associated with rights-of-way and drainage conveyance systems. However, railroad stations, rail yards, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad operations shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(4)  Henry County roads and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges and the stormwater management utility shall not charge the county a user fee charge for the county's impervious surface area resulting from the county's impervious surfaces which are owned and/or maintained by the county within the public rights-of-way. This exemption is in consideration of the county allowing the stormwater management utility to utilize assets of the county general fund including existing roads, curbs, gutters, drainageways and ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural and man-made within and owned by the county which controls and diverts surface water for the purposes of collecting, diverting, transporting and controlling surface and storm waters. All other developed property owned by the county shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(5)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) roads and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way road and drainage conveyance systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other developed property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(b)  The stormwater management utility shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the Henry County Stormwater Utility Fee Credit Manual (Credit Manual), which is incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. 
(1)  Customers may apply for credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(2)  A stormwater management utility service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater management utility service charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. 
(3)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater management utility service charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the county's design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the customer. The stormwater management utility may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual or this article. 
(4)  In order to obtain a credit, the customer must make application to the county on forms provided by the stormwater management utility for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format described in the credit manual. The customer's stormwater management utility account must be paid and current prior to review and approval of a stormwater management utility credit application by the county. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(c)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater management utility, the county shall have thirty (30) days from the date the complete application is received to approve the credit in whole, approve the credit in part, or deny the credit. The stormwater management utility's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. Credits applied for by the customer and approved in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-509. - Appeal of stormwater management utility service charges. 
(a)  Any person or entity seeking adjustment of relief from stormwater management utility service charges may appeal in the following manner: An appeal must be filed in writing with the stormwater management utility and the customer's stormwater management utility service charge account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an appeal. It shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer showing the total property area of the parcel and the impervious surface area of the property and other features or conditions that influence the hydrologic response of the property. 
(b)  Based on the information provided, a technical review shall be conducted by the director of the stormwater management utility and a written determination will be issued within thirty (30) days stating whether an adjustment to the service charge is appropriate and if so the amount of such adjustment. This determination may be appealed in writing to the county manager or designee stating and setting forth the basis of the appeal. The county manager or designee shall issue a written decision of the appeal within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  If the person or entity seeking adjustment or relief from the service charge desires, the decision of the county manager may be appealed in writing to the board of commissioners. Such appeals must be made within thirty (30) days of the decision of the county manager and include a written basis for the appeal. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(d)  This appeal process shall not interfere with the rights of the person or entity to seek judicial relief in a court of competent jurisdiction, but shall be exhausted before judicial relief is pursued. Any appeal to the court must be filed within thirty (30) days of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Notices of the appeal and decisions shall be delivered personally or by registered or certified mail to the address of record. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-510. - Severability. 
Should any part of this article be declared invalid by a court of a competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions hereof shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 3-5-511. - Conflicts. 
To the extent that any other ordinance of Henry County shall be in conflict with this article, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, 11-20-12) 
Secs. 3-5-512—3-5-550. - Reserved. 
Subchapter 5 - Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-16 , adopted Dec. 5, 2017, deleted and replaced subchapter 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former subchapter 5 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 3-5-551—3-5-559, and derived from Ord. No. 10-06, adopted June 1, 2010. 

Sec. 3-5-551. - Title. 
This ordinance will be known as "Henry County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § I, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-552. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Henry County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 3-5-554.C. of this ordinance. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 3-5-553(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § II, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-553. - Exemptions. 
This ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 3-5-554(c)(15) and (16) of this ordinance [subchapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § III, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-554. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream, that under normal circumstances, has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a twenty-five-foot buffer would consume at least eighteen (18) percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than five hundred (500) square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in [EPD Rule] 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § IV, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-555. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Henry County without first obtaining a permit from the local issuing authority to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to Henry County and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 3-5-554(b) and (c) of this ordinance will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by eight (8) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 3-5-554(c)(15), (16), and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 3-5-554(b) and (c) of this ordinance, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance, any variances required by subsections 3-5-554(c)(15), (16), and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § V, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-556. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The LIA will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The LIA shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § VI, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-557. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 3-5-555(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § VII, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-558. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § VIII, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-559. - Administrative appeal/judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Superior Court of Henry County within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Henry County. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § IX, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3-5-560. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This ordinance shall become effective on the 5th day of December, 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, Exh. A, § X, 12-5-17 ) 
Chapter 3-12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Mass gatherings, § 3-15-1; animals, § 3-4-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-12-1. - Health care advisory officer. 
The legislature of the State of Georgia has enacted, and the governor of the State of Georgia has signed, House Bill 1296 regarding health care for indigents; and House Bill 1296 and Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 31-8-43 requires the governing authority of the county to appoint, by resolution, a health care advisory officer, to make determinations of indigency for the residents of the county in accordance with standards promulgated by law; and Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 31-8-43 also sets forth that additional duties as assigned by the governing authority shall be carried out by the health care advisory officer; and the appointing resolution must be mailed to the chief administrative officer of the hospital. Therefore, there is hereby appointed a health care advisory officer for Henry County, Georgia, to carry out those duties as prescribed by Georgia law. 
(Res. No. 84-28, 9-4-84) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 84-28, enacted Sept. 4, 1984, did not specifically amend this Code. At the request of the county, the resolution is included in Ch. 3-12; designation of the substantive provisions thereof as § 3-12-1 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Local laws pertaining to administration, Ch. 2-2; ordinances relative to administration, Ch. 3-2. 
State Law reference— Hospital care for the indigent, generally, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-8-2; hospital care for pregnant women, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-8-40 et seq. 
Secs. 3-12-2—3-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 3-12-16. - Board of health. 
The board of health is established as required by statute. Such board shall have the functions provided by statute. 
State Law reference— Board of health established, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-3-1; functions of board, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-3-3 et seq. 
Sec. 3-12-17. - Fees, generally. 
Fees are hereby established in the amounts stated in this article to cover the costs of administration expenses. All fees required by this section shall be in addition to any other fees and charges required under other ordinances or resolutions of the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Henry County Building Department and may be altered or amended only by the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. The fees shall be paid directly to the Henry County Health Department prior to inspections or the issuance of permits. 
(Ord. No. 86-18, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 87-01, 2-17-87) 
Sec. 3-12-18. - Schedule of fees. 
The board of commissioners shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for the Henry County Health Department. The adopted schedule of fees shall be subject to amendment, as may be needed, by resolution of the board of commissioners. 

 
(Ord. No. 86-18, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 87-01, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 07-04, §§ 1, 2, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 3-12-19. - Public health. 
(a)  This section shall be known and referred to as "The Henry County Georgia Board of Health Regulations." 
(b)  The following rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Health are hereby adopted, in their entirety, as if fully set forth herein: 
(1)  Chapter 511-3-1, On-site sewer management systems. 
(2)  Chapter 511-6-1, Food service. 
(3)  Chapter 511-6-2, Tourist accommodations. 
(4)  Chapter 511-3-5, Public swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, 3-16-93; Ord. No. 17-08 , § 1, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-20-18 ) 
Sec. 3-12-20. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof or upon entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term of not more than sixty (60) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a new and separate offense for which the person may be punished as provided above. 
(c)  Any violation of this Code section shall also be considered a public nuisance and the person in violation may be prosecuted therefore under any section of this Code or other law of the state. It is the intent that such remedy be cumulative in nature. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, 3-16-93) 
Secs. 3-12-21—3-12-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Hospital Authorities Law, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-12-66. - Need declared. 
There is a need for a hospital authority to function in this county. 
(Res. of 12-4-73) 
State Law reference— Hospital authority created, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-13-3. 
Sec. 3-12-67. - Size of board of trustees. 
The Board of Trustees of Henry County Hospital Authority shall consist of seven (7) members. 
(Res. of 2-3-81; Res. No. 86-02, 2-4-86) 
State Law reference— Board of trustees, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 31-13-3. 
Secs. 3-12-68—3-12-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BODY ART STUDIOS AND BODY ARTISTS 

Sec. 3-12-91. - Authority. 
The legal authority for these rules is O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, 31-3-4, and O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-5, 31-40. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-92. - Purpose. 
The body art studios and body artist rules are adopted for the purpose of establishing reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards are designed to promote the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving body art services. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-93. - Exemptions. 
These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34, or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 3, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-94. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to these rules. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in these rules shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless, the context clearly requires otherwise. 
(a)  Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria which is approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by FDA. 
(b)  Biohazard means any infectious agent(s) or parts thereof presenting a real or potential risk to the wellbeing of humans or other species, directly through infection or indirectly through disruption of the environment. 
(c)  Body art means the practice of physical body alteration by permitted establishments and by licensed operators using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. Body art does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Georgia State Medical Board, which shall not be performed in a body art studio. Body art does not include the painting of the skin with tempera or temporary, nonindelible inks, paints, or dyes. Body art does not include piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems. 
(d)  Body art studio means any permanent building or structure in a planned commercial center on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business permit or license, wherein a body artist performs body art. 
(e)  Body art studio permit means the authorization granted by the board of health to the owner to operate a body art studio. Such permit is the property of the Henry County Board of Health. 
(f)  Body artist means any person who performs body art. 
(g)  Body piercing means puncturing or penetration of the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion of jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. 
(h)  Cosmetic tattooing means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic tattooing shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
(i)  Board of health means the Henry County Board of Health or its duly authorized representatives. 
(j)  Currently licensed health care professional means those professionals licensed by the State of Georgia to perform health care services and includes, but is not limited to, licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
(k)  Department means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. 
(l)  Disinfection means a process that eliminates many or all pathogenic microorganisms, with the exception of bacterial spores from inanimate objects. High level disinfection can be expected to destroy all microorganisms, with the exception of high numbers of bacterial spores. Intermediate level disinfection inactivates Mycobacterium tuberculosis, vegetative bacteria, most viruses, and most fungi. Low level disinfection can kill most bacteria, some viruses, and some fungi. Guideline for Environmental Infection Control in Healthcare Facilities: Recommendation of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2003). 
(m)  Easily cleanable means composed of readily accessible, nonabsorbent material, and of such constitution, finish, and fabrication that residue may be completely removed by nonmechanical low friction methods. 
(n)  EPA means the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(o)  Instrument means any hand piece, needle, needle bar, sharp, device, or other object that is used or may come into contact with a client or may be exposed to bodily fluids during a body art procedure. 
(p)  Owner means the person, partnership, corporation, association, or any other form of business organization that owns, maintains, or controls a body art studio and who is responsible for the operation of the studio. 
(q)  Parlor means the actual room of the body art studio where the body artist performs procedures. 
(r)  Sanitary means free of visible debris, residue, or contamination, and with reduced microbial contaminants. 
(s)  Sanitized means an effective antimicrobial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals or other suitable method on surfaces for enough time to reduce the microbial count to a sanitary level. 
(t)  Scarification means the act of creating designs out of scar tissue by cutting the skin or branding it with heated metal. 
(u)  Sharps means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin or tissue. 
(v)  Single use means an instrument or article which is reasonably anticipated to come into direct contact with blood and compromised tissue surfaces during its intended use. Such articles are not to be used on more than one customer or client for any reason and must be disposed of after use as soon as possible, without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body artist, the client, or the surrounding environment. 
(w)  Standard precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health Care and Public Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, Bi.S-6; "Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8; and "Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease" in MMWR, October 16, 1998, Vol. 47, No. RR-19. These methods of infection control require the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and other blood-borne pathogens. Precautions include, but are not limited to, hand washing, gloving, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles and other sharp instruments when contact with blood or bodily fluids containing blood is anticipated. Standard precautions apply to blood, all body fluids, secretions, and excretions, excluding sweat, regardless of whether or not they contain visible blood, non-intact skin, and mucous membranes. Standard precautions include universal precautions. In the event that the CDC or other primary reference or regulatory authority publishes materials or amends regulations applicable to this definition, this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations, and recommendations. 
(x)  Sterilization means the reduction of microbial life at an order of 10 log 6 using equipment capable of delivering full efficacy to all surfaces within the unit chamber, including tubes, lumens, cracks, or other obscured surfaces, including those inside packaging. 
(y)  Sterilizer means an autoclave certified to meet medical standards and performs the act of sterilization as defined herein. 
(z)  Sterilizer indicator means a device designed to give visual verification that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization process. 
(aa)  Suspension the act of, means the piercing of human tissue or skin with hooks or other piercing apparatuses for supporting or bearing weight, either human or object. 
(bb)  Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as may hereafter be amended. The term "tattoo" also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
(cc)  Wash means cleansing the skin with warm water and antibacterial soap and drying with single-use towels. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 4, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-95. - Scope of rules. 
(a)  All permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the board of health, the department, and state law. 
(b)  The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 5, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-96. - Body art studio owner. 
(a)  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with the applicable rules of the Henry County Board of Health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes and rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a body art studio permit, the body art studio owner shall adopt and submit to the local health authority a written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio showing compliance with the following: 
(1)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall perform body art procedures on individuals unless under the direct on-site supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34. 
(2)  Body artist shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(3)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
(4)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art studio. 
(5)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of eighteen (18) except by a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such physician or osteopath with the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
(6)  No body-piercing procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of eighteen (18) without written consent and proof of valid state-issued identification of a parent or guardian. A copy of the consent form and proof of identification shall be maintained in the client's record. The parent or guardian must be present when the piercing procedure is performed. 
(7)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on any person within one (1) inch of any part of the eye socket of such person. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 6, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-97. - Body art studio permit. 
(a)  The owner of each body art studio shall obtain a valid body art studio permit from the Henry County Board of Health, prior to beginning operation. Body art studios shall renew their permit annually in accordance with section 3-12-98 and section 3-12-99 herein. 
(b)  The permit is the property of the Henry County Board of Health. 
(c)  To be eligible for a new body art studio permit or a renewal permit, a body art studio must be in compliance with all of the requirements of these rules. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art studio operating under a valid body art studio permit issued by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(e)  The holder of a body art studio permit shall only hire, employ, or use individuals to perform body art who have complied with the applicable requirements of this article. 
(f)  The body art studio permit shall be displayed on the premises and conspicuously displayed in public view. Permits shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. A body art studio shall not post a reproduction of a permit unless the board of health has marked it "Duplicate." 
(g)  All body art studio permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(h)  The body art studio permit shall be returned to the Henry County Board of Health Environmental Health Section if it is suspended or revoked within seven (7) days. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 7, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-98. - Application for body art studio permit. 
(a)  The application for a body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be made on forms provided by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(b)  Any application for a new body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be sworn to by the applicant as true and correct. 
(c)  At least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated date of opening, the owner of a new body art studio shall submit an application to the Henry County Board of Health for a body art studio permit to operate under these rules. 
(d)  The application for a body art studio shall include: 
(1)  All existing body art studios shall provide a drawing of the studio, including the location of all furnishings and equipment; 
(2)  All new body art studios shall provide a scaled drawing of the studio, including the location of all furnishings and equipment; 
(3)  A zoning certification obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction. The applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements; 
(4)  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the studio; 
(5)  A complete description of all body art services which will be provided in the body art studio; 
(6)  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is conducted; 
(7)  The address of the body art studio; 
(8)  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
(9)  The name and home address of the owner; if the owner of the body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the owner is any other type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
(10)  A list containing the full names and home addresses of all employees and staff who will be working in the body art studio; 
(11)  A copy of the written statement and policies and procedures of the body art studio in accordance with section 3-12-96 of these rules; 
(12)  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
(13)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit a nonrefundable plan review fee as set by the Henry County Board of Health and approved by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. The plan review fee shall be waived for any body art studio that is open for operation prior to the adoption of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 8, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-99. - Application for renewal. 
(a)  At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a body art studio permit, the owner shall submit an application to the Henry County Board of Health Environmental Health Section for a renewal of the body art studio permit. 
(b)  The application shall include an updated drawing of the body art studio according to subsection 3-12-98(d)(1). 
(c)  The application shall also include all information as described in subsection 3-12-98(d)(5)—(13). 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 9, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-100. - Issuance of body art studio permits and fees. 
(a)  The Henry County Board of Health may issue a body art studio permit to an owner after determining that the studio is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  A body art studio shall submit an application for a new body art studio permit when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The studio is remodeled, renovated, or expanded; 
(2)  There is a change in the legal ownership of the body art studio; or 
(3)  An existing facility is moved or relocated. 
(c)  Body art studio permits shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a body art studio permit, the owner must pay the applicable permit fee. Body art studio permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any owner to perform body art procedures in any area of Henry County that is zoned for any type of residential use by Henry County's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 10, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-101. - Denial, suspension, or revocation of the body art studio permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation or official action of the board of health, a body art studio permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body art studio permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The premises covered by the permit are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, or other state or federal law; 
(3)  The studio is determined to be a threat or nuisance to public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The owner or body artist violated the provision of this Code; or 
(5)  Violations of the conditions of the permit are committed. 
(b)  After a body art studio permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and all changes, alteration, additions, or improvements comply with all requirements of this Code as determined by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(c)  No body art studio permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking, or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this Code may secure review by appeal to the Henry County Board of Health in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1, and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 11, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-102. - Application to existing businesses. 
(a)  The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body art studios whether the studios were established before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body art studio in business on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six (6) months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 12, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-103. - Body art not allowed in mobile, transitory facilities. 
(a)  Body art shall not be allowed to occur in automobiles, mobile, transitory, or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include mobile homes, tents, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 13, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-104. - Body art studio minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
(b)  The body art studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observers. The parlor shall be separate from the waiting room. 
(c)  Insects, vermin, and/or rodents shall not be present in any part of the body art studio. Effective measures shall be taken by the body art studio owner to prevent the breeding or presence of insects, vermin, and/or rodents on the premises. 
(d)  The body art studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation in compliance with current state and local building codes. 
(e)  Walls and ceilings of parlors and equipment storage rooms shall be painted or covered in a manner to ensure that the surface is easily cleanable. All paint and coverings shall be light in color. 
(f)  Parlor floors and equipment storage room floors shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material to ensure that the surface is easily cleanable. Floors in the parlor and equipment storage room shall not be covered by carpet or wood. 
(g)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility with a self-closing door and exhaust fan shall be made accessible to customers. Such facilities shall be separate from the parlor. 
(h)  The body art studio shall be equipped with facilities to enable effective hand hygiene. This sink or sinks must be easily accessible, at the discretion of the board of health, to all body artists and shall be separate from the restroom. It shall also provide hot and cold water under pressure through a mixing valve with no aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls. These facilities shall be for the use of the body artist for sanitizing his or her hands and preparing the customers for body art procedures. This area shall be supplied with dispensed soap, an antibacterial solution, single-use towels, and a clean and maintained fingernail brush. 
(i)  An equipment washing sink shall be provided in the studio, distinct from the hand sinks and shall be located in the equipment handling and assembly area. This sink shall meet National Safety Foundation (NSF) standards. 
(j)  Parlors, equipment storage areas, and equipment handling and assembly areas shall have sufficient light to enable the body artist to properly do work and see all contamination. This shall be approved by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(k)  Parlors shall not be used as corridors for access to other rooms. 
(l)  A water heater capable of heating water to one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100;deg;F) shall be provided. The size and capacity of such water heater shall be approved by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 14, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-105. - Body art studio furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishing of the body art studio shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be intact and functional. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, stencils, jewelry, studs, and other supplies shall be provided for each body artist and shall be designed, manufactured, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as to protect contents from contamination, such as blood and bodily fluids. 
(c)  Appropriate furnishings shall be provided for each parlor. 
(d)  Surfaces of all worktables, chairs, and furnishings shall be constructed of material that is smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable, and corrosion resistant. 
(e)  Furnishing shall be sanitized with an antibacterial solution after each procedure. 
(f)  Eating or drinking by anyone is prohibited in the parlor where a body art procedure is performed, except as required to ensure the health and safety of the body artist and/or client. 
(g)  Smoking is prohibited in the body art studio. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 15, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-106. - Body art studio supplies. 
(a)  Single-use sterile supplies shall be in an uncompromised, sterilized condition at the time of their use, either by processing in a unit that meets the requirements for a sterilizer as defined herein, or be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These supplies shall be stored in an area separate from chemical supplies and toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to human skin including, but not limited to, ink, stencils, and single-use piercing needles shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use, except those instruments approved for sterilization by the board of health. 
(c)  Jewelry supplies used in a body art studio shall consist of a material rated by the American Society for Testing Materials or the International Standards Organization as being suitable for permanent surgical implant, such as stainless steel, gold, platinum, titanium, niobium, or dense, low porosity plastic such as Tygon or PTFE. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards must be available for inspection on request of the board of health. The jewelry shall also be smooth surfaced and scratch free. 
(d)  Only single-use sterile gauze shall be used. 
(e)  Antibacterial ointment shall be dispensed in a manner that prevents contamination of the antibacterial ointment container. For example, a single-use tongue depressor may be used to dispense the ointment and then discarded. 
(f)  Single-use articles shall not be used on more than one (1) client or customer for any reason. These articles must be disposed of after use, or as soon as possible, without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body artist, the client, or the surrounding environment. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 16, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-107. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  Dyes and pigments shall be dispensed into single-use containers. 
(b)  All dyes and pigments shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(c)  After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded, along with the container, into a covered trash receptacle that can be operated without the use hands. This container shall be lined with a bag that is leak resistant. 
(d)  In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by a body artist, only non-toxic sterile single-use materials shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-108. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Instrument cleaning. 
(1)  All nondisposable instruments shall be sterilized after each use according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(2)  Employees shall wear heavy duty, multiuse, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments. 
(3)  Used instruments shall be soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaning can be performed. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer. 
(4)  Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning. 
(5)  All instrument components shall be cleaned, either manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specific to the type of cleaning performed. 
(b)  Instrument packaging. 
(1)  Employees shall properly wash hands and don clean gloves before packaging or wrapping instruments. 
(2)  Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a sterilizer indicator on each package. 
(3)  All packages shall be labeled with the time and date of sterilization. Packages shall no longer be considered sterile if the integrity of the package is damaged or if the date of sterilization exceeds six (6) months. 
(c)  Instrument sterilization. 
(1)  The sterilizer shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer. 
(2)  The operator's manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(4)  A sterilizer log shall be maintained for the studio and made available for inspection by the Henry County Board of Health and the customer. The log shall be kept for a minimum of one (1) year. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load: 
i.  A description of instruments contained in the load; 
ii.  The date of sterilization and time, if more than one load is processed in a single day; 
iii.  The sterilizer cycle time and temperature; 
iv.  Indication of proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; 
v.  Any action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur; and 
vi.  Maintenance log, including: 
1.  Date of service; 
2.  Sterilizer model and serial number; 
3.  Sterilizer location; 
4.  Name of person requesting service; 
5.  Description of malfunctions; 
6.  Name of person performing maintenance; 
7.  Description of services and parts replaced; 
8.  Results of biologic validation and testing; 
9.  Signature and title of person acknowledging completed work. 
(d)  Sterilization monitoring. 
(1)  Sterilizer monitoring shall be performed at least once a month, unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer, or after forty (40) hours of usage, whichever comes first, by using a commercial biological monitoring (spore) system. 
(2)  All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the studio, with reports sent to the studio. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of one (1) year and must be available for inspection by Henry County Board of Health. Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function. The owner shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately upon receipt of the positive report and notify the Henry County Board of Health with written documentation explaining corrective actions. If this sterilizer is the only means of sterilization of equipment, then the studio will cease operations immediately. The studio shall be allowed to re-open when a biological indicator test has three (3) consecutive negative results. The studio shall have the option to purchase and install a new sterilizer in order to reopen prior to the receipt of the test results on the previous sterilizer or use all single-use items. 
(e)  Instrument storage. 
(1)  Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized instruments. 
(2)  After sterilization, the instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area, reserved for storage of sterilized instruments. 
(f)  Single-use items. 
(1)  If the body art studio operates using only pre-sterilized, single-use instruments and supplies, a sterilizer is not required. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 18, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-109. - Disinfection of the body art studio. 
(a)  Each body art studio shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(b)  The owner shall develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination, plus any tasks or procedures to be performed daily. This written schedule shall be based on the types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the body art studio. Adherence to the schedule must be documented on a weekly basis to be appended to a maintenance log. This log shall be available for review by the Henry County Board of Health during normal hours of operation and to the general public upon request. Violation of proper maintenance and documentation thereof will be grounds for immediate closure or suspension of the owner's body art studio permit. 
(c)  All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA approved disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of body art procedures on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(d)  All protective coverings such as plastic wrap, barrier films, and aluminum foil shall be removed after each body art procedure and shall be placed in a covered trash receptacle that can be operated without the use of hands. These barriers shall be replaced with unused protective coverings. These barriers shall also be considered single-use products. 
(e)  Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated on a daily basis with a current EPA approved disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminated immediately. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 19, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-110. - Disposal of wastes. 
(a)  All disposable instruments are considered biohazardous and must be disposed of as biohazardous material. All biohazardous waste must be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. Needles, razors, and other sharp instruments shall be placed in puncture-resistant, closed containers immediately after use and shall be stored in closed cabinets or drawers at the end of each workday. 
(b)  Contaminated needles shall not be bent, broken, or their structure otherwise compromised. 
(c)  Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture-resistant waste container that is leak-proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid. These containers shall be labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD." All sharps waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. 
(d)  Biohazardous nonsharps waste shall be discarded in a biohazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. 
(e)  All other nonhazardous disposable waste shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight-fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(f)  All other nonhazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of so as to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste material. 
(g)  Self-closing waste containers designed to be operated without the use of hands and lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for waste containers shall be located within each parlor and restroom and shall be emptied at least once per day into a commercially approved dumpster. This dumpster must be picked up and emptied by a commercial contractor at least once per week. 
(h)  All sewage, including liquid waste, shall be disposed of by a public sewage system or by a sewage system constructed and operated according to the applicable provisions of the Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 20, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-111. - Client records. 
(a)  The owner shall maintain a written detailed client record that describes the body art procedure(s) administered on each client. These records shall be kept on file for three (3) years after the procedure. Client records shall be immediately made available for inspection within seven (7) days of request. 
(b)  The client records shall be created prior to any body art procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name, signature, address, proof of age, body art procedure performed, date, design, its precise location upon the body, and the name of the body artist(s) performing or assisting in the procedure. The client record shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose during the procedure and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of a valid state-issued photo ID (a driver's license, U.S. Military ID card) must be obtained from the client and maintained with the client's record. 
(c)  Each client shall be provided with an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure and each client shall be required to sign the informed consent statement prior to receiving any body art procedure. The informed consent statement signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client record, with a copy given to the customer. 
(d)  A "disclaimer of liability" form promulgated by the owner shall also be signed by the client prior to receiving any body art procedure. A copy of the "disclaimer of liability" signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client's record, with a copy given to the client. 
(e)  The client record shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time the body art procedure is performed. 
(f)  The client record shall also contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she has received, read, and understood a copy of an after-care procedures form. 
(g)  The client has the right to request and receive their entire client record. If the client's record is available on the premises of the body art studio, then the record shall be made available immediately upon request. If the record is not available on the premises, then the client's request for the client record must be fulfilled within five (5) business days. 
(h)  Client records shall not be accessible to anyone except authorized employees of the body art studio. 
(i)  Client records shall be disposed of in a manner that will not disclose any personal information of the client. For example, client records may be shredded, then discarded in a waste receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 21, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-112. - Body art studio inspection. 
(a)  The premises of any body art studio and all records required to be maintained under these regulations shall be available for review and examination by the board of health and properly identified representatives of the county at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible for having an employee with knowledge of the studio's records on duty at the body art studio during all hours of operation. 
(c)  Studio inspections shall be performed at least two (2) times annually. Additional studio inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of these rules. Each inspection will carry an inspection fee to be set by and approved by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(d)  A copy of the most recent inspection report shall be posted in public view, in an unobscure manner, within fifteen (15) feet of the main door, five (5) to seven (7) feet off the floor, and shall be approachable within one (1) foot. 
(e)  If an individual becomes aware of a licensed body art studio that is in violation of the Code, or other state or federal law, they may contact the Henry County Board of Health. The alleged violation will be investigated at the discretion of the board. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(f)  If an individual becomes aware of an unlicensed individual or facility that performs, or has performed body art procedures, they may contact the board of health. The alleged unlicensed individual or facility will be investigated at the discretion of the board of health. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 22, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-113. - Access. 
(a)  Representatives of the board of health, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any body art studio at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and review of pertinent records to determine compliance with this Code. 
(b)  If a person denies access to the board of health, the board of health shall: 
(1)  Inform the person that: 
i.  The permit holder is required to allow access to the board of health; 
ii.  Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a body art studio permit to operate; and 
iii.  If access is denied, an inspection warrant, issued by the appropriate authority to order access, may be obtained according to law; and 
(2)  Make a final request for access. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 23, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-114. - Body art studio personnel. 
(a)  All persons performing body art in Henry County shall only perform such body art procedures in a validly permitted body art studio. 
(b)  Body artist shall obtain and maintain current certifications in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training except where the body artist is a currently licensed health care professional. All certifications must be renewed at a minimum of every two (2) years unless a more frequent time period is specified by the licensing agencies. 
(c)  The above certifications must be obtained within sixty (60) days of the body artist's employment. 
(d)  The body artist must obtain a physical examination by a licensed physician within thirty (30) days prior to employment or the initial application for a body artist permit. Each body artist must obtain from the physician a certificate certifying that the body artist is free of any communicable disease. This examination must be conducted yearly. 
(e)  All body artists and any employee that has the potential to come in contact with any bodily fluids shall be required to obtain the Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(f)  The owner shall maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures. Such files shall be available for inspection by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal hours of operation. The file shall contain: 
(1)  Report of physical examination; 
(2)  Evidence of current emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training; and 
(3)  The home address and home telephone number of each employee. 
(g)  The owner of a body art studio shall only hire, employ, or use individuals who have complied with these rules. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 24, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-115. - Body artist permit. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. Body artists shall renew their permit annually. 
(b)  A body artist permit shall not be eligible for renewal unless all requirements of these rules are met. 
(c)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist's parlor. 
(d)  All body artist permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(e)  A body artist permit shall be returned to the board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(f)  Proof of current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training shall be required within sixty (60) days of issuance of the body artist permit. Otherwise, the body artist permit will be suspended until this training is completed, not to exceed sixty (60) days. If the requirements are not met within this sixty-day suspension, the body artist permit will be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 25, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-116. - Application for a body artist permit. 
(a)  Each body artist shall submit to the board of health environmental health section an application for a body artist permit. 
(b)  The application for a body artist permit shall be made on forms provided by the board of health and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in all respects, including the payment of any fees required. Application fees shall be set by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(c)  Application for a body artist permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name; 
(2)  All aliases; 
(3)  Copy of a valid driver's license or valid state-issued photo identification; 
(4)  Home address; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Mailing address; 
(7)  Home phone number; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Evidence of current certifications; and 
(10)  Physician report of physical examination and Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 26, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-117. - Issuance of body artist permit and fees. 
(a)  The Henry County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  Body artist permits shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist must pay the applicable permit fee. Body artist permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(d)  At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a body artist permit, the body artist shall submit an application for the renewal to the Henry County Environmental Health Section. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 27, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-118. - Application to existing body artist. 
(a)  The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body artists, whether the body artist began performing body art before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body artist established on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six (6) months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 28, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-119. - Denial, suspension, or revocation of body artist permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation or official action of the board of health, a body artist permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body artist permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The body artist violated the conditions of the permit; or 
(3)  The body artist committed any violation of this article. 
(b)  After a body artist permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and the body artist complies with all requirements of this article as determined by the board of health. 
(c)  No body artist permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. 31-40-4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking, or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this Code may secure review by appeal to the Henry County Board of Health in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1, and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 29, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-13-120. - Body artist temporary permits. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. 
(b)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist's parlor or in public view. 
(c)  A body artist permit shall be returned to the board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Proof of current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training shall be submitted in conjunction with a body artist temporary permit application. 
(e)  Application for a body artist temporary permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name; 
(2)  All aliases; 
(3)  Copy of a valid driver's license or valid state-issued photo identification; 
(4)  Home address; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Mailing address; 
(7)  Home phone number; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Evidence of current certifications; and 
(10)  Physician report of physical examination and Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 30, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-121. - Issuance of body artist temporary permit and fees. 
(a)  The Henry County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist must pay the applicable permit fee. 
(c)  A temporary permit for a body artist will be valid seven (7) days from the issuance date. 
(d)  This permit is transferable, with the exception that the body artist will notify the Henry County Board of Health when a location change from one body art studio is made to another body art studio. 
(e)  A body artist that obtains a body artist temporary permit shall comply with sections 3-12-118 and 3-12-119 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 31, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-122. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall tattoo the body of an individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age, unless the person performing the tattoo procedure is a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath in compliance with O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-9. 
(b)  No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of ear lobes, of any person under the age of eighteen (18) for the purpose of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects into the body, unless the minor's legal parent, custodian, or guardian with proper identification is present and signs a written consent form provided by the body art studio. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. 
(c)  No person shall tattoo the body of any person within one (1) inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
(d)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is, or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
(e)  No person shall obtain the services provided in a body art studio by misrepresentation of age in any place where body art procedures are performed. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any body artist to perform any acts of scarification and or acts of suspension in the body art studio. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 32, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-123. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or entity to violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures unless that person is employed by a body art studio and holds a current body artist permit. No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures outside the confines of a validly permitted body art studio. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for body artist to be under the influence of any alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(d)  Except as specified in (1) of this subsection, no animals of any kind shall be allowed inside a body art studio. 
(1)  Live animals may be allowed in the following situations if the contamination of clean equipment, parlors, single-use articles, or any other items that may be used in a body art procedure cannot result: 
i.  Decorative fish in aquariums; 
ii.  Patrol dogs accompanying police or security officers; 
iii.  In areas that are not used for any equipment storage or equipment cleaning and preparing areas; 
iv.  Service animals that are controlled by the disabled employee, person, or trainer of such animal, if a health or safety hazard will not result from the presence or activities of the service animal. 
(e)  An owner of a body art studio shall be deemed responsible for any act, omission, or violation of this article committed by any body artist in said studio, working upon studio premises, or performing body art procedures for the owner as an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 33, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-124. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Body artists shall follow standard precautions. 
(b)  All hand and/or arm jewelry worn by a body artist that may impede in the procedure or have sharp edges that may compromise the integrity of the gloves shall be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. 
(c)  Prior to performing body art on each client, the body artist shall ensure that his/her fingernails are closely trimmed and shall perform proper hand washing. This includes thoroughly washing and scrubbing hands with warm water and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands shall then be dried by single-use towels. 
(d)  Prior to the start of the body art procedure, the body artist shall inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Single-use medical gloves shall be worn during the body art procedure. They shall be donned in such a fashion that their integrity is not compromised. The gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, if the gloves become soiled, torn, punctured, or the integrity of the glove is compromised. The body crafter shall perform hand hygiene before donning and after removing each set of gloves. 
(e)  Each body artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron, or smock. 
(f)  Body artists who are experiencing symptoms of illness including, but not limited to, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from performing body art procedures. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each body artist for the entire day and/or night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area of the body where the body art procedure will be performed. 
(i)  All items that come in contact with a client's skin shall be single-use and disposed of after the procedure. 
(j)  All sharps used in body art procedures shall be sterile at the time of the procedure. 
(k)  All fixtures and equipment contaminated with blood shall be cleaned with an approved sanitizer, for example, a ten-percent bleach solution made fresh daily or as often as needed to maintain appropriate sanitizer concentration. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 34, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-125. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Prior to placing a tattoo design on the client's skin, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the body art procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a body artist for transferring the design to the skin, the stencil shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use sterile instrument only. 
(e)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(f)  After the area has dried, a layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied. 
(g)  After the application of the antibacterial ointment, a bandage or other protective barrier shall be applied to the tattoo. 
(h)  The client shall be given written and oral instructions on how to care for the tattoo during the healing process. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 35, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-126. - Procedures specific to body-piercing. 
(a)  Before piercing the skin of a client, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area prior to the procedure being performed. 
(c)  The client shall then be given both written and oral instructions on how to care for the piercing during the healing process. 
(d)  A facility that limits its piercing practice to the piercing of the lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing systems shall be exempt from regulatory requirements of this article. Compliance with the requirements for this exemption may be verified by inspection at the option of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 36, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-127. - Compliance. 
(a)  A body art studio shall operate in compliance with these rules and with a valid body art studio permit issued by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(b)  A body artist shall perform body art procedures in compliance with these rules and with a valid body artist permit issued by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 37, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-128. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of the rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A Ch. 31-5. 
(b)  The board of health may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any body art studio which does not fulfill the minimum requirements of the rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be offered an opportunity for a hearing before the county board of health as provided in O.C.G.A. 31-5-1. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(c)  The board of health is empowered to institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violations of an applicable provision of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or of these rules and regulations. 
(d)  Any person or entity violating any provision of this regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, or upon entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, shall be punished by a fine, not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000) or by imprisonment for a term not more than sixty (60) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Owners shall be responsible for ensuring agents and employees fully comply with the provisions of these regulations and shall be liable for any violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 38, 7-20-09) 
Sec. 3-12-129. - Effective date. 
(a)  The provisions of these rules shall become effective sixty (60) days after adoption by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 39, 7-20-09) 
Chapter 3-13 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-13-1. - Domesticated animals in county parks—Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Code section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Domesticated animals means any animal that lives in, near or about the habitation of and under the care of human beings. 
Pets means any domesticated animal or other animal that is kept by any human being for the pleasure of the keeper rather than the utility of the animal. 
Public park means a tract or parcel of land owned or leased by Henry County or over which Henry County maintains dominion and is used for recreation by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 91-04, 7-16-91) 
Sec. 3-13-2. - Same—Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual or corporation, its agents or employees to do or allow any of the following acts in the county parks: 
(1)  Bring any domesticated animal into any public building; 
(2)  Allow any domesticated animal to threaten the safety, security, peace of mind or enjoyment of others; 
(3)  Fail to restrain any domesticated animal with a leash or other instrument of six (6) feet or less in length; 
(4)  Leave any domesticated animal unattended; 
(5)  Allow a domesticated animal to enter or come within fifty (50) feet of concession or seating areas during and thirty (30) minutes prior to or after a sporting event; 
(6)  Allow any domesticated animal to enter upon the athletic fields; 
(7)  Fail to pick up or remove and properly dispose of outside the park of excrement of any domesticated animal; 
(8)  Allow any domesticated hoofed animal such as a horse, pig, donkey or cattle to enter upon the premises without express written permission of the county; or 
(9)  Allow any domesticated animal, such as a dog, cat or other domesticated pet, to enter Village Park at North Henry located at 750 Fairview Road in Ellenwood, Georgia, without express written permission of the county. 
(Ord. No. 91-04, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 17-05, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 3-13-3. - Same—Exemptions. 
[The following are exempted from section 3-13-2:] 
(1)  Certain events that, by their nature, require the presence of animals are exempt, such as rodeo events, horse shows, dog shows and farm exhibitions; and 
(2)  Seeing eye dogs. 
(Ord. No. 91-04, 7-16-91) 
Sec. 3-13-4. - Parks—Prohibited acts. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "park" or "recreational area" means a park or recreational area which is under the custody or control of Henry County, Georgia, whether owned or leased by Henry County, and which is used for recreation by the general public. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to mark on, deface, injure, displace, dig, excavate, remove, or construct on any real or personal property in any park or recreational area, except when done with special written permission granted by the board of commissioners of Henry County. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any roads in a park or recreational area in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. It shall also be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour within two hundred (200) feet of an intensive-use area in a park or recreational area. As used in this subsection, the term "vehicle" means any wheeled conveyance for the transportation of persons or materials. As used in this subsection, the term "intensive-use area" means a picnic area, a beach or pool area, a check-in station, a ball or sporting event field, or a camping or cabin area. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to fish commercially or to buy or sell fish caught in the waters of any park or recreational area. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to fish with any device other than a pole and line or rod and reel in the waters of any park or recreational area. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to hunt, trap, or otherwise pursue or catch any wildlife in any park or recreational area. It shall also be unlawful to shoot into a park or recreational area from beyond the boundaries of such park or recreational area. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any intoxicated person to enter or remain in any park or recreational area. It shall also be unlawful for any person to consume or use alcoholic beverages or intoxicants in any park or recreational area. 
a.  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages (beer and wine only) shall be permissible at the following county-owned locations only: Nash Farm Park, Heritage Park Arena and Building area only, Locust Grove Event Center, and shall meet the following conditions: 
i.  Written approval from the Henry County Recreation Commission (aka, recreation board) for each proposed event. 
ii.  Meet all applicable local jurisdictional requirements (Locust Grove, McDonough). 
iii.  Meet requirements of Henry County Code section 3-14-22. 
iv.  The individual or company responsible for the sale dispensing of the beer and wine must possess a valid alcohol license, issued through the Georgia Department of Revenue, as well as a valid alcohol license from a Georgia municipality (city or county), which allows them to sell and/or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink, off licensed premises. 
v.  A police officer must be present for duration of event, at the applicant's expense. 
vi.  Any other stipulations imposed by the recreation commission (aka, recreation board). 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section 3-13-4, the sale and consumption of beer and wine shall be permitted at the Cotton Fields Golf Course, subject to such rules and regulations as are, from time to time, adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners and/or the Henry County Recreation Commission (a.k.a. the Henry County Recreation Board). 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use in any park or recreational area any electronic device for the detection of metals, minerals, artifacts, lost articles, or for treasure hunting. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
a.  To use or possess in any park or recreational area any fireworks, explosives, or firecrackers unless such use has been approved with special written permission granted by the board of commissioners of Henry County. 
b.  To use or possess in any park or recreational area any bows and arrows, slingshots, or any other similar device which discharges projectiles by any means, unless the device is unloaded and stored so as not to be readily accessible. 
c.  To use or discharge any firearm, air rifle or spring gun or destructive device in any park or recreational area. 
d.  For purposes of subsection c., "firearm" shall mean any weapon that is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or other frame or receiver of any such weapon, any firearm muffler or firearm silencer. "Destructive device" shall mean any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas: (i) bomb, (ii) grenade, (iii) rocket having a propellant charge of more than four (4) ounces, (iv) missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, (v) mine, or (vi) device similar to any of the devices described in the preceding clauses; any type of weapon by whatever name known which will, or which may be readily converted to, expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or other propellant, and which has any barrel with a bore of more than one-half inch in diameter; and any combination of parts either designed or intended for use in converting any device into any destructive device described herein from which a destructive device may be readily assembled. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to lock or otherwise secure any walk-in gates to any ball field or athletic field in any park or recreational area to prohibit public entry except for security during non-operational hours. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful to refuse to leave a park or recreational area after violating any of the laws or regulations established by this article after being directed to leave by any law enforcement officer or any authorized representative of Henry County. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicles overnight in any park or recreational area without the prior written approval of the board of commissioners of Henry County. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any place within any park or recreational area where signs placed by Henry County or its official designee prohibit parking or condition the privilege of parking upon the purchase and display of a parking permit. 
(13)  a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale, exhale, burn or carry any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form on any public park owned or operated by Henry County. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section 3-13-4, the sale and use of tobacco products, including cigars, cigarettes and pipes shall be permitted at the Cotton Fields Golf Course, subject to such rules and regulations as are, from time to time, adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners and/or the Henry County Recreation Commission (a.k.a. Henry County Recreation Board). 
(14)  It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, retrieve, remove, excavate or disturb any historical artifact or relic on any property owned by the county without the prior written consent of the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
(15)  It shall be unlawful for anyone age eighteen (18) and older to participate in any recreational activity in any public park, and any specific areas (fields, etc.), where such has been designated for youth recreational activities only; other than those engaged in coaching youth. 
(b)  The penalty(ies) for the violation of any of the above-referenced Code provisions shall be as set forth in section 3-13-5 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 2, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 06-14, § I, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 07-01, § I, 1-25-07; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 12-22, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 16-02, 7-19-16 ; Ord. No. 16-03, 7-19-16 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-171.) 
Sec. 3-13-5. - Same—Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction in the Magistrate Court of Henry County, Georgia, or upon plea of guilty or nolo contendere, be punished by a fine as provided for in O.C.G.A. Section 15-10-60 as hereafter may be amended. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Henry County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 91-04, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 1-18-00) 
Secs. 3-13-6—3-13-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 3-13-16. - Established. 
There is hereby established a county recreation commission. 
Sec. 3-13-17. - Members. 
The county recreation commission shall consist of five (5) persons appointed from each commission district. All members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. Each member shall be paid twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per meeting that they attend, not to exceed fourteen (14) paid meetings per fiscal year. 
Sec. 3-13-18. - Organization; bylaws. 
After being initially appointed, the members of the county recreation commission shall meet and elect a chairman and such other officers from among their number as they deem advisable. The county recreation commission shall adopt bylaws for the proper conduct of its business. 
Sec. 3-13-19. - General powers and duties. 
The county recreation commission shall be responsible for scheduling the use of all county-owned and leased recreational facilities and shall have the authority to organize, sponsor, schedule and conduct any form of recreational or cultural activity which will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome, constructive manner. Such activities may be conducted on any properties or facilities, public or private, which are under the control and supervision of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 3-13-20. - Personnel. 
Within the constraints imposed by the county's prevailing wage scales, the annual budget, and personnel policies of the county, the county recreation commission shall be authorized to recommend the selection, and appointment of full and part-time employees to assist in operating the recreation program. All recreation employees will be paid from the county's payroll. Care shall be taken in all personnel action to prevent discrimination against any person or group. Full-time or part-time employees will be hired only with the concurrence of the county administrator and approved by the board of commissioners and in compliance with the personnel policies of the county. 
Sec. 3-13-21. - Annual budget; authority to solicit and receive fees, revenues and gifts. 
The county recreation commission shall advise and assist the county administrator in developing an annual budget for the recreation program. The commission shall also be authorized to receive fees and revenues from the operation of recreation facilities and programs and may solicit or receive gifts of money or personal property to be used for recreational purposes. All money so collected shall be promptly paid into the county treasury and may be set aside for recreational use only within the expenditure constraints of the county budget. The county administrator shall provide monthly to the chairman of the commission or to the head of the recreation department, a financial report showing all funds expended and the balance of all funds available for recreation purposes. 
Sec. 3-13-22. - Reports. 
The county recreation commission shall make semi-annual reports of activities to the county administrator and such other special reports as may be required from time to time. These semiannual reports are due on December 1 and June 1 of each year, and shall, as a minimum, include for the previous period: activities conducted, number of participants in each activity, number of participants who were residents of the county, source, amount, and disposition of all funds, and a listing of physical facilities or funds needed to enhance the recreation program, and projected activities for the next succeeding semi-annual period. 
Chapter 3-14 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-14-1—3-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-14-16. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage: Includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Distilled spirits: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Grocery store: A retail business engaged primarily in the retail sale of food and groceries. 
Malt beverage: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Private club: Any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(a)  Has been in existence for at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(b)  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; 
(c)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the use of its members, which building or space: 
1.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
2.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(d)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. "Fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Proper identification: A document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person and the person's photograph and the person's date of birth. By way of example only and without limiting the foregoing, proper identification may be a passport, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under the Official Code of Georgia. "Proper identification" shall never include a birth certificate. 
Restaurant: 
(a)  Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where at least one (1) meal per day is served five (5) or more days a week during normal business operations; and 
(b)  Having adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a minimum seating capacity of sixty (60) or having annual gross receipts showing a minimum of sixty (60) percent of revenue from the sale of food. 
Retail dealer: Except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink, such sales for consumption only on the premises. 
Special event: A gathering or event for which the promotor or other person, firm, or corporation holding or producing the event must obtain a permit under chapter 3-15 of the Code of Henry County adopted May 1, 1984, as amended. 
Wholesale dealer: Any person who sells beer, wine or distilled spirits to retail dealers or other wholesale dealers. 
Wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not including cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § I, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 91-07, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 97-01, § 2, 2-5-97; Ord. No. 04-06, § 1, 2-3-04; Ord. No. 03-13, 6-20-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 3-1-2(25). 
Sec. 3-14-17. - Excise tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages on each licensed wholesaler of malt beverages as follows: 
48/7 oz. cans or bottles, $1.40 per case; 36/8 oz. cans or bottles, $1.20 per case; 24/12 oz. cans or bottles, $1.20 per case; 24/14 oz. cans or bottles, $1.40 per case; 24/16 oz. cans or bottles, $1.60 per case; 12/32 oz. cans or bottles, $1.60 per case; 24/7 oz. cans or bottles, $.70 per case; 24/8 oz. cans or bottles, $.80 per case; 12/12 oz. cans or bottles, $.60 per case; 36/7 oz. cans or bottles, $1.05 per case; 20/16 oz. cans or bottles, $1.34 per case; 3.8 gallons, $5.11 per containers; ¼ bbl., $3.00 per container, and ½ bbl., $6.00 per container. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package in the amount of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter, and a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. No such tax shall be imposed, levied or collected in any portion of the county in which a municipality within the county is imposing the tax authorized by Section 3-6-60 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated on wine sold by the package. 
(c)  The excise tax provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. 
(d)  The taxes shall be paid by the dealer on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the county by said wholesale dealer. 
(e)  Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the county. The licensee shall file the report with the county. 
(f)  The wholesaler shall remit to the county on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which the sales were made the taxes imposed by this section. 
(g)  There is hereby imposed an excise tax upon the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three (3) percent of the charge to the public for the beverages. No such tax shall be imposed, levied, or collected in any portion of the county in which a municipality within the county is imposing the tax authorized by section 3-4-130 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated. The tax imposed hereby shall be collected and paid by the licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold. Each licensee responsible for payment of the tax shall file a monthly report at the time the tax is paid stating the total amount of charges to the public from the sale of distilled spirits during the preceding month and shall supply appropriate supporting documentation. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XV(3), (4), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, § 4, 2-5-97) 
Cross reference— Local acts relating to licenses and taxation, Ch. 2-4. 
State Law reference— County excise tax on malt beverages required, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-5-80; payment procedures, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-5-81; county excise tax on wine authorized, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 3-14-18. - Types of retail sales authorized; prohibited. 
(a)  Malt beverages and wine shall be sold only by wholesale establishments, retail grocery stores, restaurants, or private clubs operated under a license issued under this article; and in the case of wholesale establishments and retail grocery stores, shall be sold only in sealed containers and shall not be opened for consumption or for any other purpose on the premises where sold. Malt beverages and wine also may be sold at special events as defined herein, provided the holder of the special event permit also sells or makes available at said event a substantial amount and variety of food and non-alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Distilled spirits shall be sold only by the drink for consumption on the premises in restaurants or private clubs operated under a license issued under this article, or at special events provided the same requirements for the sale of malt beverages and wine at special events are met. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment, as defined in article II of chapter 3-17, shall be permitted to serve or sell alcoholic beverages. This prohibition is for the purpose of reducing criminal activity and minimizing community blight, which studies of related communities including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas; Amarillo, Texas; Beaumont, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Los Angeles, California; Los Angeles County, California; and St. Paul, Minnesota, have shown to be increased by the presence of adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § II, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, § 5, 2-5-97; Ord. No. 97-05, 3-17-97) 
Sec. 3-14-19. - General duty of retail licensee. 
A person issued a retail license pursuant to this article shall be active in, and solely responsible for, the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XII(4), 3-16-82) 
Sec. 3-14-20. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesalers. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of malt beverages and/or wine at retail in the county, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall receive malt beverages or wine delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by any mans other than a conveyance owned or operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the board of commissioners obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIV(7), 3-16-82) 
Sec. 3-14-21. - Notice to county of managerial changes in retail establishments. 
The holder of any retail license issued pursuant to this article shall notify the board of commissioners in writing of any managerial change within five (5) days of such change. When such a change occurs, the applicant shall report in person to the board of commissioners' office to report the new information by filling out the manager section of the application form. Violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension of license. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § III(2), 3-16-82) 
Sec. 3-14-22. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail establishments for off-premises consumption in the county nor any agent or employee of a licensee, shall sell, serve, distribute or give away alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises at any time except between 7:00 a.m. and midnight, Monday through Saturday nor shall they sell, serve, distribute or give away alcoholic beverages on Sundays or Christmas Day. Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to the board of commissioners of the county, by the state, with respect to the wholesale and retail sale of alcoholic beverages on election days; the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election, provided however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(b)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages in restaurants in the county nor any agent or employee of a licensee, shall sell, serve, distribute or give away alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises at any time except between 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and at any time between 11:55 p.m. on Saturday until 1:55 a.m. on Sunday. Sales between 11:55 p.m. on Saturday and 1:55 a.m. on Sunday shall be treated as Saturday sales and not require a separate license pursuant to section 3-14-22.1. It shall be unlawful to sell, serve, distribute or give away alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to the board of commissioners of the county, by the state with respect to the wholesale and retail sale of alcoholic beverages on election days; the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(c)  An election day is hereby defined as that period of time beginning one (1) hour prior to the opening of the polls and ending one (1) hour after the closing of the polls. The prohibition against the giving or furnishing of alcoholic beverages, spirituous liquors, malt beverages or other intoxicating beverages to any person on election days shall apply only with the territorial boundaries for which the election is being held. 
(d)  The other provisions of this section notwithstanding, no malt beverages shall be sold at a time prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, §§ XI, XIV(3), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 84-04, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 86-06, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 91-07, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 03-03, 5-5-03) 
Editor's note— The prohibition of Sunday sales was deleted from subsection (b) to conform with the provisions of Ord. No. 01-05, adopted Sept. 17, 2001, and approved at referendum on Nov. 6, 2001. 
Cross reference— Sunday sales, § 3-14-22.1. 
State Law reference— Hours of sale, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 3-14-22.1. - Sunday sales; licenses. 
Sunday sales by licensees shall be permitted and regulated under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  A license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays must be obtained from the office of the county tax commissioner. In order to obtain said license, an applicant must possess a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter and must further provide satisfactory proof that the applicant derives at least sixty (60) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served, or that it derives at least sixty (60) percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(2)  All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall restrict Sunday sales to consumption on the premises, and only during the time period of 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight on Sundays. 
(3)  All provisions this chapter 3-14, being Ordinance No. 9701 relating to the issuance, denial, revocation or surrender of alcoholic beverage licenses, are hereby incorporated by reference in this section concerning Sunday sales, and the same shall apply to licenses issued for Sunday sales pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 3, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 06-10, 8-14-06) 
Editor's note— The county has advised that Ord. No. 01-05 which pertained to Sunday sales was approved by the voters at a referendum held Nov. 6, 2001. Such ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion of § 3(1) through (3) of the ordinance as § 3-14-22.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-14-23. - Sales to intoxicated persons. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall, upon the licensed premises, sell, serve, distribute, or give any alcoholic beverage to any person while such person is in a state of noticeable intoxication. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIV(2), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 84-04, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 97-01, § 6, 2-5-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 3-14-24. - Sales to minors. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, no person knowingly, by himself or through another, shall sell, serve, distribute or give away or permit any person in his employ to sell, serve, distribute or give away any alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale or purchase of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state. 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(3)  In the home with parental consent. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, "proper identification" means any document that is issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 40-5-100 requiring the department of public safety to issue identification cards to handicapped persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, either by himself or through another, to sell, serve, distribute, give away or otherwise permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person without first examining "proper identification" as defined herein above to be provided by the proposed purchaser of the alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIV(1), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 84-04, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 88-02, 2-2-88; Ord. No. 89-03, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 91-07, 9-24-91) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 3-14-25. - Minimum server age. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail in the county, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under twenty-one (21) years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIV(6), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 88-02, 2-2-88; Ord. No. 97-01, § 7, 2-5-97; Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-8-19 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 3-14-26. - Breach of peace, etc. on licensed premises. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail in the county, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct or breach of peace. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIV(4), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, § 8, 2-5-97) 
Sec. 3-14-27. - Advertising. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail in the county, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall install any advertisement of the character or nature of the business being operated on the exterior of the building in which the business is carried on, or in any window or door, or at any place outside the building, whether on the same premises or not, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  One (1) non-flashing sign no larger than three (3) feet by three (3) feet and bearing only the trade name of the business and the designation "Beer & Wine Package Store," and/or 
(2)  One (1) non-flashing sign, no larger than three (3) feet by three (3) feet that may bear a brand name. 
Elevated pole-mounted signs or any other sign advertising the nature of the business shall not be allowed in the parking lot or adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIV(5), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, § 9, 2-5-97) 
Cross reference— Signs generally, Ch. 3-10; zoning ordinance provision relating to signs, § 3-7-231 et seq. 
Sec. 3-14-28. - Opening containers on licensed premises. 
(a)  No person shall open any alcoholic beverages for consumption, or otherwise, within one hundred (100) feet of a place of sale except within the confines of a private club or restaurant under the terms of this article. 
(b)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail in the county, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall suffer or permit a violation of subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 82-3, XIV(8), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, §§ 10, 11, 2-5-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 3-14-29. - Restriction on operator or manager dispensing alcoholic beverages. 
The operator or manager of a place of business which has been issued a retail license pursuant to this article shall not be allowed to manage or dispense alcoholic beverages if he has been convicted of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, or of any state or federal statute with reference to liquor, wine, or malt beverages. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XII(2), 3-16-82) 
Sec. 3-14-30. - Off-street parking for restaurants and clubs. 
Adequate parking must be provided by restaurants and private clubs by accordance with the off-street parking requirements of all ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIV(9), 3-16-82) 
Cross reference— Driveways and parking lots for certain buildings required, § 3-6-1; zoning ordinances off-street parking and service requirements, Ch. 3-7, § 7. 
Sec. 3-14-31. - Storage by retailers. 
All retailers licensed pursuant to this article shall store all alcoholic beverages in their possession on the premises for which the license is issued, and at no other place or places except upon written permission from the board of commissioners upon written application therefor. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XV(6), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, § 12, 2-5-97) 
Sec. 3-14-32. - Records and inspections of retailers. 
Each retail licensee under this article shall retain in his place of business the invoice of each purchase of alcoholic beverages for at least six (6) months. All records as well as the premises of the licensee shall be subject to inspection by a duly authorized agent of the board of commissioners at any time. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XV(5), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, § 13, 2-5-97) 
State Law reference— Records generally, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 3-3-6. 
Sec. 3-14-33. - Nonconforming uses. 
Those businesses licensed prior to March 16, 1982 which do not meet the established criteria regarding floor space, food stock, or distance from churches or schools as outlined in section 3-14-50 as of such date shall be considered nonconforming uses, and as such, shall not be allowed to operate as a malt beverage or wine establishment except in the name of the license holder who was last issued a license prior to March 16, 1982; or in the name of a member of the license holder's immediate family. For purposes of this section, immediate family members shall include: husband, spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, son, daughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, stepmother, stepfather, stepson, and stepdaughter. If, however, improvements are made to the nonconforming establishment which being it into compliance with the floor space and food stock requirements of this article, said establishment may be licensed and operated to sell malt beverages and wine by a person other than the previous license holder or immediate family members referred to above. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XV(6), 3-16-82) 
Sec. 3-14-34. - Employee regulations/picture identification. 
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a retail license for alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by a retail beer and/or wine establishment until such person has applied for and received a permit from the Henry County Police Department. Prior to issuing a permit, the Henry County Police Department shall conduct a background check on the applicant and shall collect a nonrefundable investigative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) from the applicant to offset the cost of this background check. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged upon the issuance/renewal of the permit which shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issue. The permit shall be in the form of a picture identification (I.D.) badge. All picture identification (I.D.) badges currently issued to permittees are hereby deemed to be the permit of each permittee. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the Henry County Police Department. The application shall include name, address, date of birth, general description of applicant; height, weight, hair color, eye color, social security number and driver's license or picture I.D. 
(4)  No alcoholic beverage permit shall be issued to any person (i) who has been convicted of more than one (1) DUI offense within two (2) years of the date of application for said permit; (ii) who is currently serving probation pursuant to any plea under the First Offender Act; (iii) who has been convicted of any felony; (iv) who has been convicted, within five (5) years from the date of application for a permit, of any misdemeanor crime of moral turpitude; or (v) who has been convicted, within five (5) years of the date of application for a permit, as a habitual violator. For the purposes of this subsection, a conviction shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere in any criminal proceeding. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the Henry County Police Department the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers twice annually on/or before June 1 and again on/or before December 1. 
(6)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated by the Henry County Police Department. 
(7)  This section shall not be construed to include employees who do not serve or sell alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises without displaying, on their person in public view, the permit issued by the Henry County Police Department. 
(9)  In the event that any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the Henry County Police Department. 
(10)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of Henry County and shall be worn by the employee at all times while at work or on duty with the licensed establishment. 
(Ord. No. 88-13, 12-3-88; Ord. No. 97-01, § 14, 2-5-97; Ord. No. 99-09, § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 06-09, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 07-09, § A, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 3-14-35. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit issued pursuant to this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to sell and/or serve beer, wine, and/or alcoholic beverages during the term of the permit, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and state law, or any future ordinances pertaining thereto, and subject to revocation, the permittee shall not be entitled to a return of the unearned permit fee. 
(b)  Any permittee of a licensed business, found to be in violation of this article, specifically including a violation and/or violations of section 3-14-24 contained herein, which prohibits the sale and/or service of alcoholic beverages to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, shall result in the suspension of the permit for a period of not less than ten (10) days for the first occurrence; and upon a second occurrence, within twelve (12) months, suspension of not less than twenty (20) days. Any permittee found to have committed such a violation and/or violations shall immediately surrender their permit for the full suspension period to the director of permits, inspections, licensing and code enforcement. Such permitees may retrieve such permits following the expiration of the relevant suspension time period involved. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the board of commissioners from suspending or revoking any permit issued under this article whenever a person holding such a permit is found in violation of this article or is found guilty of violating any law involving moral turpitude, or when it shall be shown before the board of commissioners that the health, morals, interest and convenience of the public demand the suspension or revocation of such permit. 
(c)  A suspension does not require notice or a hearing before the board of commissioners. Notice of a revocation hearing, however, shall be given, either personally or by leaving same at the permittee's employer at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice given in the name of the board of commissioners or the chairman, may include notice that the permit is suspended pending a hearing, in which case the permittee shall immediately cease to sell and/or serve any beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 2, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 3-14-36. - Appeals. 
(a)  All decisions approving, denying, suspending, or revoking a permit issued pursuant to this article or permits shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant and/or the applicant's employer. 
(b)  Upon timely application, any permittee aggrieved by the revocation and/or suspension of a permit shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 4-6-99) 
Secs. 3-14-37—3-14-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Local acts relating to licenses and taxation, Ch. 2-4. 

Sec. 3-14-46. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to sell, serve, distribute, or give alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail within the limits of Henry County without a proper and current license to do so. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, §§ I, II, X, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 84-04, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 97-01, § 16, 2-5-97) 
State Law reference— County licenses required, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40, 3-6-40; authority to license private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-40. 
Sec. 3-14-47. - Wholesale licenses. 
Wholesale licenses to sell beer or wine shall be issued only to those persons who are licensed by the state to sell and distribute malt beverages and/or wine at wholesale. Application shall be made with the board of commissioners and the applicant shall show proof of licensing by the state and shall demonstrate understanding of all laws and regulations pertaining to wholesale distribution in the county. 
Upon approval of the application, the wholesale dealer shall pay an annual fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to Henry County for issuance of their license. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIII, 3-16-82; Ord. N. 04-06, § 2, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 3-14-48. - Special provisions for private clubs. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a county retail alcoholic beverage license may be issued to a private club; provided, however, that such license shall be for the purpose of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § I(7), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, § 17, 2-5-97) 
State Law reference— Private clubs generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
Sec. 3-14-49. - Application for retail license. 
(a)  Any person who wishes to obtain a retail license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall file with the business license supervisor a written application on a form provided by the county. Each applicant shall pay an administration fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and shall also tender with the application the license fee provided by this article. Said application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Full name, home address, social security number and birth date of the applicant and the applicant's manager or agent, if different from the applicant, and whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation, provided that the manager of each location owned by a corporation must receive the license in his name if the principal owner of the corporation resides in another county; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of each partner must be shown; if the applicant is a manager of a corporation or owner of a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of each officer of the corporation must be shown. If applicant is the owner, he must own at least a twenty-five (25) percent share of the business. 
(2)  The location or address of the place of business at which the applicant will engage in business, if and when permission to do so is granted by the county and a license is issued. The applicant shall include the plans for the building in which the business shall be operated, a plan of the property on which said building shall be situated and a parking diagram. 
(3)  The names of all persons who have or will have an interest, monetary or otherwise, in the business which the licensee will operate under the license. 
(4)  The results of a police check (i.e., local records, GCIC and FBI). 
(5)  The employment record of applicant and operator/manager. 
(6)  Such other information as the board of commissioners may require from time to time. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. 
(c)  Each applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications on the application form and place same on file with the business license supervisor before any license is issued. Any misrepresentation or concealment of fact in said application or sworn statement shall be grounds for revocation of license. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, §§ V, XII(3), (6), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 86-05, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 97-01, § 18, 2-5-97; Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 3-14-50. - Persons eligible for retail license. 
No retail alcoholic beverage license shall be issued: 
(1)  To a person who, in the opinion and judgment of the board of commissioners, is not of good moral character and reputation in the county in which he resides. 
(2)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States or a person who does not possess a permanent resident alien green card. 
(3)  To any person who has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or any federal or state law relating to liquor, malt beverages or wine. 
(4)  To any person who is not a natural person. 
(5)  To a person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of a license holder. 
(6)  To a person who is the previous holder of an alcoholic beverage license and is, in the judgment and discretion of the board of commissioners, an unfit person to have a license because of the manner in which he previously conducted business there under as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law or regulation relating to such business. 
(7)  Unless the licensee is the owner or lessee of the premises to be licensed. 
(8)  For a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the board of commissioners because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or on the neighborhood. 
(9)  For a location within an area where, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest and welfare. 
(10)  For a location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(11)  Where the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. 
(12)  For a grocery store, unless the grocery store: For purposes of issuance of a beer or wine license, 
a.  Maintains on display to the customer, a minimum stock of food and groceries, excluding tobacco, of not less than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) retail value; and 
b.  Has a floor space of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet, excluding storage; and 
c.  The location used for sale of beer or wine may be either shut off and locked by a door from the remainder of the building, or the display coolers or counters must be locked securely with signs posting the non-sale of alcoholic beverages during times that are not permitted by this article. The provisions herein requiring four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) retail value of grocery stock and eight hundred (800) square feet of floor space shall not apply to those businesses existing prior to March 16, 1982. 
(13)  a.  No license for the sale of malt beverages or wine for the purpose of off premises consumption, shall be issued for any location within one hundred (100) yards of the front door of any church building or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this paragraph apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and malt beverages was lawful at such location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application; 
b.  No license for the sale of wine or malt beverages for the purpose of off premises consumption, shall be issued for any location within one hundred (100) yards of the front door of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
c.  The term "school grounds" and "college campus" shall apply only to the parcel or parcels of land on which a school, school building, or educational building is located. The term "college" shall mean an educational institution authorized by the state to award associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees. 
d.  As used in this subsection, the term "school grounds" shall mean any portion of the property on which the school is located including parking lots, carpool lines, playgrounds, ball fields, and any other portions of the property. As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as currently defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b) and as may be amended from time to time. 
e.  As used in this subsection, the term "church building" includes sanctuaries, fellowship halls, Sunday schools, administrative offices and any other structure on the church's property for which a building permit must be issued. 
f.  For purposes of this subsection (13), the distance between the church building, school building, school grounds or college campus and the location proposed for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
1)  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; 
2)  To the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center or retail package store; 
3)  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes. 
In measuring the most direct route of travel on the ground, one would have to go around a non-movable obstacle such as a tree or building, and count that distance toward the total distance measurement. The measurement done "As the crow flies," would not meet the measurement method in the above regulation. Any license issued prior to the effective date of December 4, 2012 would be required to adhere to the distance measurement procedures in place at the time of application submittal. Only those applications received after the effective date of December 4, 2012 would be required to adhere to the above measurement requirements. 
g.  The requirements for minimum distance from a church building, college or university located in a "shopping center," as defined by the latest version of "A Glossary of Zoning Development and Planning Terms" edited by Michael Davidson and Fay Dolnick; shall not apply to any new license for retail package or retail consumption. Therefore, those seeking a alcoholic beverage license for the purpose of off-premises consumption shall not be required to consider churches, colleges or universities which are located within these shopping centers in order to meet the distance requirements noted in subsection 14(a). 
h.  This subsection shall not prohibit the renewal of any license lawfully issued prior to the effective date of December 4, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, §§ I(5), III(2), XII(1)—(5), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 86-07, 3-18-86; 04-02, §1, 3-2-04; Res. No. 12-21, 12-4-12) 
State Law reference— Authority of county to set licensing standards, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-14-51. - Public notice and advertising of application for retail licenses. 
(a)  A notice containing the information required in paragraph (c) of this section shall be published in the official legal organ of the county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks immediately preceding the date upon which the business license supervisor will act upon the application. 
(b)  No retail license shall be granted unless the applicant places a sign in the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold. This sign shall remain on the premises for fifteen (15) consecutive days following the filing of the application. The sign shall be visible from the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold is located. The sign shall contain the words "NOTICE: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR." The words shall appear in bold type and be clearly visible from the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold is located. The day, month and year the license was applied for shall appear on said sign together with the following notation: "Questions and concerns may be addressed to the Henry County Business License Supervisor, 140 Henry Parkway, McDonough, Georgia 30252, or by phone at 770-288-6000." 
(c)  No retail license shall be granted unless the applicant for a license places a notice of application in the official legal organ of publication in the county for two (2) consecutive weeks after application has been made, but prior to any action on said application. This notice shall state: 
(1)  A license has been applied for; 
(2)  The date of application; 
(3)  The name of the person applying for the license; 
(4)  The location of the establishment where alcoholic beverages shall be sold; and 
(5)  The following notation: "Questions and concerns may be addressed to the Henry County Business License Supervisor, 140 Henry Parkway, McDonough, Georgia 30252, or by phone at 770-288-6000." 
(d)  All costs for the sign, notice, and advertisement shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, §§ VI, VII, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 97-01, §§ 20—22, 2-5-97; Ord. No. 07-06, § 2, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 3-14-52. - Grant of application. 
(a)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses meeting the provisions of this article shall be granted by the business license supervisor, unless some specific cause set forth in this article justifies a refusal. 
(b)  If the business license supervisor denies an application for a license, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision in accordance with the appeals provisions enumerated in section 3-14-56. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 3, 7-9-07) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 07-06, adopted July 9, 2007, amended § 3-14-52 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-14-52 pertained to the issuance of retail licenses and derived from Ord. No. 87-09, adopted June 16, 1987; and Ord. No. 97-01, adopted Feb. 5, 1997. 
Sec. 3-14-53. - License fees; joint issuance. 
(a)  The applicant for a retail license for the sale of malt beverages shall pay to Henry County, Georgia, at the time of the issuance of such license the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) as an annual license fee for the operation of one (1) year beginning on the first day of January. Applicants for a retail license for wine shall be subject to the same regulation and the annual license fee shall be three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00). 
(b)  Applicants for a retail license for the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink shall be subject to the same regulations, and the annual license fee shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), except as hereinafter provided for nonprofit organizations and special events. 
(c)  Nonprofit organizations shall pay an annual license fee for the sale of distilled spirits of one thousand three hundred seventy-five dollars ($1,375.00). 
(d)  Holders of special event permits shall pay the following license fees for each day of the event: seventy five dollars ($75.00) for malt beverages; fifty dollars ($50.00) for wine; and one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for distilled spirits. 
(e)  The license may be issued jointly in the name of the owner, lessee of the premises which shall operate the business and the manager in the event that the owner or lessee is from out-of-county. The manager shall be jointly responsible for the operation of the business and shall be subject to any penalties for violation of the county's ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XV(1), (2), 3-16-82; Ord. No. 87-09, 6-16-87; Ord. No. 97-01, § 24, 2-5-97;Ord. No. 07-06, § 4, 7-9-07) 
State Law reference— Payment of county license fee for malt beverage license required, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-5-41; limitation on license fee for malt beverage wholesalers, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-5-43. 
Sec. 3-14-54. - Term and transfer. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be applicable to and valid with the respect only to the business location referred to therein, and shall not be transferrable to any person other than the named licensee, except that if the manager of a location which is owned by a corporation is removed by that corporation from the position of manager and a new manager is named for that location, then in that event, the new manager's name must be provided to the county and all other pertinent information requested by the county must be provided, and a fifty dollar ($50.00) transfer fee must be paid. This provision does not apply to the sale of a business. Such licenses shall expire upon and be of no validity after December 31 next after their issuance except in the event of renewals. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § IX, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 86-05, 3-18-86) 
Sec. 3-14-55. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and state law, or any future ordinances pertaining thereto, and subject to revocation or suspension at any time. In case of revocation, the licensee shall not be entitled to a return of the unearned license fee. 
(b)  Any person, licensee or employee of a licensed business, found to be in violation of this section shall result in the suspension of the license for a period of not less than five (5) days for the first occurrence (thirty (30) days for a willful violation); upon a second occurrence, within twelve (12) months, suspension of not less than thirty (30) days; and upon a third occurrence within twenty-four (24) months, a suspension of not less than six (6) months or the remainder of the license period, whichever is greater. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the board of commissioners from suspending or revoking any license issued under this article whenever a person doing business under such license is found in violation of this article or is found guilty of violating any law involving moral turpitude, or when it shall be shown before the board of commissioners that the health, morals, interest and convenience of the public demand the suspension or revocation of such license. 
(c)  A suspension does not require notice or a hearing before the board of commissioners. Notice of a revocation hearing, however, shall be given, either personally or by leaving same at the licensed place of business at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice given in the name of the board of commissioners or the chairman, may include notice that the license is suspended pending a hearing, in which case the licensee shall immediately cease to operate his business until further order. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, §§ III, IV, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 89-04, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 97-01, § 25, 2-5-97) 
Sec. 3-14-56. - Appeals. 
(a)  All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking a license issued pursuant to this article or licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(b)  In case such application is denied by the business license supervisor, said denial shall be subject to initial appeal to the license review panel. There is hereby established a license review panel. 
(1)  The license review panel shall hear appeals from administrative decisions by the business license supervisor in regards to applications for alcoholic beverage licenses. An opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses shall be afforded to appellants at this meeting. 
(2)  The license review panel shall have no jurisdiction to hear any appeal or to reverse, modify, or set aside any decision made by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  The license review panel shall be composed of three (3) members appointed by the county manager based on their position within the county. Post 1 shall be a county employee of the public safety division. Post 2 shall be a county employee of the planning and zoning services division. Post 3 shall be a county employee that serves as a general administrator within county government. Said appointees shall serve at the discretion of the county manager for an indefinite term. 
The license review panel shall meet at such times as may be necessary. The license review panel shall select one (1) of its members as chair. Minutes shall be taken of the meetings of the license review panel and said minutes shall be kept in the business license office. 
(c)  The decision of the license review panel to affirm, reverse, or modify, a decision of the business license supervisor shall be final unless appealed to the board of commissioners within fifteen (15) business days of the date of decision by the license review board. An opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses shall be afforded to appellants at this meeting. The board of commissioners shall, within fifteen (15) business days from the conclusion of the hearing, render a decision to affirm or deny the decision of the business license supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 5, 7-9-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 3-3-2(b). 
Sec. 3-14-57. - Renewals. 
(a)  All retail alcoholic beverage licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and are subject to renewals as provided for in this section, and subject to compliance with all applicable ordinances and state laws. Each applicant for renewal shall make an application on the form provided by the business license office by November 1 of each year. Each applicant shall provide the information required by the Code of Ordinances and shall authorize the inspection department to obtain NCIC/GCIC reports from the Henry County Sheriff's Department or other law enforcement agencies on applicants or applicants' employees. Fingerprinting shall not be required for renewal applications unless there is a new manager of a corporation. 
(b)  Before any retail alcoholic beverage license can be considered for renewal, the manager of the occupational tax and alcoholic beverage licensing department shall compile information regarding the status of each business and maintain such information as may be relevant. 
(c)  This information shall include violations, if any, of the beer and wine ordinance in the past twelve (12) months, and whether the retail license complies with the provisions of this article or state law governing the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 85-22, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 86-04, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 97-01, §§ 26—28, 2-5-97; Ord. No. 08-01, §§ 19, 20, 1-14-08) 
Chapter 3-15 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of general assembly to authorize county to regulate businesses, § 1-4-4; business regulations authorized, § 2-4-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-15-1. - Mass gatherings. 
(a)  The term "special event" as used in this section shall be deemed to include automobile racing, other types of racing, exhibitions, plays, music concerts, and similar events, conducted for profit, at which there is a special need for security and crowd control. The term does not include any event at a place of business with a seating capacity of less than ten thousand (10,000) persons, or an event for which less than ten thousand (10,000) persons are to be admitted. 
(b)  The license fee for holding a special event shall be as established by the board of commissioners. No license for a special event shall be issued without approval of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  A license for holding a special event shall not be issued until the following conditions precedent shall have been satisfied, in addition to the payment of the required fee: 
(1)  The promoter or other person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity holding of producing the special event shall provide its own security and security personnel. Such security shall be adequate to deal with the number of persons attending the event for its duration, by protecting the property and the safety of those present and the property and the safety of those living nearby. Such security shall be approved, in writing, by the county police chief or his designee before the license may be issued. 
(2)  The promoter or other person holding or producing the event shall provide emergency medical services to said event. Such services shall be adequate to provide emergency medical attention to a group the size of that attending the special event for the duration of the event. Said emergency medical services shall be approved, in writing, by the director of the county emergency medical service before a license may be issued. 
(3)  The promoter or other person holding or producing the special event shall provide water, toilet and sewer facilities adequate to service the needs of the number of persons attending the event for its duration, and to protect the environment. Such facilities shall be approved by the county health department prior to the issuance of the license. 
(4)  The promoter or other person holding or producing the special event shall take measures to insure that no fire hazard exists at the site or the event. Written approval shall be secured from the chief of the county fire department prior to the issuance of the license, certifying that the conduct of the event poses no undue fire hazard, considering the size and nature of the facilities and the number of persons attending the event. 
(5)  The promoter or other person holding or producing the special event shall provide comprehensive damage and liability insurance in a form satisfactory to the county attorney, which insurance shall cover any and all acts of omission and commission by the security personnel, emergency medical service personnel and/or other personnel employed by the entity holding, promoting or producing the event, and which shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and its agents for any loss of any nature with regard to the furnishing of additional security, medical services, or other support to said event. Said insurance shall be in an amount equal to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of coverage for every ten thousand (10,000) persons attending the event. 
(Ord. of 6-17-80, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 3-15-2. - Ultralight aircraft. 
(a)  Definition. An ultralight aircraft is a vehicle that: 
(1)  Is used or intended to be used for manned operation in the air by a single occupant; 
(2)  Is used or intended to be used for recreation or sport purposes only; 
(3)  Does not have any U.S. or foreign airworthiness certificate; and, 
(4)  If unpowered, weighs less than one hundred fifty-five (155) pounds; or 
(5)  If powered: 
a.  Weighs less than two hundred fifty-four (254) pounds empty weight, excluding floats and safety devices which are intended for deployment in a potentially catastrophic situation; 
b.  Has a fuel capacity not exceeding five (5) U.S. gallons; 
c.  Is not capable of more than fifty-five (55) knots calibrated airspeed at full power in level flight; and 
d.  Has a power-off stall speed which does not exceed twenty-four (24) knots calibrated airspeed. 
(b)  Federal regulations adopted. "Part 103—Ultralight Vehicles" of the Special Federal Aviation Regulations is adopted and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. All amendments to "Part 103" shall become a part of this section and be applicable. 
(c)  Penalties for violation. Anyone who operates an ultralight aircraft, or anyone who owns an ultralight aircraft and allows another to operate the ultralight aircraft within Henry County, Georgia, in violation of any of the foregoing provisions or in violation of any other ordinances, including public nuisance ordinances, shall be punished in magistrate court by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or sixty (60) days in jail for each separate violation. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. No. 87-21, 10-20-87) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 87-21, enacted Oct. 20, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions, of such ordinance as § 3-15-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE II. - TEEN EVENTS 

Sec. 3-15-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate number of security personnel means a number determined by Henry County staff based on the occupancy load as approved by Henry County Fire Department. 
Alcoholic beverages mean and include, but are not limited to, malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. The terms "malt beverages", "wine", and "distilled spirits" shall have the same meaning as defined in section 3-14-16. 
Applicant means the person who files an application to operate a teen club, teen dancehall or youth activity center and in whose name the license is issued. 
Curfew ordinance means the law codified in section 3-4-218 of the Henry County Code of Ordinances. 
Dance means any event organized for the primary and predominant, but not necessarily exclusive, purpose of presenting live or recorded music for dancing or entertainment, whether indoors or outdoors. 
Employee means any employee, agent, or security personnel of the teen club, teen dancehall or youth activity center. 
Licensee means any person holding a teen club, teen dancehall or youth activity center license. 
Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
Owner , as used in this section, (except when specific reference is made to the owner of the physical location or premises) shall include the owner, operator, manager or other person having supervision over a teen dancehall as defined herein. 
Person means any individual, receiver, assignee, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, company, joint stock company, association, society, or any group or individuals, acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. 
Premises, in addition to the building and any curtilage normally considered as appurtenant thereto, means all public and private parking areas adjacent to the building on the same parcel, regardless of size. 
Private party , as used in this section, means any event that is not readily accessible to the public and which is not held and conducted for a profit, either directly or indirectly, and which requires no monetary payment or contribution from any of the persons admitted. 
Promoter means a person or the legal entity who assumes the financial responsibilities of a teen club, teen dancehall or youth activity center, including, but not limited to, contracting with the principals, renting the site and collecting the gate revenues. 
Security personnel means any individual hired or otherwise retained by a teen club, teen dancehall or youth activity center to provide security services at the aforementioned facilities. 
Teen club means any building, part of a building, or other enclosed place, including, but not limited to, a patio, deck or an outside enclosed area, within unincorporated Henry County where a teen dance, as herein is defined, is held or dancing involving individuals under the age of eighteen (18) years old is permitted, but shall not include: (1) An accredited public or private school; (2) Property owned or controlled by the federal, state or local government; or (3) A facility operated by an organization which has been recognized as exempt from federal income taxation as a religious organization under subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Furthermore, any business establishment catering exclusively or primarily to individuals between the age of fourteen (14) and eighteen (18) years of age and which is operated primarily as a place for such individuals to congregate for social, as opposed to commercial, activity for an admission fee. Teen club shall not include any business establishment which is operated primarily as a place for the exchange of merchandise for consideration. 
Teen club license means a license issued by the county business license department on an annual basis in accordance with the requirements of this section, which shall be valid only for the calendar year issued. and shall not be transferable as to person or place. 
Teen club premises means the teen club and the private property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the teen club's licensee that surrounds the teen club, including, but not limited to, the teen club's parking lot. 
Teen dance or event means any dance for teenagers between the ages of fourteen (14) and eighteen (18) years of age that is readily accessible to the public and which: 
(1)  Is held and conducted either directly or indirectly for a profit; or 
(2)  Requires a monetary payment or contribution from any of the persons admitted. 
Teen dancehall means any place where a "teen dance" is conducted, operated or maintained and includes, but is not limited to, all parking areas, hallways, bathrooms and all adjoining areas on the premises accessible to the public during the dance and which: 
(1)  Is held and conducted either directly or indirectly for a profit; or 
(2)  Requires a monetary payment or contribution from any of the persons admitted. 
Teens mean those persons between the ages of fourteen (14) and eighteen (18) years of age. 
Teen event facility means any dance or event for the purpose of gathering twenty-five (25) or more teenagers between the ages of fourteen (14) and eighteen (18) years of age in a singular location that is readily accessible to the public. This can include teen clubs, teen dancehalls and youth activity centers. 
Youth activity center means any place where a "teen event" is conducted, operated or maintained and/or coin-operated amusement machines are located or serves as a general public gathering facility for teens and includes, but is not limited, to all parking areas, hallways, bathrooms and all adjoining areas on the premises accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-4. - Teen club, teen dancehall and youth activity center license required. 
(a)  Every person keeping, operating or maintaining a teen club, teen dancehall, and/or youth activity center shall be required to obtain a license from the Henry County Occupational Tax Division in the manner specified in this article, based upon adequate assurance that the operating provision contained in this article can be met. 
(b)  No licensee or licensee's spouse shall have been convicted nor have entered a plea of nolo contendere within the ten years immediately preceding the date of application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. If the violation is for a misdemeanor or municipal ordinance, the license review board may, after investigation, recommend waiver of that disqualification. In those instances involving business or non-profit entities, this prohibition shall also apply to the business or non-profit entity's president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer and all stockholders owning twenty (20) percent or more of the corporation's stock. This prohibition applies in the same manner to any spouse thereof. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all licensees to file with the Henry County Occupational Tax Division the names of all employees and any spouses with their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees and any spouses, with the same required information for new employees and any spouses, must be filed with the Henry County Occupational Tax Division within three (3) days from the date of any such change. All persons listed on the application and on the list of persons submitted to the Henry County Occupational Tax Division as may be amended from time to time shall be subject to a criminal background check as may be deemed necessary from time to time by the Henry County Occupational Tax Division. A thirty-five-dollar criminal history/background check investigation fee shall be paid by all licensees for each employee, chaperone and security personnel as may be amended by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-5. - Application for teen events. 
An applicant for a teen events license shall submit an application to the Henry County Occupational Tax Division on a form provided by the county along with the annual nonrefundable license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per application as may be amended by the board of commissioners from time to time. Each location of a teen event must comply with all county laws including, but not limited to, building, zoning, noise and sound production and fire codes. The applicant shall provide proof of compliance with these codes. Each application must be evaluated by the departments of the county determined by the Henry County Occupational Tax Division, including, but not limited to, the police department and the fire department, and shall obtain a recommendation for approval from each before the application can be considered for approval. Applications that are recommended for approval by the departments of the county shall be reviewed by the license review board as provided in section 3-15-6. 
Each application shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof in a manner determined by the Henry County Occupational Tax Division and shall state the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the applicant and any spouse; 
(2)  If the applicant is a business or nonprofit entity, the name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the partner(s) or officers and any spouse thereof; 
(3)  If the applicant is an unincorporated association, corporation or partnership, the name of the unincorporated association, corporation or partnership, and the names and addresses of the limited partners, partners, officers and directors thereof and any spouse thereof; 
(4)  The teen events operator's home and business address and those of any spouse thereof; 
(5)  The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the operator(s), manager(s), and employee(s) of the teen events, as well as any other person whose duties may require that such person have contact with the public during operating hours and any spouse thereof; 
(6)  The name, addresses, and phone number of the owner(s) of the premises where the teen events is located and any spouse thereof; 
(7)  The name of the security personnel to be employed to provide security for the teen events and any spouse thereof; 
(8)  Detailed floor plan and site plan of the teen club, teen dancehall, or youth activity center location showing the following: 
a.  Largest assembly area including fixed seating, dance floor, and stage (if applicable); 
b.  Waiting area for persons seeking admission; 
c.  All restrooms, coat rooms, game rooms, refreshment areas, and all other spaces accessible by patrons, with plans to secure those areas; 
d.  All interior and exterior doors and windows; 
e.  Each parking space and a notation as to the number and dimensions of standard spaces, handicap spaces, and loading spaces; 
f.  Each drop-off and pick-up area and the relation thereof with parking areas, each building, and the property lines of the parcel; 
g.  The accurate and up-to-date zoning of the subject parcel and each adjoining parcel; 
h.  The distance between the property line of the subject parcel and the following (if five hundred (500) feet or less): 
•  Single- or multiple-family residential zoning district; 
•  Preexisting establishment holding a Class A or B alcoholic liquor license; 
•  Preexisting place of worship; 
•  Another teen club, teen dancehall, and/or youth activity center (whether holding an active license or not); and 
•  Public or private school. 
(9)  A binder showing the availability of the insurance required by section 3-15-20; 
(10)  The Henry County Occupational Tax Division shall conduct a criminal history background examination on any person listed on the application; 
(11)  The location(s) of the teen events(s); 
(12)  The planned date(s) of each of the teen event(s); 
(13)  Such other information reasonably related to the operation of the teen events as may be required by the county; 
(14)  A statement of any and all measures to be used to insure that adequate traffic control and crowd protection, within the youth activity center, will be maintained and the measure to be taken to estimate crowd numbers to assure consistent compliance with the fire code; 
(15)  The applicant must provide proof that the premises is in compliance with all county laws including, but not limited to, building, zoning, sound production and fire codes; 
(16)  A statement that the applicant will, in the conduct and operation of the teen events, comply with all county laws; 
(17)  A statement from the owner or lessor of each planned location that the owner or lessor will appear before the board of commissioners if specifically requested by the county clerk in a proceeding where a fine, suspension or revocation is being considered with respect to the applicant. Once requested in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of a scheduled hearing by the county clerk, any failure by the owner or lessor to appear before the board of commissioners may be considered a violation of this chapter in any subsequent applications or renewals for any license or permit issued by the county; 
(18)  The application shall be accompanied with a signed statement by three (3) citizens of the county, certifying to the character of the applicant; and 
(19)  Each time the dates of any teen event changes, as set forth in the applicant's original application, the applicant shall be required, on a form to be provided by the planning and zoning department, to notify and obtain written approval from the planning and zoning department of the new location and/or dates of the event(s) at least thirty (30) days prior to the event. The applicant shall be required to pay an administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) each time they file an updated form requesting a change of location, as may be amended by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-6. - Appearance before the license review board. 
All applications for a new or renewal license shall be scheduled to be reviewed by the license review board within thirty (30) days of a recommendation for approval by the departments of the county determined by the Henry County Occupational Tax Division, including, but not limited to, the police department and the fire department. 
(a)  The license review board may consider, in addition to all other lawful grounds, whether the applicant or spouse: 
(1)  Owned or managed an establishment where a crime involving prostitution, lewd conduct, or assault on a juvenile occurred in or upon the dancehall premises; 
(2)  Owned or managed an establishment where any act of or solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation was committed; 
(3)  Was convicted for the possession of any weapon, or the possession or consumption of alcohol and/or marijuana, cocaine, or any other controlled substance; 
(4)  Or any employee, agent, promoter, partner, director, officer or manager thereof violated any of the provisions of this chapter or committed any act which is a ground for denial of a license issued pursuant to this chapter; or 
(5)  Provides information on the planned sites of the teen events where the building, structure, equipment or location of the business does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building, or fire and safety laws of the State of Georgia and the county, or the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  All grounds for consideration by the license review board contained in this section shall independently or in conjunction with other laws or ordinances, be grounds to deny or revoke a new or renewal license. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the license review board and the departments of the county determined by the Henry County Occupational Tax Division, including, but not limited to, the police department and the fire department. Failure to furnish this data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of the request shall be grounds for denial of the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person listed on the application requested by the license review board and the departments of the county determined by the Henry County Occupational Tax Division, including, but not limited to, the police department and the fire department to respond to questions reasonably related to the license and/or the operation of the business. The failure to produce the person within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of the application. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-7. - Grounds for denial or nonrenewal of license. 
In addition to all other grounds for denial stated in this article, no original, renewal, or amendment to any application for any license under this article shall be granted if the application or the evidence produced during a hearing before the license review board shows: 
(1)  The applicant or spouse is of bad moral character, has a bad reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which an application is made. 
(2)  The applicant or spouse has had any license issued under the police powers of any local government previously suspended or revoked; provided, however, the license review board may waive this subsection if two (2) years have passed since any prior revocation or suspension of any license held by the applicant. 
(3)  The applicant or spouse, as a previous holder of any dancehall license or alcoholic beverage license, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to that business within a five-year period immediately preceding the date the application is heard by the license review board. 
(4)  The police department was unable to verify any statement of information required to be disclosed on forms furnished by the police chief or to be able to adequately conduct a full investigation of any person listed on the application or list of persons provided to the Henry County Occupational Tax Division as may be amended from time to time or a place of business for any reason beyond the police chief's control. Once a license has been granted, information revealed that is contrary to representations made by the applicant on the application or any subsequent amendment thereto, shall be cause for denial or revocation of a license. 
(5)  The applicant provided an application that contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information. If any license has previously been granted, these circumstances shall constitute cause for revocation. 
(6)  The location does not meet the minimum requirements of this article or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation. The failure to provide the means to evaluate the merits of the location as required in this article is also grounds for denial or non-renewal of a license. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-8. - Revocation. 
Any teen events license granted shall be subject to revocation for due cause. Whenever in the opinion of the Henry County Occupational Tax Division there is cause to revoke the license, a written notice of intent to revoke shall be furnished to the holder thereof five (5) days before a regular or called meeting of the license review board, at which time the holder of the license may make such showing that the licensee may deem proper. After a hearing, the board shall report its recommendations to the tax commissioner. The board can recommend a fine, suspension, or revocation of the license. The tax commissioner, upon receiving the recommendation of the Henry County Occupational Tax Division, may, within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, affirm or revise the recommendation made by the license review board. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the tax commissioner determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the tax commissioner may remand the matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the tax commissioner or the tax commissioner's designee fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the tax commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-9. - Due cause. 
Due cause is defined as: 
(1)  As used in this section, the term "due cause," for the denial of an application for a teen dancehall license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership or for revocation, suspension or refusal to renew a teen dancehall license includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  The conviction of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner. 
b.  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
c.  The failure to furnish any and all data, information and records related to the operation of licensed establishments as required in this article, or when such has been requested by the departments of the county determined by the Henry County Occupational Tax Division including, but not limited to, the police department and the fire department, or the license review board. 
d.  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in this article. 
e.  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including, but not limited to, parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
f.  The violation of any law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of or which are reasonably related to the operation of teen clubs, teen dancehall, and youth activity centers, including, but not limited to, the Unified Land Development Code. Location approvals shall only be given for properties that have current inspections, approvals and tax status for the use as a teen club, teen dancehall, or youth activity center. 
g.  The failure of the licensee, whose licensed premises directly abuts a public street to maintain all property outside the lot and property line and inside the curb line upon the public street, including any sidewalk. Said duty to maintain the above-designated property must be accomplished within reasonable time after the close of business each day. "Maintain" as used in this subsection shall mean keeping the specified area free of bottles, cups, trash and other debris. "Within a reasonable time" as used in this subsection shall mean within four (4) hours of the close of business. 
h.  The violation by either the owner, the licensee, the management, an employee, an independent contractor, or anyone acting as an agent for or on behalf of any establishment licensed to sell alcohol of the county's noise ordinance if such violation is reasonably related to the operation of a teen events and the owner or licensee knew or should have known of the violation of the noise ordinance. This violation is also applicable to any spouse thereof. 
i.  No application for a new license or for a transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied and no license issued by the county or any license under this section shall be revoked, suspended or refused renewal except upon a finding of due cause and after a hearing and upon a five-day written notice to the licensee, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and setting forth the charge upon which the hearing shall be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-10. - Duty of operator or manager to enforce chapter. 
The applicant is considered, for purposes of this chapter as the owner, operator or manager of a youth activity center. The applicant shall assure that the sections of this chapter are carried out. If the applicant fails to do so, either intentionally or by inadvertence, the applicant shall be deemed guilty of an offense for each such violation. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-11. - Chaperones. 
Any person desiring to operate a teen event, whether or not an admission fee is charged, must have at least two (2) adults for the first fifty (50) persons at all times as chaperones when the event is in progress, and a minimum of one (1) chaperone for every additional fifty (50) persons present at the event. The chaperones must be over the age of twenty-one (21). Security or law enforcement personnel cannot be counted as chaperones. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. - 3-15-12. Operating hours. 
No teen events shall open for business earlier one (1) hour after the close of any public secondary school of the county board of education; or on days for which no school is scheduled, prior to 8:00 a.m.; or on Sundays, prior to 1:00 p.m. No teen events shall allow customers to remain upon their premises after 10:30 p.m. on any day which immediately precedes a day upon which the public schools of the county board of education are scheduled to be open. No teen club shall allow customers to remain on its premises later than 11:45 p.m. on either Friday, Saturday or Sunday nights. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-13. - No alcoholic beverages allowed. 
A.  No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises where the teen events are operated. 
B.  No person under the influence of illegal drugs or alcoholic beverages shall be admitted or allowed to remain on the premises of any teen events. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-30-12) 
Sec. - 3-15-14. Participants. 
Participants in attendance at the youth activity center shall be limited to teenagers between the ages of fourteen (14) and eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, § 4, 3-30-12) 
Sec. 3-15-15. - Exceptions. 
The requirements of this article shall not apply if: 
(a)  The teen dance is limited to fewer than fifty (50) teens. 
(b)  The teen dance is sponsored, produced, or conducted under the auspices of an educational institution or by a nonprofit educational facility defined as a public or private academic institution, operated for nonprofit and accredited by the State of Georgia that offers a program or series of programs of academic study. 
(c)  The teen dance is sponsored by a nonprofit tax-exempt organization, corporation or association recognized by the United States of America as exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(1) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 26 U.S.C. Section 501 as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(d)  The teen dance is sponsored by a charitable or fraternal organization and that organization receives the proceeds of the event. 
(e)  The teen dance is given by local merchants whose total proceeds are given to local charities. 
(f)  Dances conducted by or under the auspices of the county or the Henry County Board of Education or by any club or organization are specifically authorized by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-16. - Additional prohibitions. 
(a)  All owners, operators, managers and proprietors of a teen event and all persons holding a license for the operation of a teen event are placed on notice that the county enacted section 3-4-218, which sets forth a curfew for teens after the hour of twelve midnight (12:00 a.m.). No such owner, operator, manager, proprietor or license holder shall take any action which would cause or otherwise encourage a minor to be in violation of section 3-4-218. 
(b)  No child of school age shall be allowed on the premises of a teen event during school hours while school is in session. Any youth teen events found to be out of compliance with this subsection is subject to the provisions of section 3-15-26. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-17. - Dancing for hire. 
(a)  No person conducting, maintaining or carrying on a teen event or youth activity center operations shall permit any instructor to give instructions in dancing to persons in any private room, booth, alcove or enclosure. For the purpose of this section the terms "private room, booth, alcove or enclosure" shall include any area within the youth activity center which is not clearly visible at all times from the main floor located in such youth activity center. Dancing for hire shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to any place where dancing instruction by certified instructors is the principal activity of the business. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-18. - Age restrictions—identification requirements—penalty. 
(a)  No person conducting or operating a teen event or youth activity center shall permit, either by act or omission, any person under the age of fourteen (14) years to enter or remain on the premises without a parent or legal guardian present for the duration of the event. 
(b)  No person conducting or operating a teen event or youth activity center shall permit, either by act or omission, any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, who is not a chaperone, parent, legal guardian or a bona fide employee of the persons operating the youth activity center to enter or remain on the premises. 
(c)  The person operating teen events shall require each person seeking admission to provide identification showing his or her age and/or school identification badge 
(d)  Any person who, by affirmative misrepresentation of age, obtains admission to or permission to remain in any teen event or youth activity center in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Any person who permits a person to enter or remain in any teen event or teen event hall in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-19. - Limitation on teen event locations. 
The teen club, teen dancehall, or youth activity center location shall meet all requirements of the Henry County Unified Land Development Code except as provided in this article. Should provisions or requirements conflict, the more stringent code shall prevail. 
Except for teen clubs, teen dancehalls, and youth activity centers in existence prior to the effective date of this section, a teen club, teen dancehall, and youth activity center shall be designated as an event facility and shall be only located within the C-2 (general commercial) zoning district and shall not be located within: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of any zoning district that is zoned for single or multiple families residential; 
(2)  Five hundred (500) feet of any preexisting establishment holding an alcoholic liquor license issued in accordance with chapter of the Code; 
(3)  Five hundred (500) feet of any preexisting place of worship; 
(4)  Five hundred (500) feet of another teen events/facilities; 
(5)  Five hundred (500) feet of any accredited public or private school. 
For purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of the teen events to the nearest property line of a property described in subsections (1) through (5) above. 
Parking shall be based upon the use of the location as an event facility allowing mass assembly. Should the largest assembly area fail to include fixed seating, required parking shall be calculated based upon the standard of one (1) parking space per fifty (50) square feet of the largest assembly area. All required parking shall be located on the same parcel as the teen club, teen dancehall, or youth activity center location as determined by the Henry County Tax Assessor's Office. There shall be designated drop-off and pick-up areas separated from parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-20. - Insurance requirements. 
As a condition of issuance and continued validity of a teen events license, the licensee shall maintain a broad form of comprehensive public liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company qualified to do business in Georgia and rated A or better by Best's Insurance Rating System, or its equivalent, providing coverage of all claims for property damage and personal injury arising in connection with the operation of the teen events with minimum limits of two-hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per fifty (50) persons for any single claim and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any one (1) occurrence, and such policy shall name Henry County as an additional insured. The policy shall remain in full force and effect so long as any teen club, teen dancehall and youth activity center activities are conducted by the licensee and the policy shall provide that the county be given at least fifteen (15) days' written notice prior to its cancellation. If the notice of cancellation is given and another certificate of insurance demonstrating the issuance of a policy meeting all terms and conditions hereof is not furnished prior to the end of the fifteen-day period, the license shall be revoked. At the request of the Henry County Occupational Tax Division, the licensee shall provide certification of the insurance coverage required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. - 3-15-21. Enclosed areas prohibited. 
The assembly area (i.e., dance floor) must be one (1) open room to ensure all patrons are visible to the security personnel at all times. There may be no other rooms or enclosed areas accessible to patrons except those rooms required by safety and health codes to be separated from the assembly area, namely toilet facilities, kitchen or concession area and ticket sales or other office space. All other rooms shall be kept locked and inaccessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-22. - Security personnel. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to ensure that an adequate number of qualified security personnel are employed and are on the premises of the teen dancehall during and following each teen dance as is necessary to maintain order and ensure compliance with the laws of the State of Georgia and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Preferably an "adequate number of security personnel" shall include persons trained as law enforcement personnel, which may include off-duty Henry County police officers, Henry County Sheriff's Officer or sworn police officers of other jurisdictions. Said officers shall provide proof of training. 
(c)  At no time shall fewer than twenty-five (25) percent of the security personnel in attendance at teen events have training as law enforcement personnel. Those security personnel not having law enforcement training must have received formal training in crowd control. 
(d)  At all times, there must be one (1) police officer or security officer for each established entrance or exit on the premises. 
(e)  It shall be the further obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to employ during and following each teen events, an adequate number of security personnel, as determined by Henry County Officials to patrol the sidewalks and public areas, including, but not limited to, adjacent parking lots within four hundred (400) feet used by the patrons and any areas abutting the teen dancehall. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-23. - Police supervision. 
The presence of any policeman at any teen dancehall shall not relieve the proprietor thereof, or any of his employees, from the responsibility of the provisions of this chapter or for violations of any law or ordinance or lawful rule of the chief of police or sheriff or from responsibility for maintaining decency and order in said public dancehall. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-24. - Right of entry for purpose of inspection. 
Teen clubs, teen dancehalls and youth activity centers shall at all times be open to the public authorities for entrance and inspection. All peace officers of the county shall have free access to teen clubs, teen dancehalls and/or youth activity centers when a dance or party is being conducted for the purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-25. - Readmission fee. 
No person conducting or operating a teen events shall permit any person, other than an employee, to leave the dance or dancehall and return unless that person pays a readmission fee. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-26. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a teen club, teen dancehall and youth activity center license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such license shall be valid only for the calendar year issued, unless the county otherwise specifies on the license. This fee may be amended by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-27. - Operating without a license; penalty. 
Any person who shall conduct or operate a teen dance, dancehall or youth activity center without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-28. - Violation of a county ordinance. 
Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this article, a person may be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and costs, or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than sixty (60) days. Such a convicted person shall be subject to any one (1) or more of the punishments to the fullest extent provided by applicable law. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-15-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT GAME ROOMS 

Sec. 3-15-30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location where one (1) or more bona fide games or devices designed for amusement purposes are located that permit reward redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Location means a business within the unincorporated areas of Henry County that is subject to the provisions of the ordinances of Henry County relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 3-15-31. - Issuance of license. 
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the unincorporated areas of Henry County shall be made to the Henry County Business License department upon a form to be supplied by the business license office for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant, and date of the application. 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that address or place. 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license. 
(4)  A criminal history check of the owner(s) and all employees shall be required. 
Any persons previously convicted of a felony shall be prohibited from owning and/or working in an amusement game room establishment. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the county official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of this article. The county shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with the County Code. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 3-15-32. - Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the unincorporated areas of Henry County shall offer to the public more than six (6) bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d), at the same location. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-15(b)(2), this limitation shall not apply to indoor amusement or recreational commercial establishments, as defined in "A Glossary of Zoning, Development and Planning Terms," edited by Michael Davidson and Fay Dolnick (latest edition). 
The hours of operation for all amusement game rooms shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Every amusement game room shall remain open to the public and will not have any restricted or limited access. 
Machines must be located out in the open, clearly visible from the front entrance with no visual impediments or barriers blocking their view from the front door. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 3-15-33. - Gross receipts from amusement machines and from business. 
Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by county officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. Income from the amusement game or games shall not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the fifty (50) percent of income requirement. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 3-15-34. - Notice requirement. 
Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following similar words: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY OR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the County conspicuously and permanently. 
The owner or operator of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and by this article, and of the penalties for violation O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 3-15-35. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses and annual permits for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the unincorporated areas of Henry County only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. Upon notification from either police department personnel, or code enforcement officials, the county official in the business license department in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the State Commissioner of Revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2 or § 48-17-9. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 3-15-36. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
In addition to penalties set out in O.C.G.A., provisions for failure to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a)(1) through (i), the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, may be subject to the following penalties: 
A.  Administrative penalties. 
(1)  First offense: Suspension for not more than six (6) months of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred. 
(2)  Second offense: Suspension for not more than twelve (12) months of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred. 
(3)  Third offense: Suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game in the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the county for not more than six (6) months. 
B.  Criminal sanctions. Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction by the magistrate court of Henry County, are as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. 
(3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. 
The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the magistrate court of the county. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the county may be imposed by the board of commissioners. 
Offering one (1) or more bona fide coin-operated amusement games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the magistrate court of Henry County, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each game in violation, imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 3-15-37. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated amusement machines. 
The magistrate court of the county is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning or possessing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning or possessing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offences: Fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Res. No. 12-20, 12-4-12) 
Chapter 3-16 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-05, adopted Sept. 3, 1991, repealed Ch. 3-16, Art. I, §§ 3-16-1—3-16-10 in its entirety and enacting in lieu thereof a new Ch. 3-16 Art. I, to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3-16, Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 83-11, §§ 1—9, 12, adopted March 15, 1983. 
Cross reference— Abandoned property, § 3-4-220; animal nuisances prohibited, § 3-4-7; standard code for elimination or repair of unsafe buildings, § 3-9-61 et seq.; solid waste, § 3-5-101 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, § 3-5-201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-16-1. - Nuisance defined. 
(a)  The word nuisance shall mean that which annoys or disturbs one in possession of his property, rendering the ordinary use or occupation thereof uncomfortable; that which endangers life or health, gives offense to the senses or obstructs reasonable and comfortable use of property; the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use by a person of his own property (personal or real), or from that individual's own improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct which results in an obstruction or injury to the right of another or the public. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, a nuisance shall include, but not be limited to, the following descriptive terms: 
(1)  Obnoxious vegetation which is defined to include: 
a.  Dead plant material piled such that it emits objectionable and foul odors or presents a haven for rodents; 
b.  Trees, shrubs or other plant materials which, if they should fall, would present a safety hazard to adjacent public or private property; 
c.  Any vegetation which presents a sight distance safety hazard to motorists using either public or private streets or driveways; 
d.  Any vegetation which, because of its characteristics of growth, spreads onto adjacent property and cannot be controlled; and 
e.  Any grass or weeds on vacant lots in platted subdivisions or on parcels less than one (1) acre which lie adjacent to or between other one-acre or less parcels on which homes are built, whenever more than fifty (50) percent of the lot or parcel contains vegetation which exceeds twelve (12) inches in height. 
(2)  Standing or stagnant water; 
(3)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, household garbage, refuse, junk, materials, metal, lumber or other items; 
(4)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes, house flies or any other vermin or insects; 
(5)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located; 
(6)  All disagreeable or offensive odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches; 
(7)  The carcasses of animals or fowl; 
(8)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, storm water, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances; 
(9)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained; and 
(10)  Dense smoke, offensive fumes, gas, soot or cinders. 
(Ord. No. 91-05, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 00-07, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 10-17-2000) 
Sec. 3-16-2. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, corporation, association, partnership or other entity to cause, permit, maintain, allow, assist or aide in creation, maintenance or continuance of a nuisance as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 91-05, 9-3-91) 
Sec. 3-16-3. - Abatement by the county. 
Henry County may, at its sole discretion, abate, cure or correct the nuisance. The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the county shall become a lien against the property and the same shall be filed of record with the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 91-05, 9-3-91) 
Sec. 3-16-4. - Enforcement. 
The code enforcement department of the county is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-05, 9-3-91) 
Sec. 3-16-5. - Continuation of nuisance constitutes additional offenses. 
Each day that the nuisance continues shall constitute a new and separate offense and the judge of the magistrate court may impose such sentence as the circumstances may require. 
(Ord. No. 91-05, 9-3-91) 
Sec. 3-16-6. - Penalties. 
Any person who pleads guilty, nolo contendere or is convicted of violating the provisions of this article, shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. 15-10-60 or such other general law as may be in the future enacted to provide for punishment and penalties that may be imposed by the magistrate courts of the state. In addition to the fine and/or jail sentence, the judge may impose community service and require that the defendant abate or cause to be cured the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 91-05, 9-3-91) 
Secs. 3-16-7—3-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of board of commissioners to provide for removal of junked vehicles, Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 30-60-4. 

Sec. 3-16-21. - Definition. 
As used in this article the term "junked motor vehicle" shall mean any contrivance, or parts thereof, propelled by power and used for transportation of persons or property on public streets and highways, the condition of which is one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Wrecked. 
(2)  Dismantled. 
(3)  Partially dismantled. 
(4)  Inoperative. 
(5)  Discarded. 
(Ord. No. 4-73, § 1, 6-5-73) 
Sec. 3-16-22. - Public nuisance declared; prohibited. 
(a)  The presence of any junked motor vehicle on public property or any private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the county, shall be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property of another or to suffer, permit or allow junked motor vehicles to be parked, let or maintained in his own real property. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  A motor vehicle in an enclosed building; or 
(2)  A motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  A motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinance of the county; 
provided, however that the removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises prior to the expiration of the ten-day notice shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this article and no further action shall be taken against the owner of the junked motor vehicle or the owner or the occupants of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 4-73, §§ 2, 5, 6-5-73) 
Sec. 3-16-23. - Enforcement officers. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the sheriff, director of public works, or other appropriate officials. Members of their departments designated by them are hereby authorized to enter upon private or public property to examine a junked motor vehicle, or obtain information as to the identity of a junked motor vehicle, or to remove or cause the removal of a junked motor vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this ordinance. When the county has contract with any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a junked motor vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 4-73, § 3, 6-5-73) 
Sec. 3-16-24. - Notice to remove. 
When the director of public works, chief of police, or any authorized agent shall deem such public nuisance to exist, he shall issue a notice to the parties hereinafter stated and such notice shall: 
(a)  Be in writing; 
(b)  Specify the public nuisance and its location; 
(c)  Request the public nuisance to be abated within ten (10) days from the notice. 
In the event after a diligent search has been made that the chief of police or director of public works, or any authorized agent, shall be unable to determine the owner of said junked motor vehicle, he may serve said notice by attaching it to the junked motor vehicle and this shall constitute service upon the owner of said junked motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4-73, § 4, 6-5-73) 
Secs. 3-16-25—3-16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER AND GARBAGE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Rubbish fires, § 3-4-113; garbage and trash generally, § 3-5-101 et seq.; county landfill, § 3-7-61. 

Sec. 3-16-41. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste materials, tin cans, household refuse, discarded items, garbage, trash, debris, junk, used lumber, used building materials, dead animals, metal, abandoned autos or machinery. 
This is not to include litter placed in proper containers for the purpose of pickup by private contract garbage haulers. This is not to include sand or gravel placed on private property by the owner of such property or with the express consent of the owner of such property as long as a nuisance is not created. 
Public or private property; areas of enforcement means the right-of-way of any public road, any property owned or operated by Henry County; any public playground, body of water or watercourse, recreation area, residential or farm property; or any other property not designated or approved by state or county authority as a landfill. 
(Ord. No. 85-03, § 1, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 3-16-42. - Dumping, depositing, etc., litter on public or private property. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property regardless of quantity, unless it occurs in an approved landfill area. 
(b)  Vehicles used for transport: 
(1)  Closed containers; covering. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to transport any trash, refuse, or solid waste upon the public thoroughfares of Henry County if same is likely to be deposited from the vehicle onto the public rights-of-way, unless same is secured by closed containers, or other device in any fashion as to effectively prevent such deposit on the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Liability. The duties and responsibilities herein imposed shall be strictly applicable, jointly and severally, to the owner of a motor vehicle, the operator thereof and the person, firm, company, or corporation from whose home or business establishment the garbage, trash, refuse, solid waste or similar cargo originated. 
(Ord. No. 85-03, § 2, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 86-12, 7-1-86) 
Sec. 3-16-43. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator, chief building inspector, or their authorized designees. 
(Ord. No. 85-03, § 3, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 3-16-44. - Penalties—Generally. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the Magistrate Court of Henry County, Georgia, or upon plea of guilty or nolo contendere, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or up to sixty (60) days in the Henry County Detention Facility. In addition to the fine and jail sentence, the judge may impose mandatory community service whenever any litter is found to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which contain the name of a person in such a manner as to indicate that the article or articles belong to such a person. The judge may direct that person to pick up or remove from any public street or highway, or public right-of-way, not to exceed one (1) mile, any litter he or she has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of sentence and, in addition, with the permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of any such private property upon which it can be established that he or she is depositing litter, the judge may require such person or persons to pick up and remove all litter from the property whether placed by such person or someone else prior to the date of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 85-03, § 4, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 87-02, 4-21-87) 
Sec. 3-16-45. - Same—Continuation of offense. 
Each day the offense continues shall constitute a separate offense and the judge may impose the maximum penalty for each offense or may impose the maximum penalty for each day the offense continues after notification to abate said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 85-03, § 5, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 3-16-46. - Sanitation fee for collection and removal of trash and/or articles of personal property from the right-of-way and/or public property. 
(a)  Any owner(s) of real property who causes trash and/or abandoned articles of personal property to be deposited in the right-of-way and/or on public property which results in Henry County being required to remove such trash and/or personal property shall be charged the following sanitation fees: 
(1)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the removal of the first item of trash and/or abandoned article of personal property; and 
(2)  An additional fifty dollars ($50.00) for each pick-up truck load of such trash and/or abandoned articles of personal property removed after the first pick-up truck load. 
(b)  The owner(s) of the property which fronts on the right-of-way or which fronts on the public property involved shall be responsible for the payment of all such fees. Payment shall be due within thirty (30) days of the removal of the trash and/or abandoned articles of personal property. 
(c)  Should any sanitation fee imposed by this section not be paid within the thirty (30) day time period set forth in subparagraph (b) above, the person, firm, or corporation liable for the fee shall be subject to and shall pay interest charges of one (1) percent per month for each month or portion thereof in which the same remain unpaid. 
(d)  In addition to any other remedies provided by law for the collection of the sanitation fee set forth in this section, the officer charged with the collection of the fee shall be authorized to issue executions against the delinquent property owner(s) for the amount of the fees due, plus accrued interest. Such executions shall constitute a lawful lien against the real property of the property owner(s). 
(e)  At any time within three (3) years after any sanitation fee imposed under this section becomes overdue and/or delinquent, the Board of Commissioners of Henry County may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of Henry County against the person, firm, or corporation liable for the fee to collect the amount delinquent, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(f)  In addition to the remedies for the collection of the sanitation fee imposed herein, a civil penalty may be imposed of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any failure to pay the sanitation fee established by this section. This civil penalty may be imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction over the enforcement of the ordinances of Henry County, Georgia. Such civil penalty may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 1, 7-6-99) 
Secs. 3-16-47—3-16-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAILBOX CONSTRUCTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-17, adopted November 6, 2012, replaced art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-05, adopted March 17, 1998. 

Sec. 3-16-50. - Title and effective date. 
This article shall be known as the Henry County Mailbox Ordinance. This ordinance shall be effective November 6, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 12-17, 11-6-12) 
Sec. 3-16-51. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
(1)  Mailbox shall mean any free-standing or detached structure, container, or receptacle for the delivery of United States Postal Service mail. 
(2)  Masonry shall mean brick, stone, concrete, and all other substances or materials having like properties of weight or immovability. 
(3)  Nonconforming mailbox shall mean any mailbox which was constructed in accordance with County Code at the time of construction, prior to November 6, 2012, however, no longer meets the requirements of the current County Code. 
(4)  Illegal mailboxes shall mean any mailbox built in violation of County Code at the time of construction, after the enactment of the ordinance dated November 6, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 12-17, 11-6-12; Ord. No. 13-12, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 3-16-52. - Exemptions. 
(1)  Section 3-16-54 shall not apply to mailboxes located on Henry County roadways with a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less. 
(2)  Section 3-16-54 shall not apply to existing nonconforming mailboxes, as defined in section 3-16-51. 
(Ord. No. 12-17, 11-6-12) 
Sec. 3-16-53. - Location. 
Mailboxes shall be located so as to comply with the rules and regulations of the United States Postmaster General. On roadways without a curb, mailboxes shall be set back eight (8) feet from the edge of the roadway to the face of the mailbox so as to allow the mail carrier to pull the postal delivery vehicle completely off the travel lanes of the roadway to deliver the mail. Where shoulder width does not allow for such a distance, the mailbox shall be set back a minimum of four (4) feet from the edge of the existing roadway. If due to topographic constraints, the property owner is unable to meet this requirement, the property owner shall coordinate with the Henry County Department of Transportation, and obtain prior written approval on the appropriate location of the mailbox. Under no circumstances shall the location of the mailbox interfere with the safe use of a roadway by the traveling public. Any mailbox which fails to conform to the location requirements as provided herein shall be unlawful and deemed a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 12-17, 11-6-12) 
Sec. 3-16-54. - Construction and composition of mailboxes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct a mailbox which fails to meet the construction specifications enumerated in subsection (b). 
(b)  The use of massive supports that, when struck, could damage vehicles and cause serious injury to vehicle occupants, and in general, interferes with the safety of the traveling public, are prohibited. In order to safeguard the health and welfare of the traveling public, mailboxes shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  The support structure or post of the mailbox shall not be constructed with masonry material or of any material which will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
(2)  The encasement or housing for the mailbox itself shall not be made of a masonry material or of any other material that will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
(3)  All wooden posts shall have a maximum width of four (4) inches by six (6) inches or, if round; the post shall have no greater than a diameter of four (4) inches. If a metal post is used to support the mailbox, such posts shall be no longer than two (2) inches in diameter and are to be hollow. 
(4)  Any mailbox which utilizes a support structure of brick, stone, or masonry, which is located on a street with a speed limit of greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, shall be considered "nonconforming". 
(5)  All "nonconforming" mailboxes shall be constructed with a mailbox as specified in this section, when they become damaged, destroyed, replaced or relocated. 
(6)  Nonconforming mailboxes which become damaged or are required to be relocated by Henry County as a result of routine maintenance, or as a result of Henry County road projects, will only be replaced by Henry County with a mailbox as specified in this section. 
(7)  Mailboxes built prior to November 6, 2012, may remain until such time that they become damaged, destroyed, replaced or relocated. 
(c)  Any violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment in the Henry County jail for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 12-17, 11-6-12; Ord. No. 13-12, 11-5-13) 
Chapter 3-17 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Mass gatherings, § 3-15-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-17-1. - Hauling building materials at night. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any building materials by means of any vehicle during the period of time between thirty (30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise unless the driver of the vehicle has in his possession documents establishing the ownership of such building materials or the vehicle is owned by a government entity or public utility and is operated by an authorized employee of such governmental entity or utility, or the vehicle is subject to regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission or the Interstate Commerce Commission. As used in this Section, "building materials" shall mean and include any new materials customarily used in building or construction work and which have a reasonable fair market value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) shall be fined up to a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 12-20-79) 
Sec. 3-17-2. - Disorderly conduct—Defined. 
The following described acts shall be deemed disorderly conduct and it shall be unlawful for any person to do or engage in any of the said following acts in the unincorporated area of Henry County: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of or in fear of his safety, life, limb or health; 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Any person who shall endanger or interfere with the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm; 
(4)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property; 
(5)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl; 
(6)  Any persons who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities; 
(7)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming; 
(8)  Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device or attempt to do so; 
(9)  Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain or attempts to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person; 
(10)  Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscene words or epithets; 
(11)  Any person who frequents any place or vehicle where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(12)  Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person, causing said person to become outraged and thus create turmoil; 
(13)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm to another or property of another or public property; 
(14)  Any person who shall, by acts of violence or threats thereof, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(15)  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
(16)  Any person who damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
(17)  Any person who appears in public in an intoxicated state or condition, whether said intoxication is by alcohol and/or drugs; 
(18)  Any person who exposes any part of his or her body in an indecent or rude manner; 
(19)  Any person, who by and in any manner, creates loud noises which disrupt, disturb or otherwise interfere with the peace and tranquility of the public; 
(20)  Any person who attempts to hinder, delay, obstruct or prevent any law enforcement officer from performing his/her duty; 
(21)  Any person who keeps a disorderly house or house of ill fame and all adults residing in the house shall be considered a keeper; 
(22)  Any person who lingers or loiters along public sidewalks, streets or public ways of the county; 
(23)  Any person who fails or refuses to remove himself from the private property of another when requested to do so by the owner or occupant(s) thereof; 
(24)  Any person who alone or in concert with others, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or the value thereof in whole or in part by concealing or taking possession of the goods or merchandise from a retail establishment, alters the price tag or other price marking of goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment, wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise of property or value thereof of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less. 
(Ord. No. 91-06, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 3-17-3. - Same—Continued conduct. 
Continuation of the disorderly conduct constitutes additional offenses. Each day that the disorderly conduct continues shall constitute a new and separate offense and the judge of the magistrate court may impose such sentence as the circumstances may require. 
(Ord. No. 91-06, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 3-17-4. - Same—Punishment. 
Any person who pleads guilty, nolo contendere or is convicted of violating the provisions of this article, shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 or such other general law as may be in the future enacted to provide for punishment and penalties that may be imposed by the magistrate courts of the state. In addition to the fine and/or jail sentence, the judge may impose community service. 
(Ord. No. 91-06, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 3-17-5. - Public indecency. 
(a)  This section shall be known and referred to as "The Henry County, Georgia Public Indecency Ordinance." 
(b)  Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities including but not limited to New York City, Los Angeles, Seattle and particularly within the metropolitan area of Atlanta, Georgia, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; and DeKalb County, Georgia; which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by Henry County, Georgia we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is our finding that public indecency, public nudity and semi-nudity, under certain circumstances, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with public indecency and public nudity are disorderly conduct, prostitution, drug trafficking and use, and violent crimes. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with public indecency and public nudity are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of certain establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the prohibition of public indecency is in the public welfare, and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with public indecency, public nudity or semi-nudity. To that end, this section is enacted for the purposes, among others, of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of Henry County, Georgia; protecting societal order; reflecting moral disapproval of people appearing in the nude among strangers in public places; and proscribing public nudity. 
(c)  A person shall be prohibited, while in a public place, from knowingly or intentionally: 
(1)  Engaging in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engaging in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appearing in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondling the genitals of himself, herself or another person. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section: 
1.  "Nudity" shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
2.  "Public place" shall mean any area or place, including but not limited to, any building, structure or business, accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
3.  "Accessible to the public" shall mean any area or place, including but not limited to, any building, structure or business, where the public is invited and are free to go upon special or implied invitation, and including but not limited to such an area or place available to all or a segment of the public. 
4.  "Showing" shall mean pointing out or drawing attention to. 
(e)  In addition to criminal enforcement of this article, violation of this article may be enforced by civil proceedings. 
(f)  Any person who pleads guilty, nolo contendere or is convicted of violating the provisions of this section in the Magistrate Court of Henry County, Georgia shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or up to sixty (60) days in the Henry County Detention Facility. 
(g)  Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this section be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said section shall not be affected thereby. 
(h)  Subsection (b)(3) shall not apply when the nudity is part of some larger form of expression that merits First Amendment protection pursuant to the Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, 4-23-93) 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-10, adopted Dec. 19, 2011, amended Art. II by repealing and replacing §§ 3-17-6—3-17-28 and adding § 3-17-29 to read as herein set out. Former §§ 3-17-6—3-17-28 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 97-04, adopted Mar. 17, 1997; Ord. No. 02-08, adopted July 2, 2002; and Ord. No. 02-13, adopted July 2, 2002. 

Sec. 3-17-6. - Purpose and applicability. 
Based on county officials' own observations of establishments that exploit human sexuality for commercial profit, euphemistically referred to as "Adult Entertainment" (hereinafter "adult entertainment"), and the experiences of other urban cities and counties including, but not limited to, College Park, Georgia; Forest Park, Georgia; Atlanta, Georgia; Columbus, Georgia; Austin, Texas; Pinellas County, Florida; Indianapolis, Indiana; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and Phoenix, Arizona, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by Henry County, Georgia, and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners take note of the well-known and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within the country. 
Moreover, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, in all the forms in which such exploitation may be manifested, collectively referred to hereafter as "adult entertainment," has a deleterious effect on the community where it takes place and that such effects are intensified and exacerbated when adult entertainment is provided in conjunction with the service or consumption of alcohol. The board of commissioners find that adult entertainment causes an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use and corruption of public officials. The board of commissioners further find that adult entertainment establishments escalate undesirable community conditions, including blight, diminish property values, increase the need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, and increase the burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. 
The board of commissioners expressly find that the negative effects of adult entertainment are not limited to adult entertainment that offers live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts. Other forms of adult entertainment also have a deleterious effect upon the quality of life in nearby neighborhoods and commercial districts and on urban life in general. Such other forms of adult entertainment include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, peep shows, adult theaters, massage parlors, bath houses, adult gift or novelty shops, and lingerie modeling studios. 
Further, based on the investigation conducted by the county regarding lingerie modeling studios, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that lingerie modeling studios are establishments that offer adult entertainment in the form of live human nudity in a private setting. Based on the evidence presented to the board of commissioners, it is apparent that lingerie modeling studios, by providing adult entertainment in a private setting, lead to criminal behavior including, but not limited to, masturbation for hire, prostitution, and sodomy. 
Furthermore, based on the investigation conducted by the county, it is apparent that lingerie modeling studios pose a more difficult challenge to the enforcement of regulations pertaining to adult entertainment business, in that the activity occurs within a private setting, as opposed to in an open area which is visible to all patrons of the establishment. For the same reason, the board of commissioners have identified massage parlors as presenting similar risks of criminal behavior and problems of enforcement. The board of commissioners have determined that lighting, visibility and access are measures that can reduce the risk of crime to patrons and others. 
Accordingly, the board of commissioners find that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to limit and regulate adult entertainment within the corporate boundaries of the county, so as to limit the adverse impact on property values, other business uses, residential uses and public and semipublic uses; to ensure that adult entertainment uses and adult entertainment facilities do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts; to restrict adult entertainment and adult uses in heavily-used public pedestrian areas and to protect patrons of adult entertainment business from unreasonable risk of crime. After giving due consideration to the considerations stated in these findings and the current state of growth and development of the county, the board of commissioners find that the area is so situated as to provide sufficient vehicular access to patrons and suppliers, while providing the desired containment from residential uses and pedestrian traffic. 
This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of providers and patrons of adult entertainment. 
It is a matter of governmental interest and concern and in the interest of the public welfare to minimize the proliferation of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that commercially exploit human sexuality through adult entertainment to limit adult entertainment uses of property to certain prescribed areas of the county. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-7. - Definitions. 
As used in the article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity; or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five (5) percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity. 
Adult dance establishment: Any business that features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, gogo dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity. 
Adult entertainment: Any act of providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or display of sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity. 
Adult entertainment establishment: Any establishment featuring live performances, films, still pictures, electronic reproductions, video, graphic or other visual images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or display of sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity. Adult entertainment establishments include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, adult dance establishments, adult motion picture arcades, adult movie theaters, adult video stores, adult novelty stores, or sex clubs. 
Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual explicit nudity. 
Adult movie theater: Any movie theater which on a regular, continuing basis shows films rated "X" or "NC-17" by the Motion Picture Coding Association of America or which presents for public viewing on a regular, continuing basis so-called "adult films" distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or depicting sexual conduct or sexual explicit nudity. 
Adult novelty bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in miscellaneous sex-related products, including, but not limited to, gifts, toys, or clothing, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, facilitating, enhancing, useful or intended or designed for, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual explicit nudity; or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five (5) percent or more of its net sales consisting of such items. 
Adult video store: An establishment which derives more than five (5) percent of its gross earnings from the sale or rental of video tapes, movies, or other reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual explicit nudity, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
Entertainer: Any person who provides live adult entertainment within an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this section whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment. 
Manager: Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of, the affairs or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment establishment. 
Minor: Any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Sex clubs: Either groups that, for a fee, charge, or donation organize sexual conduct among or between its patrons, guests or participants, or an establishment where patrons can engage in sex acts with other patrons. These shall include, but not be limited to, bath houses, fetish clubs and masturbation clubs. 
Sexual conduct: Actual or simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is female, breasts. 
Sexual explicit nudity: A state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-8. - License required. 
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation which owns or operates an adult entertainment establishment shall be required to obtain an adult entertainment establishment license. Except as provided in section 3-17-17, no person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be permitted to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless and until such a license is obtained. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity which is illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. Each such premises so licensed shall be hereinafter referred to as a "licensed premise." 
Any person who works as a manager or an entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall obtain an adult entertainment manager's license, or an adult entertainer's license from the Henry County Licensing Office prior to commencing any work in an adult entertainment establishment in unincorporated Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-9. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of any person under the age of eighteen (18) onto the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-10. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within an adult entertainment establishment to sell, barter, or give, or offer to sell, barter, or give to any minor any service, material, device, or thing sold or offered for sale by such adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-11. - Location and structural requirements. 
(a)  An adult entertainment establishment shall only be allowed in designated areas within the M-1 light manufacturing zoning district, as listed below, and shall be subject to the site design standards of the M-1 zoning district, unless otherwise stated in the M-1 supplemental standards (section 4.03.31). 
Adult entertainment establishments may only be located: (1) on the south side of Highway 155, within one (1) mile of the Exit 216 Interchange, as measured from the traffic signal of each respective off ramp, or (2) any M-1 zoned parcel located on the west side of Business Center Drive, north of the Norfolk Southern Railroad line. 
(b)  In addition to meeting the requirements of all other applicable code provisions, including, but not limited to, the zoning code, the following standards shall apply to adult entertainment establishments (where the provisions of this section conflict with other provisions of the Code of Henry County, the most stringent provisions shall apply): 
(1)  Buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment facility shall be separated at least forty (40) feet from the building and structure of any other business establishment, and a minimum of forty (40) feet from all property lines. 
(2)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located in any strip shopping center, mall, or other group structures; and 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments must be placed in a separate building on its own lot. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment may be located within three thousand (3,000) feet of any parcel of land containing another adult entertainment establishment. 
For the purpose of this section, distance shall be by straight line, airline measurement from property line to property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel" as applied to this section shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-12. - Adult entertainment establishment, regulations. 
(a)  No later than October 31 of each year, an adult entertainment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  An adult dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons it has employed as dancers. 
(c)  No adult dance establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be admitted to an adult dance establishment. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be admitted to any other adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) Monday through Saturday. No licensee shall permit its place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(f)  Entertainers may only perform on a platform intended for that purpose, which shall be raised at least eighteen (18) inches from the level of the floor. 
(g)  In addition to the crime of "public indecency" provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8, and Henry County Code section 3-4-209, which is applicable throughout the county and the State of Georgia, and in order to provide for more specific and clearer regulations pertaining to nudity in adult entertainment establishments in the county as expressly permitted in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8(e), it shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any portion of an adult entertainment establishment or any other business open to the public, in a state of nudity. The term "nudity" as used herein, shall mean and include the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or the anus, with less than fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than fully opaque covering the nipple or the areola thereof, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. Examples of attire that would comply with this section include, but are not limited to, those items commonly known as pasties, G-strings, T-backs, dental floss, and thongs. In case of any conflict between this subsection and any other provision in chapter 3-17 of the Henry County Code of Ordinances, this subsection shall prevail. 
(h)  No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four (4) feet to any patron, customer, or guest. No patron, customer, or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of, or any part of, the body of any adult entertainer. 
(i)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. 
(j)  No entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity directly from any patron. 
(k)  All areas of an adult entertainment establishment shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. 
(l)  "Full lighting" shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths (3.5) footcandles per square foot. 
(m)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to serve or sell alcoholic beverages, nor shall any license holder allow alcoholic beverages of any kind on the premises of its adult entertainment establishment. 
(n)  No sex club shall be allowed in Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-13. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. 
(1)  Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  No person who has ever been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a felony, or a crime that would be a felony if committed in the State of Georgia shall be permitted to be an employee of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  No person shall be an employee of an adult entertainment establishment who has ever been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any crime of moral turpitude including, but not limited to, those involving: lottery; gambling; possession or sale of any controlled substance or dangerous drug; unlawful sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; prostitution; solicitation of prostitution; sodomy; solicitation of sodomy; masturbation for hire; selling, loaning, distributing, exhibiting, or furnishing illegal material to minors; or receiving stolen property. 
(b)  Approval for employment. No person may work in an adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining a license therefore from the county. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he or she shall file an application for such license with the licensing officer of the intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment, based upon the standards contained herein, from the licensing officer. An investigation fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall accompany the application at the time it is filed. The prospective employee shall also supply a set of fingerprints on official Henry County or United States Department of Justice forms, and consent to a criminal background check. Upon approval of the application, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may appeal as otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, any person working in an adult entertainment establishment, whether considered to be an employee or independent contractor, shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-14. - Application for employee or manager's license. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to work in or manage any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county licensing department. At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the county to defray the cost of investigation and reports required by this chapter. The county shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The annual fee for the entertainer's license is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
The annual fee for the entertainment manager's license is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Sec. 3-17-15. - Application for license to conduct an adult entertainment establishment, fee, contents. 
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county licensing department. At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) to the county to defray the cost of investigation and reports required by this chapter. The county shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
The annual fee for an adult entertainment establishment license is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, he or she must provide her full legal name, any and all aliases, residence address, phone number, and date of birth; 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its chapters of incorporation or charter, together with the date and state of incorporation, and the name, aliases, residence address, phone number, and date of birth of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. The applicant shall also provide evidence of its authority to do business in Georgia, a copy of its chapters of incorporation, the name of its registered agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process; 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, aliases, residence address, phone number, and date of birth of each partner, including the limited partners, if any. The applicant shall also furnish a copy of the partnership agreement, if in existence, and, if a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership; 
(4)  The previous addresses, if any, of the applicant, its partners, officers, directors, and stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(5)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, its partners, officers, directors, and stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, is/are at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(6)  If the applicant is an individual, his or her height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and place of birth; 
(7)  If the applicant is an individual, two (2) photographs of the applicant, at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last six (6) months; 
(8)  Business, occupation, and/or employment history of the applicant, its partners, officers, directors, and stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(9)  The business license history of the applicant, its partners, officers, directors, and stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, and whether such applicant, its partners, officers, directors, and stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, in previous operations in this or any other county, city, state, or territory, has had any license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(10)  All convictions adjudicated against the applicant, if an individual, or against the applicant's partners, officers, directors, and stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, if a corporation, partnership, or other entity, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations. For each conviction, the applicant shall set forth a complete description of the crime involved, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction, and any disposition, including fine or sentence imposed, and whether term of disposition has been fully completed or fine has been fully paid. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere; 
(11)  If the applicant intends to lease the real property upon which the adult entertainment is to be conducted, the names and addresses of the owner or owners and lessor or lessors of the real property and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. If a lessor is entitled to any portion of the net or gross receipts of the business, for the purposes of the application, such person shall be considered to be an applicant, or a partner, officer, or director or stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, and relevant information required for such persons shall be provided for the landlord as well; 
(12)  If the premises is owned by the applicant, copies of the deeds or other documents evidencing such ownership; 
(13)  The county shall require the applicant, if an individual, and all persons obligated to furnish information hereunder, to furnish his or her fingerprints; 
(14)  If the applicant is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded; 
(15)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or, if the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the individual partners, shareholders, officers, or directors of said corporation, as applicable, and who are not benefiting or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or other crime involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years. The licensing office shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(16)  Address of the premises to be licensed, and the trade name under which it proposes to operate; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  The individual, if the applicant is an individual; 
b.  The manager or general partner, if the applicant is a partnership; 
c.  The president of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation; or 
d.  The chief administrative official, if the applicant is any other organization or association. 
(18)  Applicant shall be required to notify all property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed location. Applicant shall be required to provide the licensing office with certified mail notice as proof of notification. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-16. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or the designated responsible managing officer, if a firm, partnership, or corporation, shall personally present the application containing the aforementioned required information at the county administration building and shall pay the nonrefundable application fee or produce proof that the nonrefundable application fee has been paid. Applicant shall be required to provide valid photo identification, in the form of state driver's license, state ID card, government/military ID, or similar, at the time the application is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-17. - Investigation of application. 
For any license or permit required hereunder, the following rules apply: 
(a)  The county shall have thirty (30) days to investigate the application and the background, to include criminal background of the applicant. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the thirty-day period without completion of the investigation, the applicant shall be permitted to begin adult entertainment establishment activities applied for unless and until such time as the investigation is completed. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the county later denies the application, the business or activity must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of completion of the investigation, the board of commissioners may grant the license if it finds that: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(5)  The applicant, or any of its partners, officers, directors, or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, has/have not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, any crime that would be a felony if committed in the state, or any crime of moral turpitude including, but not limited to, those involving lottery; gambling; possession or sale of any controlled substance or dangerous drug; sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; prostitution; solicitation of prostitution; sodomy; solicitation of sodomy; masturbation for hire; selling, loaning, distributing, exhibiting, or furnishing illegal material to minors; or receiving stolen property; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by the county or any other jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building structure, equipment, and location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire, and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant, if an individual, or all of the applicant's partners, officers, directors, or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, if a corporation, partnership, or other entity, is/are at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(9)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; and 
(10)  The grant of such license will not violate any other provision of this chapter or any other law or regulation of the county, the state, or the United States. 
(d)  Upon the expiration of the thirty-day period without the board of commissioners either granting or denying the license, the applicant shall be permitted to begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment establishment unless and until such time as the county notifies the applicant that the license is denied. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the county later denies the license, the business must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-18. - Persons and organizations prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes or property taxes for a business at that location; 
(2)  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation if any person, partner, officer, director, or owner of five (5) percent or more of the stock or any interest in any such firm, partnership, or corporation has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, any crime that would be a felony if committed in the State of Georgia, or any crime of moral turpitude including, but not limited to, those involving lottery; gambling; possession or sale of any controlled substance or dangerous drug; sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; prostitution; solicitation of prostitution; sodomy; solicitation of sodomy; masturbation for hire; selling, loaning, distributing, exhibiting, or furnishing illegal material to minors; or receiving stolen property; or 
(3)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia, or Henry County. 
(b)  After an adult entertainment establishment license has been granted, should any individual, partner, officer, director, or stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock, as applicable, of any licensee be convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction or enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes described in subsection (a)(2), above, or whenever three (3) or more persons are adjudged guilty in a trial court of committing certain criminal acts as described in subsection (a)(2) on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, where it can be shown that the owner or operator of the business either knew of the activities and did not seek to prevent them, or else failed to take adequate steps to become aware of the activity, said license shall be subject to suspension and revocation. Withdrawal of an owner, officer, partner, or stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock after conviction of or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to said crimes shall not necessarily mitigate against the penalty imposed hereby. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-19. - Renewal of license. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments must be renewed each year. At the time of applying for renewal of an adult entertainment license, the applicant shall pay a renewal fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-20. - License is nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred, or assigned to any other person, persons, or organization. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void and shall be surrendered to the county. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-21. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  An adult entertainment license shall be valid only for the location specified on the license. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than that specified on the license. 
Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-22. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any employee, manager, or licensee/applicant desiring to appeal an adverse determination shall, within ten (10) days after being notified of said determination, submit a notice of appeal to the county clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the Henry County Board of Commissioners and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the county, and the name and address of the applicants. 
(c)  The clerk of the county board of commissioners shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board meeting occurring not less than five (5) and not more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. Upon the expiration of the thirty-day period without the appeal being placed upon the agenda of the next regular board meeting, the employee, manager, licensee/applicant shall be permitted to work, manage, or begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment establishment under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the appeal is placed upon the agenda of a regular board meeting. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the county later denies the appeal, the employee, manager, or business must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  When an appeal is placed on the agenda, the board of commissioners may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk to the board of commissioners shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(e)  The hearing, whether before the board of commissioners or an appointed hearing officer, shall occur not later than thirty (30) days after the date of the regular board meeting at which the appeal is on the agenda. Upon the expiration of the thirty-day period without the hearing occurring, the employee, manager, or licensee/applicant shall be permitted to work, manage, or begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment establishment unless and until such time as the hearing occurs. No person or entity working, managing, or conducting business as an adult entertainment establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the county later denies the appeal, the employee, manager, or business must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-23. - Hearing before the board of commissioners. 
Whenever the clerk of the county board of commissioners has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the time and date set therefore, the board shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the employee, manager, or licensee, from interested parties, and from county staff. 
The board may sustain, overrule, or modify the action complained of. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final, and may be further appealed by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Henry County. 
Upon close of business of the next succeeding regularly scheduled business meeting of the board of commissioners occurring after the hearing without the board of commissioners finally sustaining, overruling or modifying the action complained of, the licensee/applicant shall be permitted to begin and conduct business as the board of commissioners finally sustains, overrules or modifies the action complained of. No person or entity working in, managing, or conducting business as an adult entertainment establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such activity or business, and if the county later denies the appeal, the employee, manager, or business must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-24. - Hearing before the hearing officer. 
(a)  The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath, and call witnesses as he or she may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(b)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the board of commissioners. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions, and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/applicant the same day it is filed with the clerk. Upon the expiration of the thirty-day period without the hearing office submitting a written report to the board of commissioners, the licensee/applicant shall be permitted to work, manage, or begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment establishment unless and until such time as the hearing office submits a written report to the board of commissioners. No, employee, manager, or person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the county later denies the appeal, the employee, manager, or business must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board meeting occurring not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/applicant of the date of such meeting at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/applicant stipulates to a shorter notice period. Upon the expiration of the thirty-day period without the hearing officer's report being placed upon the agenda of the next regular board meeting, the licensee/applicant shall be permitted to begin work, manage, or conduct business as an adult entertainment establishment unless and until such time as the hearing officer's report is placed upon the agenda of a regular board meeting. No employee, manager, or person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to work, manage, or continued conduct of such business, and if the county later denies the appeal, the employee, manager, or business must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points. In either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-25. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The board of commissioners and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-26. - Revocation; violations; penalty. 
In the event it is determined by the business license department that any person, firm or corporation has violated the terms and conditions of this chapter, upon appropriate notice, the license of such person may be suspended, or revoked, as appropriate, and as decided by such official. The filing of an appeal shall suspend implementation of any proposed penalty pending final resolution of the appeal. 
In addition to, or in lieu of, suspension or revocation, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation, violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-27. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to, or in lieu of, prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The county may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person or organization from operating, conducting, or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-28. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-29. - Severability. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners of Henry County that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are and were, upon their enactment, believed by the board of commissioners of Henry County to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
(b)  However, it is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners of Henry County that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, that each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase therein. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners of Henry County to the greatest extent allowed by law, that no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter. In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the board of commissioners of Henry County that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this chapter, and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 3-17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 3-17-31—3-17-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 3-17-40. - Policy and purpose. 
It is the public policy of the county and purpose of this article to prevent excessive sound which may jeopardize the health, welfare, safety, or peace and tranquility of its citizens, degrade the quality of human life, or constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-41. - Definitions. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article is as set forth in this section. 
General: All definitions in all applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) (SI.1-1976, Acoustical Terminology) or its successor body. 
A-weighted sound level (dBA): The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is designated "dBA." 
Construction: Any site, preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action but excluding demolition, for or of public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Daytime: That period of time covering the hours of 7:00 a.m. (0700) to 10:00 p.m. (2200). 
dBA: See "A-weighted sound level." 
Decibel (db): A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals (twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter). 
Emergency: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Impulsive sound: Any sound of short duration, usually less than one (1) second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay, e.g., explosions, blasting and discharge of firearms. 
Land use categories: For the purpose of this article the land use categories shown on Table 1 as "residential," "commercial" and "industrial" shall have their ordinary and customary meaning provided further that the residential classifications shall include the following classification from the county zoning ordinance: RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, RD, RM, RMH, and PD (for all residential uses). The commercial classifications shall include the following classification from the county zoning ordinance: C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, and OI (for all commercial uses). The industrial classifications shall include the following classification from the county zoning ordinance: M1 and M2 (for all industrial uses). 
Level L (1): That noise (A-weighted sound level) exceeded one (1) percent of a measurement time equivalent to at least thirty (30) minutes. 
Level L (10): That noise (A-weighted sound level) exceeded ten (10) percent of a measurement time equivalent to at least thirty (30) minutes. 
Level L (50): That noise (A-weighted sound level) exceeded fifty (50) percent of a measurement time equivalent to at least thirty (30) minutes. 
Motor vehicles: All self-propelled vehicles as defined in the Georgia Motor Vehicle Code, specifically including but not limited to mini-bikes, recreational vehicles, trail bikes and go-carts. 
Nighttime: That period of time cover the hours from 10:00 p.m. (2200) to 7:00 a.m. (0700). 
Noise: Any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or endangers or damages real or personal property. 
Real property boundary: An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one (1) person from that owned by another, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
Receiving land use category: That parcel of real property onto which noise travels or is received from any source on another parcel of real property. 
Sound: An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound, including, but not limited to duration, intensity and frequency. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-42. - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted herein, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which violates the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table 1 for the receiving land use category (zoning classification) as measured at any point along the real property boundary separating the real property from which the sound emanates from the receiving land use category. 
(c)  Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighting scale in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) for a Type 2 or better sound level instrument and with the measurement period being a minimum of thirty (30) minutes continuous duration. 
(d)  Impulsive sounds as herein defined shall be permitted provided such impulsive sounds do not create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table 1 for the receiving land use category as measured at the real property boundary when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use category from which the sound emanates. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-43. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the sound level limits of Table 1: 
(1)  Domestic power tools, chain saws, lawn mowers, blowers, agricultural equipment and other domestic power-operated equipment when operated with a property functioning muffler meeting manufacturer's standards, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency. 
(3)  Noises made by persons having obtained a parade, concert or construction permit from the county. 
(4)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon. 
(5)  Aircraft-related noises associated with aircraft while in flight and while under the jurisdiction of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Department of Defense. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-44. - Specific prohibitions. 
In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle or any street or public place in the county continuously and/or incessantly for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds, except as a danger warning. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, loudspeakers, musical instruments and similar amplified devices. The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public rights-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device. 
(3)  Street sales. The offering for sale by shouting or outcry within any residential, commercial or noise-sensitive area except by permit issued by the county. 
(4)  Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which annoy or disturb an ordinary reasonable person of normal sensitivities across a residential or commercial boundary line or within a noise-sensitive area. For the purpose of this article, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of fifteen (15) minutes, or barks intermittently for one-half (½) hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" if, at the time the dog is barking making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated. 
(5)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  Except in a case of an emergency, the intentional sounding of any alarm between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
b.  The testing of any alarm for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds at any time. 
(c)  The testing of a complete emergency signaling system, including the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, more than once in each calendar month, and the sounding of said emergency signaling system for a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-45. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  Maximum sound levels. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle at any time on a public or private road in such a manner as to exceed the sound level limits for the category of motor vehicle shown in Table 2. The sound level shall be measured at a distance of at least fifty (50) feet from the centerline of the path of the vehicle being monitored and at a height of at least four (4) feet above the immediately surrounding surface. This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle. 
(b)  Adequate mufflers or sound-dissipative devices. 
(1)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public or private road which is not equipped with a muffler or proper working order and in constant operation. 
(2)  No person shall remove or render inoperative or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative any muffler or sound-dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement. 
(3)  The provisions of the subsections of this section apply to moving motor vehicles. Those motor vehicles operating in a stationary position or condition are governed by the provisions of section 3-17-42 and the levels specified in Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-46. - Special temporary permits. 
(a)  Any person desiring temporary relief from any provision of this article may apply for a special permit to cause or create a noise at sound levels which would otherwise be in violation of this article. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the business license office on forms provided for that purpose. The business license office shall conduct an investigation and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners concerning such permit. In this connection, the business license office may require the applicant for the special permit to submit reports and documents showing noise levels customarily generated by such activity, proposed means for regulating or controlling such sounds, and other such information and data as may be deemed appropriate by the building official. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany the application. 
(b)  The special permit herein provided may be granted to the applicant by the board of commissioners for a period of up to fifteen (15) days following a review of the report and information complied by the building official and upon a showing of any of the following: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the sound-producing activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The activity operation or noise source shall be of a temporary duration, and repetitive and continuous, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(3)  No reasonable economic or technological alternative, as determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, is currently available to the applicant. 
(c)  Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which said permit shall have been granted, including but not limited to the effective date of the permit, the time of day when the noise-producing activities may be conducted by the applicant, the location in which said activities may be conducted, the duration of the permit, any sound, level limits imposed by the permit, and any equipment limitations that may be imposed. 
(d)  Any special permit granted hereunder may be extended upon new application made for additional fifteen-day intervals by the board of commissioners provided good cause is shown. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-47. - Enforcement responsibility. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complaint brought by a citizen or property owner or upon their own motion following independent investigation of possible infractions of this article, the Henry County Code Enforcement Director, or his or her authorized designees, and all county law enforcement personnel, including members of the Henry County Police Department, shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The expenses of sound level testing performed by the county in checking the sound levels produced by a particular land use or activity may, at the discretion of the county, be assessed against the producer of such sound or against the complaining party if the complaint is found to be wholly frivolous and without merit. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-48. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article may be assessed a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
(b)  Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the county as provided by law or ordinance. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as new and separate offenses. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 3-17-49. - Cooperation of all departments. 
All departments and agencies of the county shall, to the fullest extent consistent with their authority, carry out their programs in such a manner as to further the policy of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
APPLICABLE NOISE LIMITS 
TABLE 1 
Measurement period is one-half hour (continuous), as measured at the property boundary of the receiving parcel. 
Sound level in decibels  A-scale (dBA) 

 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
TABLE 2 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles of a type subject to registration by the motor vehicle laws of the State of Georgia at any time or under any conditions of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicle within the speed limits specified below: 
Sound level in decibels  A-scale (dBA) 

 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
ARTICLE V. - ABATEMENT OF UNSANITARY CONDITIONS, HEALTH HAZARDS, AND UNFIT BUILDINGS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, adopted July 15, 2002, amended Art. V, by repealing §§ 3-17-51—3-17-63 derived from Ord. No. 00-09, § 1, adopted Sept. 5, 2000, and by enacting in lieu thereof §§ 3-17-51—3-17-56 to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 3-17-50. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county finds and declares that within the unincorporated area of the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the unincorporated area of the county or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and the state and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the unincorporated area of county where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe-human habitation. The governing authority of the county finds that there exist in the unincorporated area of the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. No. 00-09, § 1, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-51. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-52. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Applicable codes means (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in chapter 2 of title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in chapter 2 of title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 8 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2 of chapter 13 of title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
a.  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
b.  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a fifty-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
c.  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
d.  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings; or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8 and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8, and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-53. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the unincorporated area of the county to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the county, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in compliance with such codes or ordinances; 
(b)  The board of commissioners of the county appoint or designate the director of the code enforcement department of the county, county fire marshal, county fire chief, county police chief and his/her designees, and the director of the code enforcement department of the county and his/her designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the unincorporated area of the county charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place of the hearing; 
(d)  After such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in chapter 39A of title 41, of the O.C.G.A. qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the unincorporated area of the county; 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the county are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in paragraph (g) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Henry County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection real property ad valorem tax, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes: 
(2)  The county may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(3)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(4)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in any court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(5)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-54. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances certain dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and conditions of nuisance exist. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-55. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the unincorporated area of the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-56. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three (3) business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and [if] such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) above. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the Judge of the Probate Court of Henry County at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remainder-men who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the Judge of the Probate Court of Henry County shall be personally served at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindered. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c), and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Secs. 3-17-57—3-17-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISPOSITION AND LEASING OF REAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 3-17-64. - Sale of real property. 
(a)  Public sale required. Disposition of real property owned by the county shall be conducted by public sale in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3, or as otherwise provided by state law. 
(b)  Exceptions to public sale. The following transactions shall not be governed by subsection (a): 
(1)  A redemption of real property acquired by county under tax deed. 
(2)  A grant of easement or license. 
(3)  A grant or conveyance of right-of-way for transportation purposes. 
(4)  A conveyance to any other unit of government. 
(5)  A conveyance of recreational set aside property to a homeowner's association in a manner permitted by state law. 
(6)  A lease which constitutes a usufruct under state law. 
(7)  A grant or conveyance of property described in O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3(h). 
(c)  Procedures. Except as otherwise specifically provided by state law, the county shall not dispose of any real property unless the board of commissioners has declared such real property to be unserviceable. Other than dispositions governed by subsection (a) or by specified provisions of state law, any disposition may be made at public or private sale, upon such terms as the board of commissioners shall deem to be in the county's best interest. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-65. - Sale of surplus real property by real estate broker. 
(a)  Generally. Real property, specifically properties which are remnants of land resulting from acquisitions of property for county road projects, may be disposed of by sale via the use of a real estate broker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4. 
(b)  Requirements for real estate brokers. To qualify as a real estate broker for purposes of such dispositions, the real estate broker utilized must be licensed under chapter 40 of title 43 of the O.C.G.A. and have a place of business located in the county where the property is located or outside of the county if no such business is located in the county where the property is located. 
(c)  Declaration of unserviceability. Prior to offering a property for sale, the property must be declared surplus by the county board of commissioners in a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)  Notification to former or subsequent owner. Following such a declaration of unserviceability, the former owner of such property or, if the property from which the county acquired the property has been sold, the owner of the abutting land holding title through such former owner, will be notified in writing of the county's intent to sell since he/she has the first right to purchase the property. When an entire parcel acquired by the county or any interest therein is being disposed of, it may be acquired by such former or subsequent abutting owner at such price as may be agreed upon, but in no event less than the price paid for its acquisition. When only remnants or portions of the original acquisition are being disposed of, they may be acquired by such former or subsequent abutting owner for the market value thereof at the time the county decides the property is no longer needed. If the former or subsequent owner waives this right, then adjoining/abutting property owners will be notified that the property will be sold by real estate broker, by competitive sealed bid, or by public auction. 
(e)  Selection of broker. Real estate brokers on the approved county real estate broker list maintained by the county purchasing department shall be notified by mail when a parcel or parcels of land are to be sold. The broker shall be selected competitively via the sealed proposal process. 
(f)  Advertising and listing of property. Commencing at the time of the listing of the property as provided in O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4, the county shall publicly advertise once a week for two (2) weeks in the legal organ of the county the property and the name of the broker handling the property. The property shall be listed for a period of at least three (3) months. Property cannot be sold for less than fair market value excluding commission fee. If property does not sell during the listing time, the county may renegotiate the commission to a lower fee, extend the exclusive agreement with the real estate broker or recommend to the board of commissioners that disposal be by competitive sealed bid or public auction in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4. 
(g)  Approval of sale. All sales of properties shall be approved by the board of commissioners at a regularly scheduled public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-66. - Sale of independently unusable tracts. 
(a)  Generally. Real property, other than the real property described in section 3-17-65 herein, and specifically properties which are small or narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances or land use plans, or as streets may be disposed of by the county via the process set forth herein. 
(b)  Declaration of unserviceability. Prior to offering a property for sale, the property must be declared surplus by the county board of commissioners in a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  Determination concerning abutting owner(s). Where the board of commissioners determines that the sale and conveyance of property set forth in paragraph (a) of this Code section will facilitate the enjoyment of the highest and best use of an abutting owner's or owners' property, such abutting owner(s) shall be given an opportunity to purchase said property as set forth in paragraph (d) of this Code section. 
(d)  Notification to abutting owner(s). Following a declaration of unserviceability and a determination by the board of commissioners as set forth in subsection (c) above, the abutting owner(s) of the property to be sold will be notified in writing of the county's intent to sell since such owner(s) have the first right to purchase the property. When an entire parcel acquired by the county or any interest therein is being disposed of, it may be acquired by such abutting owner(s) at such price as may be agreed upon, but in no event less than the price paid for its acquisition. When only remnants or portions of the original acquisition are being disposed of, they may be acquired by such abutting owner(s) for the market value thereof at the time the county decides the property is no longer needed. Should more than one abutting property owner exist, the owner(s) of each abutting property may purchase an equal portion of the property. If the abutting owner(s) waives this right, then the property will be sold by competitive sealed bid or by public auction in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-67. - Exchange of real property. 
(a)  Generally. Real property of the county may be exchanged for other real property in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3(2)(D). Prior to any such exchange, real property subject to the provisions of sections 3-17-65 and 3-17-66 contained within this article shall be offered for sale to the abutting owner(s) pursuant to the terms of such code sections contained within this article. 
(b)  Declaration of unserviceability. Prior to offering a property for exchange, the property must be declared surplus by the county board of commissioners in a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  Valuation. Following a declaration of unserviceability, the county may exchange real property owned by it for other real property where the property so acquired by exchange is of equal or greater value than the property owned by the county. The value of both the property owned by the county and that to be acquired through the exchange shall be determined by appraisals and the values so determined shall be approved by the board of commissioners prior to an exchange. 
(d)  Notification. Within six (6) weeks preceding the closing of any such proposed exchange of real property, a notice of the proposed exchange of real property shall be published in the official organ of the county once a week for four (4) weeks. 
(e)  Approval of exchange. All exchanges of real property shall be approved by the board of commissioners in a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 3-17-68. - Leases of county-owned property. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may offer to lease county owned real property if: 
(1)  The sale of the real property is not in the best interests of the county but the real property is not currently being used by the county; or 
(2)  The real property has been newly acquired but not immediately put to use by the county, and may reasonably be leased on a month-to-month or short term basis. 
(b)  A lessee's interest under any lease executed under this section shall constitute a usufruct only. 
(c)  Where county owned real estate is to be leased for nonpublic use, either: 
(1)  The county manager shall cause public notice of the availability of the real property to be published, soliciting inquiries and offers. The county manager shall include as part of the solicitation the requirement that improvements to the real estate be insured for the county's benefit at the lessee's expense. The solicitation shall also describe any restrictions to be placed on the use of the real property. The county manager shall report to the board of commissioners all offers to lease the real estate and shall make recommendations as to which offer is in the county's best interest. The board of commissioners shall approve the offer which it deems to be in the best interests of the county. Such approval shall constitute authority for the chairman to execute a lease and any instruments on behalf of the county necessary to accept and effectuate the offer; or 
(2)  The board of commissioners may approve a short-term lease with a duration not to exceed twelve (12) months, when an immediate leasing of the property is deemed to be in best interest of the county. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 13-11, 8-6-2013) 
APPENDIX A - UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the county's Unified Land Development Code, as adopted by Ord. No. 09-05, on September 15, 2009. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citations to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.01.00. - Title. 
These land development regulations shall be known as the "Unified Land Development Code of Henry County, Georgia", and may be referred to as the "ULDC." 
Sec. 1.02.00. - Authority. 
The ULDC is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, in particular, House Bill No. 51 amending Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated to include Chapter 66, the "Zoning Procedures" law. The ULDC therefore replaces Chapters 3-6 through 3-11 of the Henry County Code. 
Sec. 1.03.00. - Applicability. 
1.03.01.  Generally. The regulations, standards, criteria, and procedures set forth in this ULDC shall govern the design, development, and use of all land within the unincorporated areas of Henry County. 
1.03.02.  Exemptions and exceptions. The following situations are exempt from the requirements of the ULDC: 
A.  Buildings or structures that are legally under construction on the date of adoption of the ULDC. 
B.  Buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of this ULDC, provided that construction commences prior to the expiration of the building permit, and continues until completed. 
C.  Provided that development pursuant to an approved development plan or subdivision plat approved prior to the effective date of this ULDC, commences not later than one (1) year after the effective date of this ULDC. 
D.  The proposed use of property lawfully approved as of the effective date of this ULDC. 
E.  Applications for building permits, development permits and zoning requests legally submitted, with a completed application and paid fees prior to the adoption of this ULDC, shall not be required to meet the requirements of the adopted ULDC, but shall meet the requirements of adopted ordinances at the time of application. 
F.  Zoning requests denied, but legally submitted pending the appeal of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 1.04.00. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the ULDC is to: 
A.  Promote the health, safety, aesthetics, convenience, order, prosperity, and the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Henry County; 
B.  Lessen congestion on the public streets; 
C.  Further traffic safety; 
D.  Secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; 
E.  Provide adequate light and air; 
F.  Prevent the overcrowding of land, avoiding both undue concentration of population, and urban sprawl; 
G.  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage collection, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
H.  Protect property against blight and depreciation; 
I.  Encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and other structures throughout the county; 
J.  Ensure economy in government expenditures for infrastructure; and 
K.  Preserve natural resources. 
Sec. 1.05.00. - Relationship to the comprehensive plan. 
The Henry County/Cities Joint Comprehensive Development Plan (comprehensive plan) is the official development policy and implementation guide for the county to coordinate and direct physical and economic development, related public investment, and to provide reasonable regulations for the development of private property in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. The ULDC is designed to implement all provisions of that plan for the development and use of land. 
Sec. 1.06.00. - Administrator. 
The planning and zoning department is the administrative agency charged with the administration of this code and may therefore establish such rules and procedures as may be necessary, including, but not limited to, administrative procedures for the filing of applications for amendment to the official zoning map of Henry County (i.e., zoning requests), variances, and other applications for development approval. The administrator or assigned designee is hereby authorized to interpret the provisions of this code when warranted and appropriate. 
Sec. 1.07.00. - Documents adopted by reference. 
1.07.01.  Official zoning map. 
A.  The official zoning map shall be adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners, which directs the identification of the official zoning map by the signature of the chairman of the board of commissioners, attested by the county clerk, and bearing the seal of the county under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of Henry County", together with the date of adoption. 
B.  The official zoning map of Henry County, Georgia, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ULDC. 
C.  If, in accordance with the procedural requirements set forth in section 12.02.09 regarding amendments to the official zoning map, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map once a year after the amendment has been approved by the board of commissioners, with an entry in the minutes of such board of commissioners meeting as follows: "On ________, 20___ by official action of the board of commissioners, the following (change) changes (was) were made to the official zoning map: (brief description of nature of change or changes)," which entry shall be signed by the chairman of the board of commissioners, and attested by the county clerk. 
D.  The official zoning map, located in the office of the planning and zoning department shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any parcel or lot in the county. 
E.  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the board of commissioners may, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. 
1.  The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map. 
2.  The official zoning map shall be adopted every twelve (12) months or one (1) year, as needed, by the board of commissioners. 
3.  This new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the chairman of the board of commissioners, attested by the county clerk, and bearing the seal of the county under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted on ________, 20___ as part of the ULDC." 
4.  Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
5.  If official zoning records are in conflict with the official zoning map and reveal drafting or other errors, such records shall be used to amend the official zoning map administratively. Further, notification of such errors shall be made to the board of commissioners for certification and adoption. 
1.07.02.  Functional road plan The functional road plan, adopted in the comprehensive plan, describing the functional classifications and associated right-of-way requirements, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ULDC. This plan provides information to guide Henry County in requiring the dedication or preservation of land for rights-of-way for future streets. 
1.07.03.  Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ULDC. The GSMM specifies the channel protection, flood control requirements and design standards necessary to control stormwater runoff and protect water quality. 
1.07.04.  Metro North Georgia Water Planning District. The Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District was signed into law on April 5, 2001, (2001 S.B. 130) to develop regional and watershed specific plans for a sixteen-county area. Henry County is a member of the water supply area and a member of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District; thus enabling legislation also requires that all provisions established by the district be implemented by the local governments. 
1.07.05.  Floodplain management. Henry County is required to adhere to floodplain management standards referenced in Paragraph 60.3(d) (44 CFR 59) based on participation with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The adopted flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 16, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be the final authority as to indicate base flood elevations (BFE) for Henry County, if available. Other methods can be used to determine the BFE as detailed in subsection 3.01.01(C)(2) where the FIS did not establish a BFE. 
1.07.06.  Building and construction codes. Each building and construction code listed in subsections 1.07.06(A) through (O) as approved by the State of Georgia, including any attachments, future editions and amendments are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in its entirety. Consult the website for the Henry County Board of Commissioners at www.co.henry.ga.us/buildingdepartment for the latest codes in effect. 
A.  International Building Code (ICC) 
B.  National Electric Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 
C.  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC) 
D.  International Mechanical Code (ICC) 
E.  International Plumbing Code (ICC) 
F.  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC) 
G.  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC) 
H.  International Fire Code (ICC) 
I.  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC) 
J.  Standard Amusement Device Code (SBCCI/ICC) 
K.  Excavation and Grading Code (SBCCI/ICC) 
L.  International Existing Buildings Code (ICC) 
M.  Standard Swimming Pool Code (SBCCI/ICC) 
N.  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code (SBCCI/ICC) 
O.  The Code for Safety of Life from Fire in Buildings and Structures as contained in the National Fire Prevention Association Publication 101 (NFPA). 
1.07.07.  OSHA safety and health regulations regarding excavating and trenching. All safety and health regulations promulgated by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly Part 1926, Subpart P, Excavation, Trenching, and Shoring, sections 1926.650, 1926.651, and 1926.652 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, are hereby adopted as a part of this ULDC as if it were quoted verbatim herein. 
Sec. 1.08.00. - Rules of interpretation. 
1.08.01.  Generally. 
A.  The following rules of interpretation shall apply in the administration of the ULDC: 
1.  In the administration of the ULDC, where there is any conflict between text within the ULDC and any caption, illustration, or graphic presentation, the text shall control. 
2.  All statements that refer to "section" means sections of this ULDC unless the statement clearly provides a citation to another document. 
3.  More specific provisions of this ULDC shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions. 
4.  Where more than one (1) standard on the same subject is applied to the design and development of land, the stricter standard shall apply. 
5.  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ULDC, the provisions shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, aesthetics, and welfare of the general public. 
1.08.02  Rules for boundary interpretations It is the intent of this Unified Land Development Code that the entire area of the county, including all land, water areas, rivers, streets, alleys, railroad and other rights-of-way, be included in the districts established by this Unified Land Development Code. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district in Henry County the following rules shall apply: 
A.  District boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways shall be construed as following the indicated centerline. 
B.  District boundaries indicated as approximately following street or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed as following the street or highway right-of-way lines. 
C.  District boundaries indicated as approximately following lot or property lines shall be construed to follow such lot or property lines. 
D.  District boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, roads, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance or legal description is given, the dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map. 
E.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot that is in single ownership at the time of enactment of this ULDC, the district requirements for each portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply. 
F.  In the case of a through lot fronting on two (2) approximately parallel streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 
G.  Where zoning district boundaries are in doubt, the administrator shall make such interpretation using the appropriate scale from the official zoning map. 
H.  All rights-of-way; not otherwise specifically designated, shall be zoned RA. 
1.08.03.  Rules of construction. 
A.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
B.  Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words used in the plural number shall include the singular number. 
C.  A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to female persons and to firms, partnerships, and corporations, as well as to male persons. 
D.  The word "may" is always permissive and never mandatory. The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
E.  The word "month" shall mean thirty (30) days. 
F.  The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies both political and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
G.  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
1.08.04.  Computation of time. Except as required by state or federal law, or as interpreted by the courts, the time within which an act shall be done shall be computed by working days, excluding the first and including the last day. Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays in Henry County shall be excluded from the computation. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § I, 3-19-13) 
Sec. 1.09.00. - Abrogation. 
This ULDC is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ULDC and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
Sec. 1.10.00. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ULDC shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of remaining portions of this ULDC. 
Sec. 1.11.00. - Conversion of previous zoning districts. 
A.  Zoning districts as were established under the previous zoning ordinance of Henry County are hereby renamed to the following zoning district names and designations under this ULDC, as shown in Table 1.11.00(A). All regulations, requirements and provisions of this ULDC applicable to a zoning district established under this section shall apply to the previously named zoning district as now named, as shown in Table 2.01.07(A). 
B.  All special conditions and special stipulations imposed as conditions of rezoning of property prior to adoption of this ULDC are hereby retained and reaffirmed, and shall continue in full force and effect until such time as the property is rezoned or the prior zoning action of the board of commissioners is amended through the rezoning process established by this ULDC. 
Table 1.11.00(A): Conversion of Previous Zoning Districts 

 
C.  Any subdivision (residential or commercial), platted prior to the September 15, 2009 adoption of the Unified Land Development Code (ULDC), shall retain all development standards which were in place at the time of platting. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(1), 6-15-10) 
CHAPTER 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2.00.00. - Generally. 
The use of buildings, structures, and land in accordance with the land use plan for Henry County shall comply with the use requirements for zoning districts set forth in chapter 2. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 2.01.00. - Establishment of base zoning districts. 
2.01.01.  Official zoning map. 
A.  Henry County is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ULDC. 
B.  The official zoning map may be amended according to the procedures set forth in section 12.02.09 of the ULDC. 
2.01.02.  Residential zoning districts. The following residential zoning districts are established: 
A.  RA: Residential-agricultural zoning district. This district is intended to preserve the mixed agricultural and residential character of land while providing a transition between rural and agricultural land and suburban and urban land; and locations to carry out agricultural activities, including those related to crops, livestock, and timber. This district will also provide for detached single-family residential dwellings that are site-built, manufactured or industrialized on lots. 
1.  Development standards. 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
B.  R-1: Single-family residence zoning district. This district is intended to provide for detached single-family residential dwellings that are site-built, manufactured or industrialized on lots. 
1.  Development standards. 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
C.  R-2/R-2(sewer): Single-family residence zoning district. This district is intended to provide for detached single-family residential dwellings that are either site-built or industrialized on lots. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
D.  R-3: Single-family residence zoning district. This district is intended to provide for detached single-family residential dwellings that are either site-built or industrialized on lots. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
Zero lot line developments are allowed as an optional development pattern by right for single-family uses within this zoning district. 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
E.  R-4: Single-family residence zoning district. This district is intended to provide for detached single-family residential dwellings that are either site-built or industrialized on lots. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
Zero lot line developments are allowed as an optional development pattern by right for single-family uses within this zoning district. 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
F.  R-5: Single-family residence zoning district. This district is intended to provide for detached single-family residential dwellings that are either site-built or industrialized on lots. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
Zero lot line developments are allowed as an optional development pattern by right for single-family uses within this zoning district. 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
G.  RD: Residential duplex district. This district is intended to provide locations for duplex structures, where central water and central sewer are available on lots. 
1.  Development standards. 

 
;ad=1p;Zero lot line developments are allowed as an optional development pattern by right for single-family uses within this zoning district. 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
H.  RM: Multifamily residential district. This district is intended to provide locations for the development of multifamily residences or cluster housing developments. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
I.  RS: Residential suburban district. This district is intended to provide locations for a combination of two (2) of the following: single-family, duplex, or multifamily developments. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
J.  RMH: Mobile or manufactured home development district. This district is intended to provide locations for mobile or manufactured homes in parks, subdivisions, or other similar unified development arrangements on lots. See section 4.03.16 for manufactured home park standards. 
1.  Development standards. 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
2.01.03.  Commercial, office and institutional zoning districts. 
A.  OI: Office-institutional district. This district is intended to provide for the development of a complimentary mix of business, professional and institutional activities that are compatible with the primary purpose of this district. Limited retail uses normally associated with office or institutional uses, accessory structures, and essential public services are also permissible. 
1.  Development standards. 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
B.  C-1: Neighborhood commercial district. This district is intended to provide locations for limited retail and service uses to satisfy the common and frequent needs of residents of nearby residential neighborhoods. It is further the intent of this district to encourage such uses to be a part of a neighborhood convenience shopping center. Accessory uses and structures and essential public services are permissible. 
1.  Development standards. 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
C.  C-2: General commercial district. This district is intended to provide locations for a wide variety of retail and service uses to satisfy the common and frequent needs of residents in large sections of the county and of the traveling public. It is the intent of this district to encourage businesses to be part of planned commercial centers, neighborhood shopping centers, or community shopping centers. Accessory uses and structures, essential public services and all "permitted" C-1 uses are permissible. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
D.  C-3: Highway commercial district. This district is intended to provide areas for commercial activities which provide products and services that require locations with the highest level of access to major highways and regional transportation systems. Permissible uses also include essential public services, accessory uses and structures, and all "permitted" C-1 and C-2 uses. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
2.01.04.  Industrial zoning districts. 
A.  M-1: Light manufacturing district. This district is intended to provide for light industrial uses which do not produce, store, or handle hazardous wastes. Permissible uses include commercial and industrial activities involved in manufacturing, processing, assembly, storage, or sale of products. Accessory uses and structures and essential public services are permissible. 
1.  Development standards. 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
B.  M-2: Heavy manufacturing district. This district is intended to provide for the broadest range of industrial operations permitted in the county. It is the district for location of those industries which may have negative impacts or nuisance factors. Accessory uses and structures, essential public services and all "permitted" M-1 uses are permissible. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
2.01.05.  Mixture of residential, office and institutional, commercial, and industrial zoning districts. 
A.  MU: Mixed-use district. This district is intended to provide locations for office, institutional, personal service, single-family, duplex, cluster housing, and multifamily residential uses, accessory uses or structures, and essential public services. Lots and parcels may be used for a single use, or may contain a mixture of uses within a single development site. This district is intended to allow the flexibility of development standards. Accessory uses and structures and essential public services are permissible. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
Zero lot line developments are allowed as an optional development pattern by right for single-family uses within this zoning district. 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
B.  IAC: Interchange activity center district. This district is intended to provide locations at the intersection of two (2) major arterials or at interstate interchanges to accommodate transient shopping, lodging, and hospitality uses, and to provide locations with the highest level of access to meet the needs for product distribution. This district is intended as a mixed-use development. The following types of uses are permissible: multifamily residential, regional commercial, lodging, regional services, and essential public services. Uses may be combined within a development project in this district. 
1.  Development standards: 

 
Zero lot line developments are allowed as an optional development pattern by right for single-family uses within this zoning district. 
2.  Permitted uses and supplemental standards: See tables 2.03.02 and 2.03.03. 
3.  Accessory uses: See table 2.03.04. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(2)—(4), 6-15-10; Ord. No. 11-05, § I, 7-19-11; Ord. No. 17-14, § I, 7-18-17 ) 
Sec. 2.02.00. - Establishment of overlay districts. 
2.02.01.  Generally. These districts are superimposed on top of portions of one (1) or more underlying base zoning districts that allow application of additional standards addressing a special purpose, such as historic preservation or floodplain protection. An overlay district may be used to add a village center or community commercial district as described in the comprehensive plan. See section 4.02.00 for the regulations for overlay districts. 
Sec. 2.03.00. - Uses allowed in base zoning districts. 
2.03.01.  Generally. The tables in this section describe those uses that are permissible in each base zoning district. 
2.03.02.  Residential land uses in base zoning districts (see table 2.03.02). The table in this section identifies the permissible residential uses within base zoning districts. Allowable density in residential districts shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. Within the following table, the letter "P" means the identified use is permissible, subject to the standards and criteria applicable to the zoning district. The letter "S" means the use is permissible, subject to the standards and criteria applicable to the zoning district and supplemental standards applicable to the specific use. The section number for supplemental standards is listed within the cell. A blank cell means the use is prohibited in the indicated zoning district. 
Table 2.03.02. Residential Land Uses in Base Zoning Districts. 

 
1 Single-family, duplex, multifamily, and/or institutional living may be permissible where the development within the RA zoning district is proposed as a traditional neighborhood development, pursuant to section 6.01.00. 
2.03.03.  Nonresidential land uses in base zoning districts. The table in this section identifies the permissible nonresidential uses within each base zoning district. Within the following table, the letter "P" means the identified use is permissible, subject to the standards and criteria applicable to the zoning district. The letter "S" means the use is permissible, subject to the standards and criteria applicable to the zoning district and supplemental standards applicable to the specific use. The letter "H" means that use is permissible as a home occupation, subject to the supplemental standards and criteria applicable within chapter 7, section 7.01.00. A blank cell means the use is prohibited in the indicated zoning district. Permissible accessory uses are identified in table 2.03.04. Land uses permitted in the C-1 zoning district are permitted in C-2 and C-3 zoning districts. Land uses permitted in the M-1 zoning district are permitted in the M-2 zoning district. 
Table 2.03.03. Nonresidential Land Uses in Base Zoning Districts. 

 
2.03.04.  Accessory land uses in base zoning districts. The table in this section identifies the permissible accessory uses within each base zoning district. Individual accessory uses are listed, together with an indication as to whether the use is permissible, as an accessory use, within each zoning district. Some uses are permissible by right in a zoning district, and are so indicated in tables 2.03.03 and 2.03.04. Consult each table for a determination as to whether the indicated use is permissible by right, or as an accessory use. Where the cell is blank in all tables for a specified use in a specified zoning district, the use is prohibited. All accessory structures/uses require that a building permit be issued prior to placement through the Henry County Building Department. 
Table 2.03.04. Accessory Land Uses in Base Zoning Districts 

 
*Permitted only for lawn and garden, and greenhouses/nursery uses where a building is on the lot. 
2.03.05.  Move-in structure uses in base zoning districts. 
A.  [Applicability.] Except as provided in this section, no application for a move-in structure permit shall be approved, nor any structure moved or occupied, in Henry County, Georgia, prior to completion of all the requirements of this section. 
B.  [Defined.] A move-in structure is defined as a preexisting structure relocated to another property or on the same property. Factory-built modular and manufactured homes as defined in the ULDC (Appendix A) are exempt from this section. 
C.  [Permitted use.] Move-in houses shall be a permitted use only in the RA (residential-agricultural) zoning district as defined in the ULDC, section 2.01.02 and are subject to all lot size and setback requirements of the RA district, and shall be subject to all regulations of the Henry County Health Department concerning on-site sewage disposal facilities and private wells. 
D.  Inspections. 
1.  Preliminary inspections. No building permit application for a move-in structure shall be approved until a complete inspection of the structure is made by the Henry County Building Department. An application for a move-in structure inspection shall be completed on forms provided by the building department prior to the inspection being made. The building department inspection shall determine the compliance or the feasibility of compliance to all existing building codes, development codes and ordinances adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. Depending upon the size, age, condition or design of the structure, the building official or his authorized representative may require an inspection and report from a structural engineer to evaluate the suitability of the structure for moving. The engineering inspection and report fee shall be paid by the applicant for the move-in structure. If the building official or his authorized representative determines that compliance with existing codes is not feasible, the application for the building permits shall be denied. All such denials shall be in writing specifying the reasons therefore and signed by the building official. 
2.  Follow-up inspection. Following relocation of the structure and prior to and for the purpose of re-inspecting, the owner of the move-in structure shall, at the owner's choice, remove either the interior wall covering on all exterior walls or the exterior wall covering on all exterior walls. If necessary, and at the direction of the building official or his authorized representative regarding the interior load-bearing walls, the owner shall remove one (1) side of these interior walls and the building department shall then re-inspect the structure to insure that its structural integrity has not been compromised and that any required improvements are still feasible. 
3.  Inspection fee. The inspection fee shall be as set forth in the Henry County Building Department Fee Schedule which shall be paid to the building department prior to the inspection being made. 
E.  Performance letter of credit or escrow letter of surety required of owner of the structure. To ensure that the structure will meet all of Henry County's current building construction codes and that the renovation of the move-in structure is completed and ready for occupancy within six (6) months from the date the building permit is issued, the owner of the move-in structure shall provide an irrevocable letter of credit or irrevocable bank escrow letter of surety in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), meeting the requirements of section 12.02.13. Such irrevocable letters of credit or irrevocable bank escrow letters of surety shall be issued from a federally insured banking institution. 
F.  Building permit. A building permit shall be obtained from the building department for a move-in structure before it can be located on a lot in Henry County. The fee for the permit shall be as set forth in the Henry County building department fee schedule. 
G.  Owner certification. All applications for permit shall be accompanied by a sworn affidavit that said applicant is the owner of the move-in structure and the owner of real property where the structure is to be relocated if the structure is to be located in Henry County. Prior to habitation, said owner shall be required to obtain a certificate of occupancy to verify completion of all work and that the structure is ready for habitation. 
H.  Route approval. 
1.  Structures to be located within Henry County. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a move-in structure, the applicant must first submit and receive approval from the Henry County Police Department, Henry County Department of Transportation, and Henry County Code Enforcement Division regarding the proposed route. The applicants shall provide information concerning the name and address of the moving company, owner of structure to be moved, destination of structure, type and size of structure, map of the proposed route and insurance company. Said approval and information must be on forms furnished by the Henry County Building Department. Routes must comply with the Henry County Truck Route Ordinance. 
2.  Structures to be located outside of Henry County. Prior to moving a preexisting structure through Henry County, routes must be established by the Henry County Police Department, Henry County Department of Transportation, and Henry County Code Enforcement Division on forms provided by the Henry County Building Department. The applicants shall provide information concerning the name and address of the moving company, owner of structure to be moved, destination of structure, type and size of structure, map of the proposed route and insurance company. Required police escort must be prearranged with the Henry County Police Department three (3) days prior to moving structure from Henry County. Move-through structures will be allowed only on routes established in the Henry County Truck Route Ordinance. 
I.  Requirements for moving companies. Any firm or individual moving structures into or through Henry County shall provide a valid copy of the Georgia Department of Transportation Oversize/Overweight Permit for the structures and a certificate of liability, naming Henry County as the certificate holder, that meets or exceeds the minimum insurance standards required by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
J.  Guarantee of completion. No application for a building permit shall be approved until a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or irrevocable bank escrow letter of surety shall first be provided as referred to in subsection E., above. 
K.  Time of completion. All permits for move-in structures must be completed in compliance with all codes and ordinances of Henry County within six (6) months from the date of granting of the building permit, unless extended as provided herein. In the event said structure is not in compliance and/or is not completed within the specified time limit, the building official or his authorized representative shall notify, in writing, the owner giving specific causes of noncompliance or noncompletion. Upon notification, the owner has thirty (30) days to correct said causes of noncompliance or noncompletion. In the event of failure of the owner to correct causes of noncompliance or noncompletion, and the owner has not received an extension of completion time, a notice to move or demolish said structure shall be issued to the owner immediately. Failure to move or demolish said structure within ten (10) days of this notice shall be deemed a violation of this section and shall be punishable in the Magistrate Court of Henry County and the Henry County Building Official or his authorized representative shall authorize the surety or bank issuing the irrevocable letter of credit or escrow letter of surety to release to the county all funds. 
L.  Extension of completion time. The Henry County Building Official or his authorized representative, upon written request by the owner which states the reason for the request and payment of applicable fees, may issue a 90-day extension of completion time for cause beyond the original six-month compliance/completion period. A second 90-day extension of completion time, upon written request by the owner which states the reason for the second request, may be issued after the first 90-day extension of completion time has elapsed. Approved or denied extension of compliance/completion time requests shall be in writing and signed by the building official or his authorized representative. Permission for a greater extension of time may be granted only by the Henry County Board of Commissioners in regular public session. Application to appear before the board of commissioners shall be on forms provided by the Henry County Building Department. For any extension of completion time request, the performance irrevocable letter of credit, or irrevocable bank escrow letter of surety may be required to be extended if the performance letter of credit or irrevocable bank escrow letter of surety does not have sufficient time remaining to ensure that the structure will meet all of Henry County's current building construction codes and that the renovation of the move-in structure is completed and ready for occupancy within the requested time. The fees for each extension of completion time request shall be as set forth in the Henry County Building Department Fee Schedule. 
M.  Certification of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued upon the passing of a final inspection of a structure and shall verify the completion requirements hereinabove set forth, including compliance with all existing building and life safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 10-12, § I, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 10-14, § I, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 10-18, § I, 11-16-10; Ord. No. 10-20, § I(5)—(8), 6-15-10; Ord. No. 10-15, § I, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 11-02, § I, 4-4-11; Ord. No. 11-08, § I, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 11-09, § I, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 12-10, § I, 2-1-12; Ord. No. 12-15, § I, 7-17-12; Res. No. 13-05, Exh. A, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 15-05, § I, 7-7-15 ; Ord. No. 17-15, 8-1-17 ) 
Sec. 2.04.00. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
2.04.01.  Parking and storage of major recreational equipment. Major recreational equipment may be parked or stored on side yards or rear yards or in a carport or enclosed building; provided that public right-of-way, sidewalk or sight distance, as defined in chapter 8, section 8.01.08 of the ULDC, is not obstructed. In addition, temporary parking is permitted within front yards for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading or unloading. 
The administrator is authorized to allow such equipment to be used as temporary living quarters in the following situations provided adequate documentation is provided prior to establishing such: 
1.  Family hardships and catastrophic events. 
2.  Temporary visitations. 
3.  Temporary dwelling when a primary structure is being built or modified on the same property. 
No more than two (2) such vehicles are allowed to be occupied on site at any one time. No separate permanent utility hook-ups or fixtures may be installed at any time. Services required to facilitate temporary habitation, included, but not limited to, liquid waste containment and disposal, solid waste disposal (e.g., dumpsters, trash cans), potable water, power, etc., shall be approved by administrator. 
Such equipment may be used for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days; however, the administrator may approve two (2) extensions up to ninety (90) days each. Any further extensions must be approved by the county manager. 
2.04.02.  Parking and storage of commercial vehicles. Parking, storing, or maintaining any commercial vehicle is prohibited in all residential subdivisions, and in all residential zoning districts except RA. 
2.04.03.  Keeping and raising of livestock. The keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables shall be limited to property located within the RA zoning district and must have a minimum lot area of three (3) acres. The keeping and raising of animals and fowl shall be subject to all regulations of the Henry County Health Department and the Henry County Animal Control Ordinance. 
See section 3-4-15 of the Henry County Code of Ordinances for the requirements for raising backyard chickens on lots less than three (3) acres. 
2.04.04.  Abandoned, wrecked, or junked vehicles. Parking or storing abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, lumber, metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material is prohibited in all residential zoning districts. 
2.04.05.  Accumulation of garbage, trash and rubbish. It shall be prohibited in all residential districts to place, deposit, or allow the accumulation of, household garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse or any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
2.04.06.  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, fence, service area, parking facility/area, loading area, except driveways shall be permitted to encroach on public right-of-way. All permanent structures or inorganic objects which are placed near but not within the right-of-way shall be located as not to obstruct, hinder or impede the view or movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic as to become a nuisance, danger or hazard to the general public. 
2.04.07.  Posting. Each dwelling unit and place of business shall have light-reflective numbers posted and maintained in a prominent place on the property, visible from the street providing public access, the address of the dwelling unit or place of business. 
(1)  For residences using mailboxes: Two-inch high light-reflective number with contrasting background; 
(2)  For residences which do not use mailboxes and within one hundred (100) feet of roadway: Three-inch high light-reflective numbers with contrasting background; 
(3)  For residences which do not use mailboxes and are more than one hundred (100) feet from a roadway: Three-inch high light-reflective numbers visible from the roadway with contrasting background; and 
(4)  For all commercial establishments: Three-inch high light-reflective numbers with contrasting backgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 10-09, § I, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 12-01, § I, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 12-13, § I, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 13-09, 7-16-13) 
CHAPTER 3. - PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND RESOURCES 

Sec. 3.00.00. - Generally. 
The provisions set forth in chapter 3 are intended to protect the natural features and natural resources within Henry County, and to implement policies in the Henry County Comprehensive Plan. The natural features and natural resources included in chapter 3 are the floodplain, watersheds, wetlands, groundwater, river corridors, and open spaces. 
Sec. 3.01.00. - Floodplain protection. 
3.01.01.  General provisions. 
A.  The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
1.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial development, ground disturbance or construction; 
2.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
3.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
4.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
5.  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
6.  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
B.  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within Henry County. 
C.  Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this article, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
1.  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 16, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Henry County dated May 16, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
2.  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to Henry County; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by Henry County Stormwater Management Department. 
3.  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to Henry County; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. 
4.  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Henry County Stormwater Management Department. 
D.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Henry County or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
E.  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
F.  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent Henry County, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
G.  Responsibility for administration. The Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
3.01.02.  Permit procedures and requirements. 
A.  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the Henry County Environmental Compliance and Plan Review Department a permit application on a form provided by the Environmental Compliance and Plan Review Department for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
B.  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
1.  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one (1) foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
2.  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 3.01.03.C.2.; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in subsection 3.01.04.A.5.; and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer for all proposed structure(s). 
3.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
4.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
5.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including, but not limited to, permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
6.  All appropriate certifications required under this article. The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
C.  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the director of the building department or designee: 
1.  A certified as-built elevation certificate; or 
2.  Floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. 
A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
D.  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
3.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 3.01.03 and 3.01.04; 
4.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
5.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
6.  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
7.  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
8.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
9.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee and shall be open for public inspection; 
10.  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
11.  Coordinate with the planning and zoning department the review of applicable variance applications and make recommendations that will be presented to the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
3.01.03.  Standards for development. 
A.  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
1.  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
2.  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the Henry County Stormwater Management Department, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. 
B.  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. If floodway data is not available from the Henry County Stormwater Management Department, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. 
C.  General standards. 
1.  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
2.  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection 3.01.03.C.1. shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two (2.0) percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection 3.01.03.D.; 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department using the FEMA Community Concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
D.  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
1.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
2.  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
3.  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
4.  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
E.  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection 3.01.03.E.2. below. 
2.  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
3.  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the environmental compliance and plan review department until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. 
F.  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The Henry County Stormwater Management Department may direct the property owner (at no cost to Henry County) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Henry County Stormwater Management Department. 
3.01.04.  Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
A.  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of subsections 3.01.03.C., D., and E. have been met; 
2.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
3.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
4.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
5.  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
6.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
7.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
8.  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the Henry County Stormwater Management Department to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
9.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
10.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
11.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
12.  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
13.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
14.  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
15.  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this article; and 
16.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
B.  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
1.  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 3.01.03.C., D., and E. have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 3.01.03.C., D., and E. have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.5. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.5. 
2.  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal nonresidential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 3.01.03.C., D. and E. have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 3.01.03.C., D. and E. have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.5. New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 3.01.03.C., D. and E. may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04(A)5. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
3.  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of subsections 3.01.03.C., D. and E. and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection 3.01.04.A.5. and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
4.  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection 3.01.04(B)1.b.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
5.  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 3.01.03(C), (D) and (E) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 3.01.03(C), (D) and (E) have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.5. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.7. 
C.  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
1.  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.5. 
2.  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.5. Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
D.  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
2.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood-prone enclosures in accordance with subsection 3.01.04.A.5. 
E.  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.04.A.5.; 
2.  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
3.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
F.  Standards for subdivisions. 
1.  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
2.  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
3.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 3.01.02.B. 
3.01.05.  [Reserved.] (Variance procedures are found in section 11.02.04 of ULDC.) 
3.01.06.  Violations, enforcement and penalties. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of violation. If the Henry County Stormwater Management Department Director or designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Henry County Stormwater Management Department by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation. 
B.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Henry County Stormwater Management Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Henry County Stormwater Management Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
1.  Stop work order. The environmental compliance and plan review department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Henry County Building Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Henry County Stormwater Management Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Henry County Stormwater Management Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the Henry County Stormwater Management Department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Henry County Stormwater Management Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the Henry County Stormwater Management Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the Henry County Code Enforcement Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Henry County Magistrate Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 15-04, 4-21-15 ) 
Sec. 3.02.00. - Illicit discharge. 
3.02.01.  Description. An illicit discharge is defined as any discharge to a municipal or county separate storm sewer system (stormwater drainage system) that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff, except for discharges allowed under a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit or nonpolluting flows. These nonstormwater discharges occur due to illegal dumping or illegal connections to the stormwater drainage system. This model ordinance provides communities with the authority to deal with illicit discharges and establishes enforcement actions for those persons or entities found to be in noncompliance or that refuse to allow access to their facilities. 
3.02.02.  Introduction. It is hereby determined that: 
Discharges to Henry County's separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to Henry County's separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
These nonstormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume nonstormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into Henry County's separate storm sewer system; 
Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper nonstormwater discharges to Henry County's separate storm sewer system. 
It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the Henry County's separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
3.02.03.  General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to Henry County's separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into Henry County's separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the NPDES permit process. The objectives of this section are to: 
1.  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to Henry County's separate storm sewer system by any person; 
2.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to Henry County's separate storm sewer system; 
3.  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to Henry County's separate storm sewer system; and 
4.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply throughout the unincorporated area of Henry County. 
C.  Compatibility with other regulations. This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
D.  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section shall be adjudged invalid by a court of law within Henry County, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section. 
E.  Responsibility for administration. Henry County Stormwater Management Department shall be responsible for the implementation and administration of this section. Authorized staff within the department, in cooperation with public officers of Henry County Code Enforcement, shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions contained herein. 
3.02.04.  Prohibitions. 
A.  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into Henry County's separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
1.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
2.  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by Henry County as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
3.  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to Henry County's separate storm sewer system. 
B.  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to Henry County's separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
1.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
2.  A person violates this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to Henry County's separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
3.  Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
4.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from Henry County requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to Henry County. 
3.02.05.  Industrial or construction activity discharges. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to Henry County prior to allowing discharges to Henry County's separate storm sewer system. 
3.02.06.  Access and inspection of properties and facilities. Duly authorized representatives from the Henry County Stormwater Management Department shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. 
A.  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access by stormwater management staff. 
B.  The owner or operator shall allow stormwater management staff ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
C.  Stormwater management staff shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of Henry County to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
D.  The stormwater management department may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to stormwater management staff. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
E.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of Henry County Stormwater Management Department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
F.  Unreasonable delays in allowing stormwater management staff access to a facility is a violation of this section. 
G.  If the stormwater management department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and stormwater management staff is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the stormwater management department may seek issuance of a search warrant from the magistrate court of Henry County. 
3.02.07.  Notification of accidental discharges and spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, Henry County's separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to Henry County Stormwater Management Department within three (3) business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this section. 
3.02.08.  Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, stormwater management staff are authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The stormwater management department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in [subsection] 3.02.08.E. 
B.  Notice of violation. Whenever the stormwater management department finds that a violation of this section has occurred, they may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
1.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Henry County Board of Commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation. 
2.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
C.  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination to the board of commissioners. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the board of commissioners or his/her designee shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
D.  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision by Henry County, then representatives of the stormwater management department may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
E.  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within fifteen (15) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within fifteen (15) days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment, at the discretion of the county attorney. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to Henry County by reason of such violation. 
F.  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as Henry County shall deem appropriate, after Henry County has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, Henry County may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
G.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, Henry County may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the Magistrate Court of Henry County Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
H.  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
I.  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and Henry County may seek cumulative remedies. 
Henry County may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
Sec. 3.03.00. - Stream buffer protection. 
3.03.01.  Description. This section provides a framework for local governments to develop buffer zones for streams, as well as the requirements that minimize land development within those buffers. It is the purpose of these buffer zone requirements to protect and stabilize stream banks, protect water quality and preserve aquatic and riparian habitat. 
3.03.02.  Title. This section shall be known as the "Henry County Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
3.03.03.  Findings and purposes. 
A.  Findings. Buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits: 
1.  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
2.  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
3.  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
4.  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
5.  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
6.  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
7.  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
8.  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
9.  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
10.  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
11.  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
B.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, silt and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
1.  Create buffer zones along the streams of Henry County for the protection of water resources; and 
2.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
3.03.04.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in chapter 3 of this appendix. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
A.  Legal nonconformance. This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this appendix. 
2.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
3.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this appendix. 
4.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this appendix. 
B.  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this ordinance. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
1.  Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
2.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 3.03.04.B.1., above. 
3.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this section. 
4.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
5.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to Henry County on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by Henry County to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
6.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this chapter, this section shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection 3.03.05 below. 
3.03.05.  Land development requirements. All land development activity subject to this section shall meet the following: 
1.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. If defined banks are not identifiable, the protected buffer shall be measured from other identifiable features such as the "point of wrested vegetation" (O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(15)(A)) or the "ordinary high water mark" (33 CFR 328.3(e)). 
2.  An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback, as determined by the director of stormwater management or designee. 
3.  For all proposed residential site developments utilizing mass grading/master drainage plans, an undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for seventy-five (75) linear feet, measured horizontally, on both sides of all streams (as applicable) on or adjacent to the subject property, as measured from the top of the streambank(s). If defined banks are not identifiable, the protected buffer shall be measured from other identifiable features such as the "point of wrested vegetation" (O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(15)(A)) or the "ordinary high water mark" (33 CFR 328.3(e)). An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) linear feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited (totaling one hundred (100) linear feet). Additionally, an undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) linear feet, measured horizontally, from all wetlands located on or adjacent to the subject site. 
4.  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffers described above in subsections 3.03.05.1., 3.03.05.2., and 3.03.05.3. 
3.03.06.  Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
3.03.07.  Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. Any permit applications for property requiring buffers hereunder shall be prepared by a Georgia-registered professional engineer and include the following: 
1.  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer; 
2.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer; and 
3.  Any other documentation that Henry County may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
3.03.08.  Responsibility. Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon Henry County, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
3.03.09.  Inspection. Henry County may cause inspections of the work in the buffer to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist Henry County in making such inspections. Henry County shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
3.03.10.  Violations, enforcement and penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this subsection. Any continued violation is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of violation. If Henry County determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this appendix, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to Henry County by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
B.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, Henry County shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, Henry County may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
1.  Stop work order. Henry County may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. Henry County may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. Henry County may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as Henry County may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as Henry County shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after Henry County has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, Henry County may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, Henry County may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the magistrate court of Henry County to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
3.03.11.  Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
A.  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of Henry County, may appeal in writing within thirty (30) days after the issuance of such decision or order to Henry County and shall be entitled to a hearing before Henry County within sixty (60) days of receipt of the written appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of commissioners of Henry County, may within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision, appeal the decision, by writ of certiorari to the superior court of Henry County. 
3.03.12.  Severability. If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § I, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 3.04.00. - Watershed protection areas. 
3.04.01.  Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to identify and protect the established water supply watershed districts within Henry County. This section sets forth development standards intended to maintain the quality and quantity of the water supply in Henry County and adjacent jurisdictions. 
B.  Applicability. Regulations in this section are to be applied in addition to regulations found elsewhere in this ULDC for the specified watershed protection areas and be consistent with the goals of the comprehensive plan. 
3.04.02.  Establishment of watershed protection areas. The following watershed protection areas (WPA) are hereby established and designated. The WPA's listed below with an asterisk (*) are subject to the water quality critical area and limited development area development regulations in sections 3.04.04 and 3.04.05. 
A.  Indian Creek Watershed Protection Area (ICWPA).* The Indian Creek Watershed Protection Area is defined as follows: All land that lies on each side of Indian Creek and each perennial stream that flows into Indian Creek to the ridge line from the S.H. Gardner Reservoir Dam located on Indian Creek just north of Indian Creek Road to the beginning points of Indian Creek and each perennial stream that drains into Indian Creek within said area. Indian Creek is a tributary to the Towaliga River and is contained within the Towaliga River Watershed Protection Area. 
B.  Long Branch Creek Watershed Protection Area (LBWPA).* The Long Branch Creek Watershed Protection Area is defined as follows: All land that lies on each side of Long Branch Creek and each perennial stream that flows into Long Branch Creek to the ridge line from the Long Branch Dam located just north of Locust Grove-Griffin Road to the beginning points of Long Branch Creek and each perennial stream that drains into Long Branch Creek in said area. Long Branch Creek is a tributary to the Towaliga River and is contained within the Towaliga River Watershed Protection Area. 
C.  Shoal Creek Watershed Protection Area (SCWPA).* The SCWPA is described and designated as follows: All land within the boundaries of Henry County located in the Shoal Creek drainage basin upstream from the Shoal Creek Tandem Reservoir Dam, being that portion of Henry County which lies northerly and westerly of Lovejoy Road. 
D.  Towaliga River Watershed Protection Area (TRWPA).* The TRWPA is described and designated as follows: All land that lies on each side of the Towaliga River and each perennial stream that flows into the Towaliga River to the ridge line from Steel Mills Dam located just north of Locust Grove-Griffin Road to the beginning points of the Towaliga River and each perennial stream that drains into the Towaliga River in said area. 
E.  Tussahaw Creek Watershed Protection Area (TCWPA).* The TCWPA is described and designated as follows: All land that lies on each side of Tussahaw Creek and each perennial stream that flows into Tussahaw Creek to the ridge line from the Tussahaw Reservior Dam located just west of Fincherville Road to the beginning points of Tussahaw Creek and each perennial stream that drains into Tussahaw Creek in said area. The main perennial streams that flow into the Tussahaw Creek are: Peeksville Creek and its tributaries; Wolf Creek and its tributaries; and Malholms Creek and its tributaries. All of said creeks are located in the Tussahaw Watershed Protection Area. 
F.  Walnut Creek Watershed Protection Area (WCWPA). The WCWPA is described and designated as including tracts and parcels of land that lie within the 6th and 7th Districts of Henry County, Georgia, as delineated on the Walnut Creek Watershed Map which is made part of this section. The WCWPA includes Walnut Creek and tributaries, including Birch Creek and Crittle Creek. The WCWPA also includes the City of McDonough reservoir. Refer to Ordinance No. 03-06-16 of the City of McDonough Walnut Creek and Tussahaw Creek Watershed Protection Districts. 
G.  Little Cotton Indian Creek Watershed Protection Area (LCICWPA). The LCICWPA is described and designated as follows: All land that lies on each side of Little Cotton Indian Creek and each perennial stream that flows into Little Cotton Indian Creek to the ridge line from the WJ Hooper Reservoir Dam located just west of Springdale Road to the beginning points of Little Cotton Indian Creek and each perennial stream that drains into Little Cotton Indian Creek in said area. The main perennial streams that flow into the WJ Hooper Reservoir are: Rum Creek and its tributaries; Reeves Creek and its tributaries; Little Cotton Indian Creek and its tributaries; and Pates Creek and its tributaries. All of said creeks are located in the Little Cotton Indian Creek Watershed Protection Area. The LCICWPA flows into the WJ Hooper Reservoir which is owned and operated by the Clayton County Water Authority. 
H.  Pates Creek Watershed Protection Area (PCWPA). The PCWPA is described and designated as follows: All land within the boundaries of Henry County located in the Pates Creek Reservoir drainage basin upstream from the Edgar J. Blalock Reservoir Dam, being that portion of Henry County which lies westerly of Pates Creek Drive. The PCWPA flows into the Edgar J. Blalock Reservoir which is owned and operated by the Clayton County Water Authority. 
3.04.03.  Watershed protection area map. A map of each watershed protection area shall be maintained by Henry County and the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority or the Clayton County Water Authority (hereinafter called "authority"). These maps are adopted herein by reference. The following map is for illustrative purposes; maps described in section 3.04.02 are the official maps of watershed protection areas. 

Figure 3.1 Watershed Protection Areas Map 
3.04.04.  Water quality critical area. A water quality critical area is established for each watershed protection area. The water quality critical area for each of the above-stated watershed protection area, except the WCWPA, is: 
A..  All land that lies adjacent to the normal pool level of a reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed or five hundred (500) feet, whichever is shorter; and 
B.  All land extending a distance of three (3) miles upstream from the normal pool level of the reservoir that is adjacent to each perennial stream upstream from the reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed on each side of the perennial stream or five hundred (500) feet, whichever is shorter. 
C.  The normal pool level elevation* of the existing reservoirs of the authority are as follows: 
Indian Creek Reservoir contour line El. 728.0; 
Long Branch Reservoir contour line El. 720.0; 
Lower Towaliga River Reservoir contour line El. 658.0; 
Upper Towaliga River Reservoir contour line El. 720.0; 
Tussahaw Creek Reservoir contour line El. 600.0; 
Shoal Creek Reservoir contour line El. 845.0; 
*Elevations are based on U.S. Geological Survey Datum 
3.04.05.  Limited development area. A limited development area is established for the remaining part of the watershed protection area that is located outside of the water quality critical area and extending to the ridge line of each watershed district. 

Figure 3.2. 
If a perennial stream abuts or crosses any property within the limited development area described in section 3.04.05, specific regulations apply (see Table 3.04.09). 
3.04.06.  Specific provisions for WCWPA. 
A.  The City of McDonough Reservoir Protection Area is established as that area seven hundred fifty (750) feet in width surrounding the existing property owned by the City of McDonough on which is located the City of McDonough reservoir. This area shall be measured from the normal pool elevation (seven hundred twenty-three (723.0) feet contour above mean sea level) at the reservoir. 
B.  The Walnut Creek Limited Development Area includes all land area within the WCWPA, exclusive of those properties contained within and subject to regulations of the City of McDonough Reservoir Protection Area. 
3.04.07.  Specific provisions for LCICWPA and PCWPA. 
A.  The Little Cotton Indian Creek Reservoir Protection Area and Pates Creek Reservoir Protection Area are established as that area one hundred fifty (150) feet in width surrounding each respective reservoir's normal pool elevation. 
B.  The perennial stream corridors of the LCICWPA and PCWPA shall be protected by the following criteria: 
1.  An undisturbed buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred (100) feet on both sides of the stream measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
For the purposes of subsection 3.04.07, perennial streams are defined as streams that flow throughout the whole year as indicated on the most current USGS quadrangle map. 
C.  The following uses shall be exempted from the above buffers and setbacks, provided the listed uses do not impair the quality of the drinking water stream: 
1.  Utilities, provided that said utilities: 
a.  Are located as far from stream bank as reasonably possible, 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas to the extent reasonably possible. 
2.  Forestry and agricultural activities. 
3.  Structures and infrastructure existing within the above setback and buffer, as of date of adoption. 
4.  Development activities on recorded parcels existing at the date of adoption that would be unbuildable by the above buffer and setback requirements. 
D.  Hazardous or toxic materials storage, disposal, use or generation (except handling as regulated in section 3.04.10) is prohibited within both watershed protection areas. 
E.  New sanitary landfills shall have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
F.  Sections 3.04.09 and 3.04.11 are not applicable to either the LCICWPA and PCWPA. 
G.  Variances from the provisions of this subsection may be granted in accordance with section 11.02.06. 
3.04.08.  Uses in watershed protection areas. The following table identifies permissible and prohibited uses within the water quality critical area and limited development area of watershed protection areas: 
Table 3.04.08. Uses in Watershed Protection Areas and Limited Development Areas. 

 
3.04.09.  Hazardous materials handling. New facilities located within the watershed protection area that handle hazardous materials of a type and amounts requiring a permit from the Georgia DNR or that require disposal by a hazardous materials handler permitted or licensed by the Georgia DNR at a hazardous materials facility, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems. Such spill and leak collections systems shall be shown on the development plan in detail and shall be approved pursuant to procedures for development plan approval set forth in subsection 12.02.02.E.6. 
3.04.10.  Site design standards for specific uses in watershed protection areas. Proposed development shall comply with both the standards for watershed protection areas and the standards for the zoning district in which the proposed development is located. Where standards are specified for the same item in both the zoning district standards and the watershed protection area standards, the stricter standard shall be required. 
Table 3.04.10. Site Design Requirements Within Watershed Protection Areas. 

 
3.04.11.  Buffers in watershed protection areas. Buffers are required in watershed protection area as follows: 
A.  Buffers within water quality critical areas and the City of McDonough reservoir protection area. A natural or enhanced vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the normal pool level of a reservoir and one hundred (100) feet on both sides of any other surface water as measured from the banks. 
B.  Surface water buffers within the limited development area. A natural or enhanced vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred (100) feet on both sides of any surface water as measured from the banks. 
3.04.12.  Specific requirements for septic tanks and drainfields within watershed protection areas. 
A.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the setback areas established in section 3.04.10 for buildings and impervious surfaces in watershed protection areas. 
B.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields for residential development shall have a minimum one hundred (100) feet setback from any surface water. 
C.  In the City of McDonough Reservoir protection area, septic tanks and septic tank drain fields for residential development shall have a minimum one hundred fifty (150) feet setback from the normal pool elevation of the reservoir and from any surface water. 
3.04.13.  Alternative provisions for impervious surface limitations. 
A.  The percentage of impervious surface shall be determined by the sum of all land areas to be covered by impervious structures during the development of the property (i.e., roads, streets, driveways, houses, buildings, parking areas), divided by the total site area. 
B.  The impervious surface of a single-family residential development within the limited development area may be increased up to thirty-five (35) percent provided that: 
1.  Development of land in the limited development area includes area(s) set aside to remain in natural vegetation or open space in the amount of two (2) times the area of impervious surface above the twenty-five (25) percent limit. Ownership of such parcels in fee simple or as a conservation easement shall be conveyed to the county, a homeowners' association, a government agency, or nonprofit entity, as approved by the county. 
2.  If the recipient of the property or conservation easement is to be an existing or proposed organization other than a governmental entity, the developer shall submit to the county articles of association or incorporation which establish the entity. Said document shall be approved in writing by the county prior to approving said development. Any proposed changes in said articles shall require the prior written approval of the county. 
3.  If the recipient is a homeowners' association, membership in the homeowners' association shall be mandatory for property owners and made a required covenant in all deeds issued or passed. The association shall provide voting and use rights in the natural vegetated area when applicable and charge dues or levy assessments to cover expenses which may include tax liabilities of common areas, and for the maintenance of such common areas, natural vegetated areas, improvements, rights-of-way, utilities, etc. Such association shall be responsible for the perpetuation, maintenance, and function of all common lands, uses, and facilities. 
4.  All lands and improvements shall be described and identified as to location, size, use and control in a restrictive covenant. The details of all easements conveyed shall be likewise described. These restrictive covenants shall be written so as to run with the land and become a part of the deed of each lot or dwelling unit within the development. 
5.  Such restrictive covenants and the association shall continue in effect so as to control the availability of facilities for their intended function, and to protect the development from additional unplanned densities and use. Such associations shall not be dissolved, nor shall such association dispose of any land set aside for the purposes of this section, by sale or otherwise without prior written consent of the county. 
6.  Any and all natural vegetated areas shall be held in common ownership by the dwelling unit owners. Any change in the natural or vegetated area, other than to maintain it in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the approved final development plan, shall require prior written approval of the county. 
7.  The natural vegetated area may be set aside by the developer by acquiring property in fee simple or a conservation easement within the watershed district. 
C.  The impervious surfaces for industrial, commercial, offices, institutional, public, and multifamily residential development within the limited development area may be increased up to seventy-five (75) percent impervious surfaces. 
1.  All permanent stormwater control structures and easements for maintenance and access shall be recorded in the final plat of the property in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection 12.02.03. 
D.  A development may participate in a regional wet detention pond program which has been established by one (1) or more public or private entities subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Runoff from the development drains into a regional stormwater management control facility approved by the county. 
2.  An agreement between the county and the landowner has been executed which guarantees participation in the regional stormwater arrangement of the property and the detention pond. 
3.  Construction of a regional detention pond meets or exceeds the design requirements of the stormwater management provisions set forth in section 8.04.00. 
E.  A development may provide an alternative method for stormwater control other than a wet detention pond provided that it is in compliance with the stormwater management requirements set forth in section 8.04.00, and design criteria for pollutant removal equivalent to those associated with wet detention ponds included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § I, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 12-08, § I, 5-19-12) 
Sec. 3.05.00. - Wetland protection. 
3.05.01.  Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the regulations in this section is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational, and aesthetic values. The regulations set forth in this section are intended to limit activities that may damage wetlands, and to require that such activities be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as described in the comprehensive plan. The regulations set forth in this section are further intended to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain protection, erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature, and provision of wildlife habitat. 
B.  Applicability. Regulations for the protection of wetlands, set forth in this section, shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within the jurisdiction of Henry County. 
3.05.02.  National wetland inventory (NWI) maps. The U.S. Department of the Interior, National Wetland Inventory Maps (NWI Maps), together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ULDC. NWI maps are available at http:wetlands.fws.gov. 
3.05.03.  Determination of wetlands boundary. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  The NWI maps are general reference documents, and wetland boundaries indicated on the maps are approximations. The purpose of the NWI maps is to alert developers/landowners if the property proposed for development is within or adjacent to a wetland. 
2.  The NWI maps do not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Henry County and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
B.  Where it is determined that wetlands are located on property proposed for development, a determination of the location and extent of the wetlands shall be made by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or a qualified environmental engineer. A local permit for development within wetlands shall not be issued until a determination has been made by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as to whether jurisdictional wetlands exist on the site. If there are jurisdictional wetlands on the site that will be disturbed by the proposed development, the applicant shall first obtain a wetlands alteration section 404 permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
3.05.04.  Permissible activities within wetlands. Lawful activities set forth in this section shall be allowed as of right within a wetland. Constructing, grading, filling, draining, or dredging shall be permissible only as provided. 
A.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require a permit as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
B.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
C.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
D.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
E.  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed, and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
F.  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
3.05.05.  Prohibited activities within wetlands. The following activities are prohibited within wetlands: 
A.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
B.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
C.  Other uses prohibited in the underlying zoning district. 
3.05.06.  Temporary activities within wetlands. The following activities may be permissible on a temporary basis, provided that emergency conditions require the activity: 
A.  Maintenance or repair, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Maintenance and repair is limited to lawfully located roads, structures, and facilities used in the service to the public to provide transportation, electricity, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication, or other services; 
2.  The roads, structures, or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged; 
3.  Written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to Henry County; and 
4.  The work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment shall be minimized. 
B.  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
C.  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating, or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration, or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use as set forth in subsection 3.05.04.D. above. 
D.  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses, or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
3.05.07.  Buffers required. 
A.  Location of buffer. A buffer shall be located adjacent to and running parallel with the boundary established pursuant to subsection 3.05.03 above. The buffer shall provide an area of protection between the wetland, whether or not subsequently removed pursuant to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit and any permissible activity within or adjacent to the wetland. 
B.  Buffer standards. 
1.  The buffer shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width. 
2.  All natural vegetation shall be retained and maintained within the buffer. 
3.  The number and types of plants required within the buffer shall be as set forth in section 5.02.00. 
Sec. 3.06.00. - Groundwater recharge protection. 
3.06.01.  Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to protect groundwater as follows: 
1.  Restricting land uses that generate, use, or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
2.  Limiting density of development; and 
3.  Ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all lands mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition, as amended, or as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
3.06.02.  Determination of pollution susceptability. Limitations on land use activities are based on the degree to which the aquifer is susceptible, or at risk, to pollution from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections, and other human activities. The Georgia DNR has prepared maps of pollution susceptibility, which categorize land in areas of high, medium, and low potential for groundwater pollution. These maps shall be the basis for determining the locations for limited land use activities set forth in subsection 3.06.03. 
3.06.03.  Limitations and site design requirements for land use activities. 
Table 3.06.03. Land Use Limitations and Site Design Requirements Within the Groundwater Protection Area. 

 
A.  At a minimum, the liner required for new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
B.  The following soil groupings are for use with Tables DHR MT-1 and DHR MT-2. 

 
Sec. 3.07.00. - River corridor protection. 
3.07.01.  Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of river corridor protection standards is to help maintain high water quality of the designated rivers. 
B.  Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all river corridors designated by the State of Georgia because of their unique environmental importance. The South River in Henry County is a designated river. 
C.  Stricter standards apply. Proposed development shall comply with both the standards for river corridor protection, the standards for the zoning district in which the proposed development is located, and the goals of the comprehensive plan. Where standards are specified for the same item in both the zoning district standards and the river corridor standards, the stricter standard shall be required. 
3.07.02.  River corridor protection area. The river corridor protection area extends from the top of the riverbank on both sides of the river for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet landward. The top of the riverbank is the uppermost part of the riverbank, usually marked by a break in the slope. All land that lies within this corridor is part of the river corridor protection area. 
3.07.03.  Buffer requirements for the river corridor protection area. A natural vegetative buffer area shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred (100) feet on both sides of the river as measured from the riverbanks. 
3.07.04.  Permissible uses within the river corridor protection area. The following specific land uses are permissible within the river corridor protection area, subject to the standards listed for each use: 
A.  A single-family dwelling together with permissible accessory structures, limited to one (1) per tract of land, may be located within the buffer area; 
B.  Road crossings and utility crossings; 
C.  Timber production and harvesting, consistent with best management practices of the Georgia Forestry Commission, and protection of the water quality of the river as required by the Clean Water Act; 
D.  Wildlife and fishery management activities; 
E.  Wastewater treatment; 
F.  Recreational activities that are river dependent and that do not interfere with the maintenance of the required buffer; 
G.  Walking paths; 
H.  Natural water quality treatment or purification; 
I.  Agricultural production and management, consistent with best management practices of the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, protection of the water quality of the river as required by the Clean Water Act, and consistent with all requirements of the Georgia Department of Agriculture; and 
J.  Uses that are specifically permissible by the Georgia DNR or under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
3.07.05.  Prohibited uses within the river corridor protection area. The following specific land uses are prohibited within the river corridor protection area: 
A.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields; 
B.  Handling areas for receiving and storage of hazardous waste, unless located within port facilities that comply with all federal and state laws and regulations for the handling and transport of hazardous waste and the operations are performed on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak protection systems as described by the Georgia DNR; 
C.  Hazardous waste landfill; and 
D.  Solid waste landfill. 
Sec. 3.08.00. - Open space connectivity system and green space system. 
(Reserved) 
CHAPTER 4. - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 4.00.00. - Generally. 
4.00.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide site design and development standards applicable to both public and private development activity within the county. More specifically, the purpose of the regulations set forth in chapter 4 is to ensure the proper location, height, bulk, and size of buildings and other structures; to ensure the proper size of yards and other features of a development site; to ensure the proper layout and design of subdivisions; and to provide for compatibility between proposed development and existing development. 
4.00.02.  Principles of site design and development. 
A.  Site design and development shall first take into account the protection of natural resources as set forth in chapter 3 of this ULDC. All development shall be designed to avoid unnecessary impervious surface cover; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; to ensure compatibility; and to ensure site design that is consistent with the standards set forth within chapter 4. Landscaping, buffering, and tree protection standards are applicable to site design and development, and are set forth in chapter 5. Property owners and applicants may elect to design a site according to the alternative standards that are provided in chapter 6. 
B.  No building or other structure shall be constructed, installed, erected, or altered except in compliance with the site design and development standards set forth in this ULDC. 
C.  No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations required by this ULDC for the zoning district and/or overlay district in which such open space is located. 
D.  No part of any yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ULDC shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space, off-street parking, loading space, for any other building, structure, or use, except as explicitly provided in this ULDC. 
4.00.03.  Applicability. 
A.  The site design standards described for a base zoning district in sections 2.01.02 through 2.01.05 and section 4.01.00 shall apply to all development within that district. 
B.  Where an overlay district applies to a site, the standards for that district, as set forth in section 4.02.00, shall apply. 
C.  In addition to standards for all development within a zoning district, supplemental standards are provided for the MU zoning district and the IAC zoning district, as well as specified individual uses. These supplemental standards are set forth in section 4.03.00. 
D.  Where conflict arises between standards required in a base zoning district, an overlay district, supplemental standards, or specific standards for specific situations, the following rules shall be used in the application of standards: 
1.  Where a master plan, development agreement, or other legally binding document applies to the proposed development, the standards in the legally binding document shall apply. 
2.  In all other situations, the stricter standard shall apply. 
Sec. 4.01.00. - Site design standards for base zoning districts. 
4.01.01.  Design standards for lots. 
A.  Only one (1) principal residential building and its allowable accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one (1) lot in any single-family or two-family residential district. Where contiguous lots have been combined, the combined lot shall be considered one (1) lot. 
B.  Except as specifically provided in this ULDC, no lot existing at the time of adoption of this ULDC shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a lot or tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimensional standards for its appropriate zoning district. 
C.  Land which is required, dedicated or donated and accepted for public use is exempt from the requirement of subsection 4.01.01.B. 
D.  Measurement of lot width: 
1.  Lot width shall be measured at the right-of-way, along the frontage of the lot, except for cul-de-sac lots. 
2.  For cul-de-sac lots, lot width shall be measured at the right-of-way and shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required width of the zoning district requirement. 
4.01.02.  Dimensional standards for building height and location. 
A.  Applicability of height standards. The height limitations of this section shall not apply to church spires, belfries, flagpoles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, or observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, transmission towers, radio or television towers or aerials. 
B.  Measurement of setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured from the front, side, or rear property line to the nearest building or structure. 
C.  Encroachments into required setbacks. 
1.  Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, and fire escapes may project up to three (3) feet beyond a required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are used or may be used for access of service and/or emergency vehicles. 
2.  In the case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front or side yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line or future right-of-way line as designated by the comprehensive transportation plan. 
D.  Setback requirements for corner lots for both the primary and secondary structures. 
1.  Side yard setback requirements from the right-of-way of abutting streets shall be equal to seventy-five (75) percent of the front yard setback. 
2.  It shall be permissible for purposes of this section, to construe a residence to be fronting on a street other than the street which the entrance (front door) faces. In this situation, development plans and plats shall clearly identify the front, side, and rear yards. Setbacks for side and rear yards shall be established according to the standards in the table below for the yards as indicated on the plan or plat. 
E.  Property with a side lot line adjacent to a railroad right-of-way shall provide a ten-foot side yard setback. 
F.  If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two (2) roads (not at an intersection), a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
4.01.03.  Appearance standards for commercial and industrial buildings. 
A.  All buildings constructed within the C-1, C-2, C-3, OI, MU, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts shall meet the development standards in subsection 2.01.03 or 2.01.04 or 2.01.05 and the appearance standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Each commercial or industrial building shall maintain a decorative facing on that portion of the building which faces on all public streets. The decorative facing shall consist of brick, masonry, and/or wood. Glass may be used in combination with brick, masonry, and/or wood. All windows shall be consistent with the decorative facade design, considering materials and color. 
C.  Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service components, and similar utility devices, whether ground level, wall mounted, or roof mounted, shall be screened from public rights-of-way views through one (1) of the following methods: 
1.  Where equipment is at ground level, screening may be provided through landscaping sufficient to block the view from public rights-of-way. 
2.  Where brick, wood, or masonry materials are used to screen the equipment or devices, the materials shall be the same as the predominant exterior building materials for the principal building on the site. 
D.  Street level retail uses with sidewalk frontage shall provide an entrance to the building from the sidewalk in addition to any other access that may be provided to the building. 
E.  All entrance and exit driveways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or pavers. 
4.01.04.  Standards for commercial or industrial infill development. 
A.  Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to proposed commercial or industrial development on a vacant or redeveloped lot in the OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, MU, IAC, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts, where the lots on the same street and in the surrounding adjacent area are undeveloped. 
B.  Front yard setbacks. Where the actual front yard setbacks within the surrounding area are greater or less than the required front yard setback, as set forth in subsection 4.01.02, the required front yard setback shall be not less than the average front yard setback on the block where the property is located (See figure 4-3). 
C.  [Materials.] Buildings shall be of similar materials, textures, and designs as the surrounding area, as determined by the administrator. 
D.  [Building tops or cornices.] Building tops or first floor cornices shall be aligned. 
E.  [Exceeding predominant height.] Where the height of proposed buildings exceeds the predominant height of buildings in the surrounding area, there shall be a transition in height. The transition shall occur in "step increases" of building height, such that adjacent buildings do not exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the height of existing buildings, to the maximum allowable for the zoning district. 
F.  [New building widths.] New buildings shall be consistent with existing building widths, through one (1) of the following methods (See figure 4-3): 
1.  The new building shall not exceed the average width of existing buildings in the surrounding area; or 
2.  The new building shall provide a division of the facade into visible building increments that are no larger than the average width of existing buildings in the surrounding area. 
4.01.05.  Additional standards for the mixed-use zoning district. 
A.  In addition to the dimensional standards for the MU zoning district set forth in subsection 2.01.05, development in the MU zoning district shall meet the standards set forth in subsection 4.01.05. 
B.  Where nonresidential uses are proposed, shared parking shall be required. The standards for shared parking are set forth in subsection 8.02.08. 
C.  Development parcels in the MU zoning district shall provide vehicular access to adjacent parcels by means of connected parking lots, shared driveways, cross-access easements, or other interparcel connections. (See subsection 8.01.04 regarding standards for these types of shared access.) 
D.  Development may be proposed on a single parcel, or two (2) or more parcels. Where a single development is proposed that includes two (2) or more parcels, the development shall be under unified control and/or management. 
1.  The standards for setbacks in subsection 2.01.05 shall apply on the front, side, and rear of the development parcel. Setbacks or building separation on the interior of the development parcel shall be proposed by the applicant. Such internal setbacks or building separation shall be consistent with fire and building safety requirements. 
2.  The standards for buffers in section 5.02.00 shall apply on the perimeter of the development parcel. Buffers shall not be required between uses on the interior of the development parcel. This does not relieve the applicant from meeting all landscaping requirements that may apply to the total site or parking areas within the site. 
E.  Development proposed within the MU zoning district shall be integrated. 
1.  For nonresidential uses: each use or building within a development shall be connected by direct and convenient sidewalks or pathways to provide pedestrian access from one use or building to another use or building. The walking distance between any two (2) uses shall not exceed 660 feet and shall be so stated on the final plat for the development. 
2.  Parking lots shall be connected and cross-access easements provided as set forth in section 8.02.08 unless topographic constraints exist to prevent such connections. 
3.  For a combination of residential and nonresidential uses: the residential portion of the site shall be connected by direct and convenient sidewalks or pathways to provide pedestrian or bicycle access from the residential development to the nonresidential development. The nonresidential portion of the site shall meet the connection standards in [subsection] E.1. above. 
F.  Where residential uses are proposed within the same building as nonresidential uses, the residential uses shall be limited to upper floors. 
G.  Residential dwellings that are not within the same building as a nonresidential use shall meet the appearance requirements applicable to commercial and industrial buildings in subsection 4.01.03. 
H.  Development within the MU zoning district shall provide public spaces, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  An area equal to one (1) percent of the total floor area within the development shall be provided as public space. 
2.  The following types of spaces may be provided: transit stops, plazas, courtyards, atriums, pavilions, or other similar public spaces. 
3.  Public spaces shall be within view of a street or public area and accessible by pedestrians. 
I.  Development within the MU zoning district shall provide open space, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  A minimum of five (5) percent of the total land area shall be devoted to open space. The required open space shall not be counted toward required landscaping, required buffers, stormwater management facilities, or required public space. 
2.  The following types of open spaces may be provided: parks, playgrounds, picnic grounds, playing fields or courts, trails for jogging or biking, or passive open space. 
3.  Open spaces shall be accessible to pedestrians and/or bicyclists. 
4.  The type and design of open space shall be consistent with the type of development within the mixed use area. Passive open spaces are appropriate as a means of protecting views and natural features. Playgrounds, fields, and courts are appropriate in or near residential developments. 
J.  Parking areas are required within each MU zoning district. The locations of parking areas are encouraged, to be located in the side and rear yards where such parking areas can be partially or wholly screened by buildings from the public right-of-way. (See subsection 8.02.07 for parking lot design requirements.) 
K.  Exterior lighting for parking areas and building security shall be shielded and directed to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties, as measured at the property line. 
L.  Containers for solid waste collection shall not be located within twenty-five (25) feet of residentially zoned properties. Solid waste collection areas shall be fully enclosed, except for a gate, by a solid wall, solid fence, or landscaped buffer not less than ten (10) feet in width. Where a buffer is proposed, it shall contain shrubs selected from the lists of "large screening shrubs" and "small shrubs" in subsection 5.01.02. Large shrubs shall be planted every eight (8) feet, on center. Small shrubs shall be planted in a double staggered row to form a hedge. 
4.01.06.  Additional standards for the interchange activity center zoning district. 
A.  In addition to the dimensional standards for the IAC zoning district set forth in subsection 2.01.05, development in the IAC zoning district shall meet the standards set forth in subsection 4.01.06. 
B.  Development may be proposed on a single parcel, or two (2) or more parcels. 
1.  Where a single development is proposed that includes two (2) or more parcels, the development shall be under unified control and management. 
2.  The standards for setbacks in subsection 2.01.05 shall apply on the front, side, and rear of the development parcel. Setbacks or building separation on the interior of the development parcel shall be proposed by the applicant. Such internal setbacks or building separation shall be consistent with fire and building safety requirements, as set forth in the applicable building and technical codes. (See subsection 1.07.06 for a list of codes adopted by reference.) 
3.  The standards for buffers in section 5.02.00 shall apply on the perimeter of the development parcel. Buffers shall not be required between uses on the interior of the development parcel. This does not relieve the applicant from meeting all landscaping requirements that may apply to the total site or parking areas within the site. 
4.  Multiple uses or buildings within the development site shall be connected by sidewalks or pedestrian pathways. 
5.  Shared parking shall be required and shall meet the standards of subsection 8.02.08. 
C.  New curb cuts shall be minimized. New developments shall provide vehicular access to adjacent parcels by means of connected parking lots, shared driveways, cross-access easements, or other interparcel connections. (See subsection 8.01.04 for standards for these types of shared access.) 
D.  Exterior lighting for parking areas and building security shall be shielded and directed to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
E.  Containers for solid waste collection shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of residentially zoned properties. Solid waste collection areas shall be fully enclosed, except for a gate, by a solid wall, solid fence, or landscaped buffer not less than ten (10) feet in width. Where a buffer is proposed, it shall contain shrubs selected from the lists of "large screening shrubs" and "small shrubs" in subsection 5.01.02. Large shrubs shall be planted every eight (8) feet, on center. Small shrubs shall be planted in a double staggered row to form a hedge. 
F.  Residential structures within the IAC zoning district shall be limited to multifamily buildings, such as apartments, town homes, row houses, or other attached dwellings. 
4.01.07.  Design standards for single-family dwellings within the RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 zoning districts. All single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes shall meet the design standards set forth in subsections 4.01.07.A. through H. Manufactured homes in the RMH zoning district shall meet the standards of the district and standards for manufactured home/mobile home parks set forth in subsection 4.03.16. 
A.  The minimum width of the building shall exceed sixteen (16) feet. 
B.  The minimum roof pitch shall be 4:12, with the exception of attached patio covers. The minimum roof pitch of an attached patio cover shall be as required by the current state minimum standard codes for construction as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs, along with their respective amendments. 
C.  Roof materials shall include wood or cedar shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, or built-up gravel materials. Other roof materials may be used where specifically approved by the building official. 
D.  The dwelling shall be attached to a permanent foundation. The foundation shall be concrete or masonry blocks joined by mortar or both. 
E.  Any building having its finished floor entirely above grade, except for a basement, as defined in the standard building codes, shall be enclosed by masonry blocks or bricks joined by mortar, or poured concrete walls having a height of at least eighteen (18) inches high and a minimum width of six (6) inches wide. 
F.  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. Where metal or vinyl lap siding is used, the siding shall not have a shiny surface. Siding materials shall improve or reflect the existing character of the surrounding area. 
G.  The building shall be constructed according to standards established either by the state minimum standard codes, the Standard Building Code, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, or the State of Georgia Industrial Building Act. 
H.  A compatibility review shall be conducted to verify that a proposed manufactured home meets the standards set forth in subsection 4.01.07. Requirements for review are set forth in subsection 12.02.08. 
4.01.08.  Compatibility standards. 
A.  The manufactured home shall be substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation, and general aesthetic appearance to site-built or other forms of housing which may exist or be permitted under this ULDC in the same zoning district or general area. 
B.  All towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches shall be removed from the manufactured home. 
C.  At each exit door there shall be a landing that is a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. 
D.  Windows and doors shall be similar in material, design, and appearance to windows and doors on site-built homes in the surrounding area. 
4.01.09  Outdoor lighting standards. The intent of this ordinance is to preserve, protect, and enhance the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of any and all property through the use of appropriate lighting practices and systems. Such individual fixtures and lighting systems are designed, constructed, and installed to control glare, minimize obtrusive light, conserve energy and resources while maintaining safety, security and productivity, and curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment. 
A.  [Establishing lighting:] Lighting in all districts shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon or adversely affects adjacent properties and roadways. This section shall not apply to lighting established by governmental authority within public rights-of-way. 
B.  Submittal requirements: The applicant for any permit of work involving outdoor lighting fixtures governed by this section shall submit, as part of the site plan, evidence that the proposed work will comply with this article. The following information must be included for all nonresidential site plan submissions and all plans for uses ancillary to residential uses such as club houses, amenity areas, etc. 
1.  Location, type and height of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures, shall be shown on the site plan and building elevations. 
2.  Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light for intensity throughout the site (in footcandles). No certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued until the photometric grid has been approved by the inspector or administrator. 
3.  Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of shielding. 
4.  Use of fixture proposed; and 
5.  Any other information deemed necessary by the administrator and/or building inspector. 
C.  General provisions: The design and illumination standards of this ordinance shall apply to all exterior lighting sources and other light sources visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent parcels, except where specifically exempted herein. 
1.  Shielding: Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward, and shall utilize full cutoff housings, louvers, glare shields, optics, reflectors or other measures to prevent off-site glare and minimize light pollution. 
2.  Intensity: The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed ten (10.0) footcandles within any site; however the administrator or designee may permit a maximum intensity of twenty (20.0) footcandles provided that such lighting is otherwise in compliance with this ordinance and one (1.0) footcandle at any property line or street right-of-way line. Where the subject property abuts a residential district or existing residential use, the intensity shall not exceed one-half (0.5) footcandle at the property line. 
3.  Measurement: Light intensity levels shall be measured on the horizontal plane at grade level within the site, and on the vertical plane of any property line or street right-of-way line at a height of five (5) feet above grade level. 
4.  Decorative light fixtures: The administrator or designee may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures, provided that such fixtures would enhance the aesthetics of the site and would not cause off-site glare or light pollution. 
5.  [Wall-mounted lights:] Wall-mounted lights shall be cut-off, down directional with a maximum of two hundred fifty (250) watts per fixture. The administrator may approve wall-mounted lights to up to four hundred (400) watts when there are unique limitations and conflicts associated with a site. 
D.  Exemptions: The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this section: 
1.  Roadway and airport lighting and lighting activated by motion sensor devices. 
2.  Temporary circus, fair, carnival, or civic events. 
3.  Construction or emergency lighting, provided such lighting is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency necessitating said lighting. 
4.  Temporary lighting. 
5.  Lighting associated with agricultural activities. 
6.  Athletic fields. 
7.  Swimming pools. 
8.  Holiday decorations. 
9.  Shielded pedestrian walkway lighting. 
10.  Residential lighting with no-offsite glare. 
11.  Street lights. 
12.  Other uses deemed reasonable by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 12-16, § I, 10-15-12; Ord. No. 13-06, § I, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 6-17-14) 
Sec. 4.02.00. - Site design standards for overlay districts. 
All overlay districts are applied over underlying zoning districts. Development shall comply with the use and design standards applicable to the underlying zoning district and the design standards required in the overlay district. In any situation where design standards conflict, the stricter standard shall be required. 
4.02.01.  Bruton Smith Parkway Overlay District (BSPOD). 
A.  Generally. 
1.  The Bruton Smith Parkway Overlay District (BSPOD) is established as a corridor overlay district (COD). This section sets BSPOD regulations for the development of tracts and parcels of land located therein. 
This section provides for access management standards and aesthetic standards indicative of incremental growth and quality development. The standards contained herein compose an extension of orderly growth policies required to meet comprehensive plan objectives for Henry County. 
2.  The BSPOD lies within unincorporated Henry County. BSPOD regulations, as provisions of the Unified Land Development Code, shall be administered according to all sections of the same. 
All new development and redevelopment requiring a building permit must follow the BSPOD regulations. Internal renovations of properties that do not alter the exterior appearance of buildings are not required to seek approval under these regulations. 
The following parcels shall not be subject to the provisions of this section: 
a.  Lots zoned RA (residential-agricultural) until such time as such lot is zoned to another zoning classification. 
b.  Lots zoned single-family residence not located within a platted subdivision. 
c.  Lots zoned single-family residence located within a subdivision with a final plat approved prior to the enactment of this section. 
3.  The provisions of this section apply to parcels in unincorporated Henry County abutting the realignment of that road now or formerly known as Richard Petty Boulevard as well as those abutting State Route 20 from Interstate 75 in the east to the Atlanta Motor Speedway (AMS) in the west and as shown on that certain map entitled "Bruton Smith Parkway Design District," Figure 4.1, Bruton Smith Parkway Overlay District Boundary Map, which map is adopted herewith and is an integral part of this section. 
a.  Corridor district map. The map of the Bruton Smith Parkway Overlay District will be maintained by the county. The BSPOD map will overlay the official Henry County Zoning Map and said map is hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this section by reference. 
b.  No changes in the boundaries of the BSPOD shall be authorized except by the board of commissioners. Dividing a lot will not change the designation of the divided land, except by board approval. 
B.  Access management. BSPOD regulations set out herein shall apply to all subdivisions and projects requiring a land development permit where access is taken from a state or federal route or a road classified as a major or minor arterial or collector road in the Henry County Functional Road Plan. Access to any state or federal route shall comply with the traffic access requirements established by Henry County and the Georgia Department of Transportation. Future State Route 20 right-of-way, including that of any State Route 20 extension, as determined by the Georgia Department of Transportation shall be preserved from development. 
Individual county standards shall apply unless a more restrictive conflicting standard is required by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
1.  Required joint driveways, cross access drives, and pedestrian access shall be provided to allow circulation between parcels. 
2.  Cross access easements and pedestrian access shall be established along state or federal routes. Building sites having access to any state or federal route shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous interparcel connectivity extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation along any state or federal route of at least one thousand (1,000) feet of linear frontage and providing a two-way travel aisle width of a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet and other features as required herein. 
b.  Stub-outs and other features indicating that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access via a service drive. 
3.  All developments shall have access to a public right-of-way. Regardless of the minimum number of access points, minimum spacing requirements as described in subsection 4. (below) shall be maintained. The number of access points shall be as follows: 

 
4.  The separation of access points on any state or federal route shall be determined by the design speed of the road from which access is taken with the following minimum spacing requirements: 

 
a.  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or public or private street to the centerline of the nearest existing adjacent driveway or public or private street. 
b.  Driveway and public or private street spacing at intersections and corners shall provide required sight distance, response time, and permit required queuing space. 
c.  No driveway shall be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of the centerline of an intersecting state or federal route, arterial, or collector road. 
d.  Nothing within this section shall be construed to mean that a single parcel may have more than the number of approved access points. 
e.  Nothing within this section shall be construed to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
5.  For access points along any state or federal route a deceleration lane, larger turning radius, traffic islands, and any other devices or designs may be required at the sole discretion of the development plan review department staff. 
6.  Deceleration lanes are required for entrances of subdivisions consisting of twenty (20) or more units as specified below: 

 

C.  Signage. Signage shall comply with all ULDC sign regulations. Should regulations conflict, the more strict regulation shall govern. 
Interstate signs shall not be permitted. 
Ground signs shall be limited to monument-based signs. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of brick or stone consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the primary structure. No more than one (1) ground sign per frontage on a public right-of-way shall be permitted, and it shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height above grade for subdivisions and single occupant development or fifteen (15) feet in height above grade for multi-occupant developments. 
Any ground sign shall be a minimum of one (1) foot from the right-of-way and shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from the curb-line of a paved vehicular area. 
Wall signs shall be limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the square footage of the facade of the tenant space. Two (2) wall signs are allowed on corner unit of a strip center. If lighted, lettering shall be individually formed and lighted. No spreader bar signage shall be allowed except as required by the state fire marshal. 
Prohibited signs include, without limitation, exposed neon, portable, pennant, or any sign determined by the planning and zoning department to distract the traveling public. 
D.  Transportation/infrastructure. 
1.  Underground utilities. All utilities except for major electronic transmission lines and substations are required to be placed underground. 
2.  Interparcel access. Interior roadways if constructed shall be continuous and aligned with existing, planned, or platted streets. 
At least one (1) stub-out shall be provided between all contiguous parcels where feasible. One (1) such stub-out shall be provided to the adjacent property for each eight hundred (800) feet of shared property line. 
3.  On-street parking. On-street parking is encouraged. The placement of on-street parking shall be subject to review, and approval shall be required. 
4.  Multiuse pathways. Multiuse pathways are required to connect to multiuse pathways or sidewalks that have been provided on adjacent parcels and do so without abrupt changes in grade or direction. They shall have a paved width of ten (10) feet. The grade of the pathways shall not exceed a grade of six (6) percent. Intersections with streets shall require striping, appropriate signage, and a five-foot curb flare with bollards placed six (6) feet apart to block unauthorized vehicles. Multiuse pathways shall be located along the sites frontage along State Route 20. 
5.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks are required to be provided on both sides of all interior roadways (public or private), and shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. Attractive, safe, and convenient pedestrian access from the sidewalk to the building frontage as well as other pedestrian connections to adjacent buildings within the same development shall be provided. Such pedestrian access shall minimize conflicts with automobiles by such means as walkways, ornamental pavers, striping, signs and painted crosswalks. 
E.  Architectural design. Any accessories provided such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. 
1.  Building placement. For any parcel or lot, the front setback shall be fifty (50) feet. Development plans shall record the zoning designation of each adjoining parcel. The side setback from the property line of an adjoining parcel with a residential zoning designation shall be twenty (20) feet. The rear setback from the property line of an adjoining parcel with a residential zoning designation shall be forty (40) feet. 
2.  Residential design guidelines. 
a.  Each subdivision shall provide at least one (1) entrance street. Entrance streets shall be designed as three-lane divided streets with a center median not less than eight (8) feet in width. 
b.  Alleys where provided shall run continually through residential blocks. Alleys shall intersect streets no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any street intersection. 
c.  Architectural design of all residential buildings shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
i.  Architectural treatments of each building elevation shall be brick, stone or hard-coat stucco. Wood, wood shake or fiber cement-type siding may be used as architectural accents but may in no case make up more than fifty (50) percent of any elevation. The percentage of architectural accents shall be included on required elevation plans submitted to the building department for approval. 
ii.  Roofs shall have a minimum of 5:12 pitch, with the exception of attached patio covers. The minimum roof pitch of an attached patio cover shall be as required by the current state minimum standard codes for construction as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs, along with their respective amendments. Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be limited to the following: 
• Metal standing seam. 
• Tile, slate or stone. 
• Wood shake. 
• Architectural-style asphalt shingles. 
• Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
iii.  All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from street level view (within three hundred (300) feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence constructed of brick, stucco, split-faced block or wood. 
3.  Commercial/retail design guidelines. 
a.  Architectural design of all commercial/retail buildings shall comply with the following additional performance guidelines: 
i.  Architectural treatments of each building elevation shall be brick, stone, hard-coat stucco, or glass. Cement fiber board may be used as an accent building material. 
ii.  Within planned shopping centers, distinct architectural entry identity for individual tenants' entrances shall be provided for suites exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet of leasable area. 
iii.  Walls visible from roadways or parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material/color or varying edifice detail such as trellises; false windows; recessed panels reminiscent of window, door, or colonnade openings; landscaping; or storefronts every one hundred fifty (150) linear feet. 
iv.  Roof parapets when constructed shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every one hundred (100) linear feet. 
v.  Building design shall include minimum one-foot deep cornices, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings at least ten (10) feet. 
vi.  Building design shall include a minimum one-foot high contrasting base, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings at least ten (10) feet, excluding window and doors. 
vii.  All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from street level view (within three hundred (300) feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence constructed of brick, stucco, split-faced block or wood. 
4.  Industrial design regulations. 
a.  Architectural design of all industrial buildings shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
i.  Contrasting accent colors (other than dark green or brick red) of any wall, awning or other feature shall be limited to no more than fifteen (15) percent of the total area of any elevation. The percentage of contrasting accent colors shall be included on required elevation plans submitted to the building department for approval. 
ii.  Buildings shall incorporate live plant material growing immediately in front of or on the building. 
iii.  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be limited to the following: 
• Metal standing seam. 
• Tile, slate or stone. 
• Wood shake. 
• Architectural-style shingles. 
iv.  All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from street level view (within three hundred (300) feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence constructed of brick, stucco, split-faced block or wood. 
F.  Dumpster screening. Dumpsters visible from adjacent properties or public parking lots shall be screened from view on all four (4) sides. Screening shall consist of three (3) solid walls of brick or stone construction, at least six (6) feet in height, with one hundred (100) percent solid metal or wooden gates. 
G.  Landscaping and buffers. 
1.  Planting strip. A ten-foot wide planting strip shall be provided along the perimeter of all commercial development. This strip shall be planted with approved ground cover and contain trees. Trees shall be a single species and planted at regular fifty-foot intervals. Trees shall not be planted within twenty-five (25) feet of the curb line of street intersections. All trees shall be a minimum two-inch caliper (dbh) at the time of planting. The height of the landscaping material shall be a minimum of five (5) feet at the time of planting. The planting strip requirement can be waived by the administrator if fifteen (15) percent of the site is landscaped. 
2.  Off-street surface parking lot planting requirements. Off-street surface parking lots which are required to contain more than twenty (20) parking spaces shall contain landscaping and plantings as follows: 
a.  Trees shall be provided and maintained adjacent to, and in the interior portions of, parking lots in a ratio of one (1) tree for each seven (7) parking spaces. In addition, every parking space shall be within sixty (60) feet of the trunk of a tree. 
b.  Deciduous trees shall be a three-inch caliper (dbh), and evergreen trees shall be at least six (6) feet in height at the time of planting. 
c.  The minimum planting area or island for each canopy tree shall be at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet. If shared with other trees, eighty (80) square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
d.  The minimum planting area or island for each understory tree shall be one hundred (100) square feet. If shared with other trees, forty (40) square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
e.  Trees shall be planted in areas surrounding the perimeter of the parking lot and/or shall be planted in planting areas or islands internal to the parking lot as approved. Trees may be planted and spaced singly or in groups. Each planting area or island shall not be less than four (4) feet in width in any direction. 
f.  Ground areas shall be sodded and/or planted with groundcover species, and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
g.  Paved or striped islands greater than fifty (50) square feet shall not be allowed. These areas shall contain landscape plantings. 
h.  Landscaping and other features shall be maintained to ensure adequate sight distance within parking lots at all times. 
H.  Lighting. 
1.  Street lighting. Any streetlights along public rights-of-way shall utilize decorative light poles/fixtures. Light sources shall be high-pressure sodium. Street lights shall be staggered, one hundred fifty (150) feet on-center. All street lighting shall be subject to review, and approval shall be required. The light fixture that shall be utilized is as follows: 

 
2.  Parking lot lighting. Required lighting throughout all parking areas shall utilize decorative light poles/fixtures. Light sources shall be metal halide, not exceeding an average of 4.5 foot-candles of light output throughout the parking area. Other than pedestrian light fixtures that will be less than fourteen (14) feet tall, light fixtures shall be hooded. Lighting shall be directed to avoid intrusion on adjacent properties and away from adjacent thoroughfares. Light fixtures shall be as follows: 

 
3.  Multiuse pathway lighting. Lighting for pedestrians and bicyclists along any multiuse pathway segments shall be of an approved design, a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height with average spacing not to exceed forty (40) feet apart. 
4.02.02.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 14-03, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 15-02, § I, 2-17-15 ; Ord. No. 18-06, § I, 11-27-18 ) 
Sec. 4.03.00. - Supplemental standards for specific uses.(Check chapter 2 for districts and defined uses.) 
4.03.01.  Animal care facilities (kennels, animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, and stables). 
A.  Animal care facilities, with the exception of stables and facilities for livestock are permissible in the RA zoning district with an approved conditional use and subject to the site design standards for the district. Stables and facilities for livestock are permissible in the RA zoning district and subject to the site design standards of subsection 4.03.01.G. 
B.  Animal care facilities, with the exception of noncommercial kennels in the MU, C-2, C-3, IAC, and M-1 zoning districts are subject to the site design standards for the district and specific site design standards in this section. 
C.  Design standards for an animal hospital or veterinary clinic in a freestanding building are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.01.C. Standards for Freestanding Animal Hospital or Veterinary Clinic 

 
D.  Design standards for an animal hospital or veterinary clinic in a shopping center are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.01.D. Standards for Animal Hospital or Veterinary Clinic in a Shopping Center. 

 
E.  Design standards for commercial kennels are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.01.E. Standards for Commercial Kennels. 

 
F.  Design standards for noncommercial kennels are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.01(F). Standards for Noncommercial Kennels. 

 
G.  Design standards for stables, including riding academies, barns, and other facilities for farm animals and livestock are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.01(G). Standards for Stables and Facilities for Livestock. 

 
4.03.02.  Cemeteries. 
A.  Cemeteries are permissible in all zoning districts, subject to the site design standards of the district and the specific supplemental standards in this section. 
B.  A cemetery may include one (1) or more of the following: a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, and a columbarium. 
C.  A cemetery may include a chapel or church when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
D.  Site design requirements are as follows: 
Table 4.03.02(D). Standards for Cemeteries. 

 
1 The buffer shall be designed to achieve a minimum height of six (6) feet within three (3) years after installation. 
2 The required buffer shall be along the banks of all state bodies of water as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action. 
E.  Location requirements. 
1.  A cemetery shall not be located in a wetland, 100-year floodplain, floodway, or flood hazard area. 
2.  All new cemeteries must be located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a drinking water well. 
3.  The cemetery shall be located below the elevation of known drinking water wells. 
F.  [Off-street waiting.] Adequate off-street waiting space shall be provided for funeral processions so that no vehicle stands or waits in a dedicated right-of-way. 
G.  [Access.] All cemetery access shall be provided from a county maintained roadway or state highway. The entrance and exits to the cemetery shall be only from the frontage street. 
H.  [Mausoleums and columbaria.] Mausoleums and columbaria may be located only within the boundaries of approved cemeteries. Mausoleums and columbaria shall have facades of brick or stone. 
I.  Review and approval procedures. 
1.  A cemetery shall meet the requirements of chapter 12 for application, review, and approval. Upon approval, a final plat of the cemetery shall be recorded. 
2.  A drainage plan must be submitted and approved by the development plan review department before cemetery approval may be granted. 
3.  The owner of a cemetery shall notify the county health department of the intent to build a cemetery and shall submit a letter from the county health department identifying the cemetery's location in relation to any known drinking water wells as part of the application for approval. 
4.03.03.  Centers for manufacturing, production, processing, or assembly. 
A.  Purpose. Certain manufacturing, production, processing, or assembly uses are permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the site design requirements of the zoning district. However, within this broad group of uses there are individual uses that are permissible within M-1 or M-2 only where supplemental site design standards are provided. This section sets forth those specific site design standards that are required in addition to the site design standards of the zoning district in which the use is proposed. 
B.  [Supplemental standards.] Supplemental standards for asphalt and concrete batching plants, central mixing plants for cement, mortar, plaster, or housing materials; and food processing plants are provided in the following table: 
Table 4.03.03.B. Standards for Asphalt and Concrete Batching Plants, Central Mixing Plants and Food Processing. 

 
4.03.04  Adult and child day care facilities. 
A.  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to child and adult day care facilities, nursery schools, and preschools. These facilities are permissible in the MU, OI, C-1, C-2, C-3 and IAC zoning districts. In addition, these facilities are permissible with an approved conditional use in the RA, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. Further, child and adult day care facilities are permissible as a home occupation in all residential zoning districts. Non-home occupation facilities subject to the requirements of this section shall meet the site design standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  All facilities regulated in this section shall comply with state regulations and require applicable state licenses for operation. 
C.  Home occupation day care facilities shall be limited to the provision of care and supervision to not more than six (6) children or six (6) adults and shall comply with the standards set forth in section 7.01.00. 
D.  Non-home occupation child day care facilities, nursery schools, and preschools shall comply with the following standards: 
Table 4.03.04(D). Standards for Non-Home Occupation Child Day Care Centers, Nursery Schools, and Preschools. 

 
E.  Adult day care centers. 
Table 4.03.04(E). Standards for Adult Day Care Centers. 

 
4.03.05.  Electrical substations. 
A.  Electrical substations are permissible in any zoning district, subject to the dimensional standards for the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  An electrical substation shall be fully enclosed, except for a gate, on all sides with a solid fence or a landscaped buffer that meets the following standards: 
Table 4.03.05(B). Standards for Electrical Substations 

 
4.03.06.  Emergency response and public safety facilities. 
A.  Emergency response facilities, such as fire stations, ambulance services, and police stations are permissible in any zoning district, subject to the dimensional standards for the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Site design standards for emergency response facilities are as follows: 
Table 4.03.06(B). Standards for Emergency Response Facilities 

 
4.03.07.  Establishments over 40,000 square feet (large-scale retail centers). 
A.  Purpose. This section is intended to provide design standards for uses located in large-scale buildings. The purpose is to ensure the compatibility of large buildings and their associated impacts with the surrounding area, and to avoid large, undifferentiated wall surfaces. 
B.  Applicability. Establishments over forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall comply with the design standards contained in this section, in addition to the site design standards of the underlying zoning district. The size threshold refers to an individual establishment and its associated outdoor areas used for display and storage. 
C.  [Building design standards.] Building design shall meet the standards in the following table (See figure 4.2). 
Table 4.03.07(C) Building Design Standards for Establishments Over 40,000 Square Feet 

 
* Architectural design shall be subject to approval by the architectural review committee. 
4.03.08.  Funeral homes, mortuaries, and/or crematoriums. 
A.  Funeral homes and mortuaries, with or without crematoriums, are permissible in the OI, C-2, C-3, MU, and IAC zoning districts, subject to site design standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Adequate off-street waiting space shall be provided for funeral processions so that no vehicle stands or waits in a dedicated right-of-way. A minimum off-street stacking distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided. 
4.03.09.  Gasoline service stations. 
A.  Gasoline service stations are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the site design standards for the district, and the specific site design standards in this section: C-1, C-2, C-3, MU, and IAC. 
B.  Gasoline service stations may include the following activities and uses: sale of fuel, oil, lubricants, and similar products; light repair; sale of small automotive accessories; sale of food and sundries; convenience store; restaurant drive-up windows; inspection stations for emissions; or car wash. Gasoline service stations shall not include game rooms, game arcades, major repair shops, body shops, paint shops, or paint booths. 
C.  Design standards for gasoline service stations are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.09(C). Standards for Gasoline Service Stations 

 
4.03.10.  Golf courses. 
A.  Golf courses are permissible in RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RD, RM, RS, and MU zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards in this section. 
B.  A golf course may be public or private and may include the following buildings and accessory uses: 
1.  A clubhouse with or without a pro shop, retail sales of golf supplies and accessories, and a restaurant or snack shop. 
2.  An equipment building for maintenance, minor repairs, and storage. Storage may include fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides or golf carts. 
3.  Driving range and/or putting greens. 
4.  Restroom facilities. 
C.  The types of golf courses may be par three (3), executive, private, semiprivate or regulation. 
D.  The following are site design standards for golf courses: 
Table 4.03.10(D) Standards for Golf Courses 

 
4.03.11.  Commercial greenhouses and/or plant nurseries. 
A.  Greenhouses and/or plant nurseries are permissible in the RA, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts subject to the site design standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Greenhouses and/or plant nurseries in the RA zoning district shall sell only plants grown on-site. 
C.  The following are the site design requirements for greenhouses and plant nurseries: 
Table 4.03.11(C) Standards for Greenhouses and Plant Nurseries 

 
4.03.12.  Hospitals. 
A.  Hospitals are permitted in the OI, C-2, C-3, MU, and IAC zoning districts, subject to the site design standards of the district. Hospitals are permissible in the RA zoning district with an approved conditional use and shall comply with the site design standards of the RA district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  The following are site design standards for hospitals: 
Table 4.03.12(B) Standards for Hospitals 

 
4.03.13.  Radio and television stations. (Reserved) 
4.03.14.  Mass assembly centers and grounds (fairgrounds, outdoor amusements, amphitheaters, convention centers, civic centers, rodeos, armories, churches and athletic fields). 
A.  All fairgrounds, outdoor amusements, amphitheaters, civic centers, convention centers, rodeos and armories shall meet the site design requirements for zoning districts RA, MU, IAC, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 in which they are located and the additional site design standards as set forth in this section. An approved conditional use is required in all aforementioned zoning districts. 
B.  Fairgrounds and amphitheaters, where activities occur primarily out of doors, shall meet the following site design standards: 
Table 4.03.14(B). Standards for Fairgrounds and Amphitheaters. 

 
C.  Outdoor amusements include such activities as miniature golf, carnivals or midway rides, pony rides, climbing walls, tracks for go-carts and other similar vehicles, and other tourist-oriented rides and amusements. Temporary activities or special events that include outdoor amusements are regulated in section 7.03.03. 
1.  Outdoor amusements may be freestanding, or two (2) or more amusements may be combined in a unified development site. 
2.  Outdoor amusements may include accessory uses, such as snack shops or food stands, gift shops, ice cream stands, or similar uses, provided that such uses are not open to the general public without entrance to the outdoor amusement. 
3.  The site design standards for outdoor amusements are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.14(C) Standards for Outdoor Amusements 

 
D.  Convention centers, civic centers, centers for performing arts, and armories (where activities occur primarily indoors) shall meet the site design standards in the following table: 
Table 4.03.14(D) Standards for Convention, Civic and Performing Arts Centers and Armories 

 
E.  Churches and similar religious facilities. Religious facilities, including churches and other places of worship, together with specified accessory uses and structures, are permissible in the MU, OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, and IAC zoning districts subject to the standards of the zoning district. An approved conditional use is required for churches and religious facilities within the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and in accordance with section 4.01.03, appearance standards for commercial and industrial buildings. Ancillary and accessory uses for churches and religious facilities are permitted within the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to supplemental standards. Religious facilities, including churches and other places of worship, together with specified accessory uses and structures, are permissible with an approved conditional use in the following zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section: RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RS, RD, RM, and RMH. 
Table 4.03.14(E) Site Design Standards for Churches and Similar Religious Facilities 

 
1.  Uses and activities other than worship shall be considered accessory uses and shall be clearly ancillary to the primary use. Such uses and activities shall be limited to: 
A.  Religious instruction or similar instruction or study typically associated with the religion; 
B.  Offices to support the establishment; 
C.  Child or adult day care; 
D.  Private academic school; 
E.  A fellowship hall, with or without a kitchen (which may be known as a community center, activity hall, or life center); 
F.  Recreation facilities, including athletic fields; 
G.  Individual meeting spaces; and 
H.  A parsonage. 
2.  All accessory uses are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  (Reserved.) 
B.  The facility housing the accessory use shall meet all local, state, or federal standards. 
C.  The operator of the accessory use shall obtain any licenses required to conduct the accessory use. Any approval of the accessory use shall be contingent upon receipt of all licenses. 
D.  Loudspeaker or paging systems shall be located to ensure that they cannot be heard at the property line of adjacent properties. 
E.  All outdoor activities shall occur no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m. 
F.  Exterior lighting shall be downcast of moderate brightness and shall not cause glare on any abutting property. 
G.  Outdoor play or activity areas shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet from any residential property line. 
3.  Child day care, adult day care, preschool, or child nursery uses are allowable accessory uses subject to the following standards: 
A.  The total floor area allocated to the child day care, adult day care, preschool, or nursery uses shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the uses shall be cumulative and shall include all child day care, adult day care, preschool, nursery facilities, and related mechanical and support facilities. 
B.  An off-street drop-off area for persons served by the facility shall be provided. The entrance and vehicle drop-off points shall not be located on a street providing primary access to residences, unless such street is classified as a collector or arterial. 
4.  Private academic schools are allowable accessory uses subject to the following standards: 
A.  The total floor area allocated to the school shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the school shall include all components of the school: classrooms, school library, school offices, teacher work areas, and the like, including related mechanical and support facilities. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection 4.03.14.E.5.A., the total floor area allocated to the school may exceed twenty (20) percent of the total floor area on the site, provided that the area allocated to the school meets the requirements of section 4.03.22. 
C.  The entrance and vehicle drop-off points for students shall not be located on a street providing primary access to residences, unless such street is classified as a collector or arterial. 
5.  A fellowship hall is an allowable accessory use, provided that the total floor area allocated to the fellowship hall, including related mechanical and support facilities, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total floor area on the site. 
6.  One (1) residential dwelling unit is allowable to serve as a parsonage, subject to the following standards: 
A.  A minimum lot area, within the parcel developed for religious uses and facilities, to be devoted to the dwelling unit ("parsonage lot") shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet. The parsonage lot shall be used exclusively for the dwelling unit, and shall not include any primary or other accessory use allowable on the site. The parsonage lot shall not be used for any support activity to the primary or accessory uses, such as outdoor play areas, storage, or parking, other than as specifically provided in subsection 4.03.14.E.7.B. through F. and subsection 4.03.14.E.8. and 9., below. 
B.  The maximum lot coverage for the parsonage lot shall be thirty-five (35) percent. 
C.  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided within the parsonage lot. 
D.  The maximum building height on the parsonage lot shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
E.  The parsonage lot may contain children's outdoor play equipment, in a size and quantity typical of residential uses. 
F.  The parsonage lot may contain a residential swimming pool, fully enclosed, and attached to the dwelling. 
7.  A specific parking plan shall be provided. This plan shall identify the principal use and each accessory use proposed on the site. The parking plan shall indicate the hours of operation and peak times of use (parking demand) for the primary use and each accessory use on the site. The parking standards for the principal use and each accessory use shall be identified, based upon ULDC requirements, set forth in section 8.02.00. The parking plan may propose reduced or shared parking, as set forth in section 8.02.08. The parking plan shall indicate areas designated for overflow parking during times of extraordinary use (such as festival or holiday periods). 
8.  For religious facilities that exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet in total floor area, excluding the parsonage, if any, the minimum setback from any property line that is otherwise required shall increase five (5) feet for each two thousand (2,000) square feet, or portion thereof, over ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
F.  Athletic fields can be located in any zoning district and shall meet the site design standards in the following table: 
Table 4.03.14(F) Standards for Athletic Fields 

 
4.03.15.  Mines and quarries. 
A.  The development of natural resources, including the removal of minerals and natural materials, together with necessary buildings and machinery, is allowable in the M-2 zoning district, subject to the standards of sections 4.01.01 and 4.01.02 and the supplemental standards of this section. 
B.  Where an existing quarry is proposed for extension or expansion beyond the property lines of the quarry area, such extension or expansion shall be considered as a new operation, subject to the standards set forth in this section. 
C.  The area where mining or quarrying operations are conducted shall be fully enclosed with a fence or wall. 
1.  The fence or wall shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of any excavation. 
2.  The fence or wall shall be designed and installed to ensure safety and security of the site, and to prevent entrance to the site by animals and unauthorized persons. 
D.  Product piles, spoil piles, or other accumulations of by-products shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the original contour of the site. 
E.  Roads within the excavation site shall be surfaced with a dust-free material. 
F.  A mining land use plan, conforming to the requirements of federal and state law, shall be required prior to approval of any mining or quarrying activity. 
G.  Applications for approval of new mines or quarries or the expansion or extension of mines or quarries shall comply with the procedures set forth in chapter 12. Applications shall demonstrate compliance with all state and federal laws and regulations applicable to mines and quarries. 
4.03.16.  Mobile home or manufactured home parks. 
A.  A mobile home or manufactured home subdivision shall comply with the dimensional standards set forth in tables 4.01.01(E) and 4.01.02(H), and with the subdivision design standards set forth in section 4.04.00. All mobile home or manufactured home developments that are not subdivisions shall be considered parks. 
B.  A mobile home or manufactured home park ("park") is permissible in the RMH zoning district, and shall comply with the standards set forth in this section. 
C.  A park shall be a unified development site. 
D.  Certain accessory uses and structures may be contained in a park, provided such uses and structures are incidental to the principal use of the site for a park. The following standards are required for accessory uses and structures: 
Table 4.03.16(D). Standards for Accessory Uses in Manufactured Home Parks. 

 
E.  The site design standards for a park are set forth in the following table: 
Table 4.03.16(E) Site Design Standards for Manufactured Home Parks 

 
Standards for recreation or open space areas within parks 
1.  Recreation or open space areas may be one (1) contiguous tract or several tracts. 
2.  Individual tracts shall be no smaller than one-half (½) acre. 
3.  Recreation areas shall be located for convenient access to all park residents. 
4.  Street open space shall not be included in the required recreation or open space area. 
5.  Up to twenty (20) percent of the required area may be located in the floodplain area. 
6.  Recreational parks shall be located on land suitable for park development and shall contain a sufficient amount of play equipment designed for school-age children. 
7.  If the park management fails to maintain open spaces, the county may provide this service and file a lien against the property owner. 
F.  Standards applicable to manufactured homes and mobile homes within a park are set forth in the following table: 
Table 4.03.16(F) Standards for Manufactured and Mobile Homes Within Parks 

 
G.  Structural requirements for manufactured homes in parks. 
1.  Each manufactured or mobile home unit shall be installed in compliance with the manufacturer installation requirements or with Chapter 120-3-7 of the Rules and Regulations of the Office of Commissioner of Insurance — Safety Fire Division. 
2.  The manufactured or mobile home unit shall be installed true and plumb. 
H.  Requirements for utilities in a park. 
1.  Each park shall be served by central water, sanitary sewer, electricity, gas (if available), and a central television antenna system or cable. 
2.  All utilities shall be located underground. 
3.  Each manufactured or mobile home shall be connected with public water and sanitary sewer facilities which comply with county requirements. 
4.  An electrical outlet supplying both sixty (60) and one hundred fifty (150) amperes of service shall be provided for each lot. All such outlets shall be weather-proof, and installations shall meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code. 
I.  Requirements for streets within a park. 
1.  Streets shall be a minimum of twenty-six (26) feet in width. 
2.  All private streets, driveways and pedestrian walkways within the mobile home park shall be lighted between sunset and sunrise with electric lights emitting light at an intensity of at least five thousand (5,000) lumens. 
3.  Light poles shall be no more than two hundred fifty (250) feet apart. 
J.  Requirements for fire protection within a park. 
1.  Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire equipment in good working order and of such type, size, number, and location as to satisfy applicable fire regulations of Henry County. 
2.  No open fires or burning of leaves or other refuse shall be permitted within the boundaries of any park. 
K.  Requirements for sanitation within a park. 
1.  The area around and underneath each mobile home unit shall be kept clean and free from collections of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles, or other unsightly material. 
2.  Garbage and refuse collection facilities shall be provided. Waste shall be removed from the premises and disposed of often enough to prevent creating a nuisance or health hazard and to insure that the garbage can shall not overflow. 
4.03.17.  Recreational vehicle parks. 
A.  Recreational vehicle (RV) parks are permissible in the RA, C-3, and IAC zoning districts, subject to the site design standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards of this section. 
B.  Recreational vehicle parks may include motor homes, travel trailers, pop-up trailers, tents, and other similar vehicles. 
C.  The condition of soils, groundwater level, drainage, and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
D.  Accessory uses and structures permissible in the recreational vehicle park include management headquarters, recreational facilities, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a recreational vehicle park. Standards for accessory uses are in the following table: 
Table 4.03.17(D) Standards for Accessory Uses in Recreational Vehicle Parks 

 
E.  Site design standards for recreational vehicle parks are set forth in the following table: 
Table 4.03.17(E) Site Design Standards for Recreational Vehicle Parks 

 
F.  Garbage and refuse collection facilities shall be provided. 
1.  Each lot shall be provided with an approved metal garbage container with a tight-fitting cover. The container shall be kept in sanitary condition and shall be stored at least three (3) inches off the ground, preferably on a metal rack or hanger for such purpose. 
2.  Waste shall be removed from the premises and disposed of often enough to prevent creating a nuisance or health hazard and to insure that the garbage can shall not overflow. 
4.03.18.  Group homes, nursing homes, assisted living and hospice care facilities. 
A.  Group homes, nursing homes, assisted living and hospice care facilities are permissible in the following zoning districts: RA with an approved conditional use and subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  The following site design standards are required for care homes, group homes, nursing homes, assisted living and hospice care facilities: 
Table 4.03.18(B) Standards for Group Homes, Nursing Homes, Assisted Living Facilities and Hospice Care Facilities 

 
4.03.19.  Personal care homes. 
A.  Personal care homes are permissible in all residential zoning districts and subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards in this section. An approved conditional use is required for all non-home occupation care homes, except in the RA zoning district a four (4) client personal care home is permitted without an approved conditional use. An approved conditional use is required for more than four (4) clients in the RA zoning district. 
B.  Home occupation personal care homes shall be limited to the provision of care and supervision to not more than three (3) persons and shall comply with the standards set forth in section 7.01.00. 
C.  A state license is required for all personal care homes in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-7-12. 
4.03.20.  Roadside produce stands. 
A.  A roadside produce stand is permissible in the RA zoning district, subject to the site design standards of the district, and the standards of this section. 
B.  Roadside stands are allowable for the sale of vegetables, fruit, produce, eggs, or other agricultural products grown on the premises. Agricultural products shall not include poultry or livestock. 
C.  Roadside and produce stands shall meet the site design standards in the following table: 
Table 4.03.20(C) Standards for Roadside Produce Stands 

 
4.03.21.  Salvage yards or junkyards and wrecker services (with storage area). 
A.  Salvage yards and junkyards are permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards in this section. An approved conditional use is required for all salvage yards and junkyards. In addition, salvage yards shall be required to have minimum lot size of two (2) acres for properties zoned M-1 and one (1) acre for properties zoned M-2. 
B.  The site design standards for salvage yards and junkyards are set forth in the following table: 
Table 4.03.21(B) Standards for Salvage Yards and Junkyards 

 
C.  Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted. 
D.  Wrecker services (with storage area) are permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards of this section. An approved conditional use is required in the aforementioned zoning districts. 
E.  The site design standards for wrecker services (with storage area) are set forth in the following table: 
Table 4.03.21(E) Standards for Wrecker Services (with storage area) 

 
4.03.22.  Schools, academic, public or private. 
A.  Public or private academic schools are permissible in the following zoning districts: OI, C-1, C-2 and IAC, subject to the standards of the zoning district, and the supplemental standards of this section: RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RS, RD, RM, RMH, and MU. 
B.  The following site design standards are required: 
Table 4.03.22(B) Standards for Public and Private Schools 

 
4.03.23.  Self-service storage facilities. 
A.  Self-service storage facilities, also called mini-storage or self-storage, are permissible in the C-3, IAC, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  The following activities or uses are prohibited on the grounds or within the buildings of self-service storage facilities: 
1.  Wholesale sales; 
2.  Retail sales, including garage sales, or other commercial activities; 
3.  Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, or other industrial activity; 
4.  Service or repair of vehicles, engines, electronic equipment or similar activities; 
5.  Rehearsal or practice of musical instruments; 
6.  Residential and office uses. 
C.  Notwithstanding the limitations described in subsection 4.03.23.B., above, the following activities may be conducted: 
1.  Rental of storage bays. 
2.  Truck rental business, limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the gross site area. 
3.  Sales of boxes or goods related directly to the operation of a self-service storage facility. 
4.  Sales by the owner or manager of the facility of abandoned items for reclamation of rental costs. 
D.  Except as specifically provided in this section, all property stored on the site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. 
E.  Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous waste or chemicals is prohibited. 
F.  As an accessory use, one (1) dwelling unit may be established for security personnel, management personnel, or the facility owner. 
G.  The following site design requirements shall be met: 
Table 4.03.23(G) Site Design Standards for Self-Service Storage Facilities 

 
H.  The following design standards are required for the self-service storage buildings: 
Table 4.03.23(H) Building Design Standards for Self-Service Storage Facilities 

 
;adv=1;I.  Outdoor (open) storage is permissible, subject to the following standards: 
Table 4.03.23(I) Standards for Outdoor Storage at Self-Service Storage Facilities 

 
J.  Traffic circulation requirements. 
1.  Traffic lane widths shall be established to provide for the adequate circulation, safety, and accessibility of trucks, cars, and individuals who utilize dead storage in such facilities. 
2.  The minimum traffic lane width shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  The maximum traffic lane width shall be forty (40) feet. 
4.  Traffic flow patterns, directional signage, and painted land markings with arrows shall also be clearly marked. 
5.  In order to ensure appropriate access and circulation by emergency vehicles and equipment, the turning radii of the aisle ways shall be approved by the county DOT and the fire marshal at the time of preliminary plan review. 
6.  There shall be no aisle ways or other vehicular access ways located in the buffer area or within the designated rights-of-way. 
K.  The following standards are required for landscaping: 
Table 4.03.23(K) Landscaping Standards for Self-Service Storage Facilities 

 
4.03.24.  Truck stops. 
A.  Truck stops (or truck service centers) are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the site design standards for the district, and the specific site design standards in this section: C-2, C-3, IAC, and M-1. 
B.  Truck stops may include the following activities and uses: sale of fuel, oil, lubricants, and similar products; sale of small automotive accessories; sale of food and sundries; convenience store; restaurant drive-up windows; inspection stations for emissions; or truck wash. Truck stops shall not include repair shops, body shops, paint shops, or paint booths. 
C.  Design standards for truck stops are shown in the following table: 
Table 4.03.24(C) Standards for Truck Stops 

 
4.03.25.  Airstrips, airports and helicopters [heliports]. Airstrips, airports and helicopters [heliports] (other than private airstrips and helicopters [heliports] within a residential fly-in neighborhood) are permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. Those properties zoned RA (Residential Agricultural) outside of a subdivision, shall be required to obtain a Conditional Use [permit] and meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  The minimum acreage shall be fifteen (15) acres. 
2.  An undisturbed vegetative buffer shall be provided along all property lines which abut property with a residential zoning classification, except where prohibited to provide access or utility easements. The purpose of the buffer shall be to screen sight or sound of activities from adjacent and nearby residential neighborhoods. The buffer shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') in width. Should the property lack existing vegetation, a detailed landscaped plan shall be submitted and approved by the Development Plan Review Department, prior to the submittal of a Conditional Use Application, and shall conform to the plant material requirements and specifications set forth in Section 5.02.04. Existing vegetation within the buffer area should be preserved and enhanced where insufficient to provide adequate screening, but not in excess of that which is required under Section 5.02.00. 
3.  The landing strip/runway shall not be paved. The use of permeable or pervious pavement materials shall be allowed. 
4.  The private airstrips, airports and helicopters [heliports] shall adhere to all applicable laws and regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
5.  No commercial activities shall be allowed or permissible with any approved Conditional Use. The following uses are prohibited: flight instruction, aircraft storage (other than hangars for use by the property owner), aircraft maintenance (will be permissible as long as it's for use by the property owner), aircraft fueling (other than for use by the property owner), and other similar commercial airport activities. 
6.  Only one (1) airstrip per Conditional Use shall be allowed. 
7.  A maximum of two (2) airplane hangars may be allowed even in the absence of a primary structure to any approved Conditional Use. Any hangars in excess of two (2) shall be required to obtain separate approval from the Board of Commissioners, by the filing of a separate application. 
8.  All hangars constructed shall be required to obtain a permit and approval from the Building Department and shall comply with any and all development and building regulations and standards. 
4.03.26.  Livestock processing and feedlots. Livestock processing and feedlots shall meet applicable state and federal standards for confinement feeding operations. A buffer one hundred (100) feet in width is required on all side and rear property lines. 
4.03.27.  Lodges and event facilities. 
A.  Lodges and event facilities are permissible in the MU, OI, C-1, C-2, C-3 and IAC zoning districts, subject to the site design standards for that district. Lodges and event facilities are permissible with an approved conditional use within the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and in accordance with section 4.01.03, appearance standards for commercial and industrial buildings. An approved conditional use is also required within the RA zoning district, subject to the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Functions including luncheons, banquets, parties, weddings, meetings, charitable fundraising, commercial or advertising activities, or other gatherings for direct or indirect compensation are permissible. 
C.  The following site design standards are required for lodges and event facilities: 
Table 4.03.27(C) Standards for Lodges and Event Facilities 

 
4.03.28.  Bed and breakfast facility (not in a subdivision). The regulations below are intended to allow for a more efficient use of large, older homes in residential areas if the neighborhood character is reserved to maintain both the residential neighborhood experience and the bed and breakfast experience. These regulations enable owners to maintain large residential structures in a manner which keeps them primarily in residential uses and provides an alternative form of lodging for visitors who prefer a residential setting. An approved conditional use is required for all bed and breakfast facilities within the RA zoning district. 
A.  The house must be at least ten (10) years old before a bed and breakfast facility is allowed. The individual or family who operate the facility must occupy the house as their primary residence. 
B.  Bed and breakfast facility may have nonresident employees for such activities as booking rooms and food preparation. Hired services for normal maintenance, repair and care of the residence such as yard maintenance are also permitted. 
C.  The following functions are permissible: luncheons, banquets, parties, weddings, meetings, charitable fundraising, commercial or advertising activities, or other gatherings for direct or indirect compensation. 
D.  The following site design standards are required for bed and breakfast facilities (not in a subdivision): 
Table 4.03.28(D) Standards for Bed and Breakfast Facilities 

 
4.03.29.  Boarding and rooming houses. 
A.  Boarding or rooming houses are permissible in the following zoning districts RA with an approved conditional use, OI, C-1, C-2, and C-3 and subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  The following site design standards are required for boarding and rooming house facilities: 
Table 4.03.29(B) Standards for Boarding and Rooming Houses 

 
4.03.30.  Senior adult housing. The purpose of this section is to determine where age-restricted adult housing may be located and to provide minimum standards. The intent of this section is to encourage age-appropriate housing for persons with mobility, sensory, and cognitive limitations. Though these regulations require that over-all developments feature a measure of accessibility, full accessibility is encouraged. Accessibility is defined by the Georgia Accessibility Code as amended, and any age-restricted adult housing development must meet the same standards required by Georgia Accessibility Code 120-3-20-.54 in order to be considered fully accessible. 
Senior adult housing may be allowed in these zoning districts as a supplemental use: RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RS, RD, RM, and MU provided that at minimum the following restrictions apply. Final plats and all required construction documents shall include a notation specifying "Age-Restricted Adult Housing: Shall Follow Section 4.03.30" 
A.  Unit type allowed: 
1.  Only single-family detached units may be allowed in RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and RS districts; 
2.  Only two-family units may be allowed in RD district; 
3.  Only multifamily units may be allowed in RM district. 
B.  The development shall have a minimum of twenty (20) dwelling units. 
C.  The maximum net density shall meet the future land use plan requirements. 
D.  At least forty (40) percent of the gross site area shall be open space. The open space shall provide amenities such as pathways, seating areas, and recreation areas for residents. The open space shall be protective of natural features. 
E.  At least one (1) on-site community building or interior community space shall be provided which contains a minimum of: 
1.  Twenty (20) square feet of heated floor area per dwelling unit for the first ninety nine (99) units with a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet, and 
2.  Ten (10) square feet of heated floor area per additional dwelling unit. 
F.  For phased development; open space, recreational facilities, and other accessory facilities shall be provided in each phase to meet the requirements as stated herein of the residents of each phase. The developer shall provide a schedule for the installation of facilities at the time of the first permit approval. 
G.  At the time of the first permit application, the developer shall establish how the age restrictions will be implemented and maintained over time. If the development is anything other than a rental community under single ownership, a common entity such as a condominium association or a homeowners association shall be established to maintain and enforce the age restrictions in addition to the county enforcement of zoning regulations. 
H.  All open space, common areas, and related improvements shall be fully accessible and shall be managed and maintained by the owner of the development or a common entity such as a condominium association, or a homeowners association. 
I.  Any structure within the development may be fully accessible; however, the minimum standards of this section shall be met. The development shall incorporate universal design features as follows. The application shall include descriptions of the universal design features of proposed dwellings to demonstrate their appropriateness for the age-restricted population. The material submitted shall indicate how universal design features will be used to make individual dwellings adaptable to persons with mobility, sensory, or otherwise functional limitations; and how the design will provide accessible routes between parking areas, sidewalks, front door of the dwelling units, and common areas. These routes shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, allowing mobility-enhancing devices to meet and pass safely. 
1.  "No-step" (maximum vertical floor level change of one-quarter (¼) inch, except where a tapered threshold is used which has a maximum height of one-half (½) inch) access to the front door entrance to all dwelling units and community buildings is required. If a no-step front entrance is not feasible, an alternate no-step walkway to the front floor may be approved. 
2.  A minimum thirty-six-inch wide front door with exterior lighting at the entrance is required. Exterior doors shall be provided with an artificial light source located in the immediate vicinity of the exterior door. The illumination of the exterior light shall be controlled from inside the dwelling except for lights that are continuously illuminated or automatically controlled. 
3.  All interior doorways must have a minimum of thirty-two-inch clear width in the open position — typically a thirty-six-inch door. 
4.  A thirty-six-inch fully accessible route must connect throughout the floor served by the front door of the dwelling unit. The maximum vertical floor level change is one-quarter (¼) inch, except where a tapered threshold is used which has a maximum height of one-half (½) inch. 
5.  A complete living area including, but not limited to, kitchen, master bedroom, and bathroom shall be located on the floor served by the front door of the dwelling unit. 
6.  Lever handles are required on all interior and exterior doors. 
7.  Clear floor space of thirty (30) inches by forty-eight (48) inches shall be provided and centered on each appliance and fixture in the kitchen. Floor space can overlap. 
8.  Walls shall be reinforced (blocked) to allow for the later installation of grab bars around the toilet, tub, and shower stall; and of wall-hung bench shower seat. 
9.  Maneuvering space shall be provided within the bathroom to permit a person using a mobility aid to enter the room, close the door, and reopen the door with a clear floor space of thirty (30) inches by forty-eight (48) inches. Clear floor space of thirty (30) inches by forty-eight (48) inches shall be provided and centered on each fixture in the bathroom. Floor space can overlap. 
10.  Wall-mounted electrical outlets, light switches, and environmental controls shall be mounted for a reaching range of a minimum of fifteen (15) inches to a maximum of forty-eight (48) inches above the floor. Such wall-mounted devices shall be of a contrasting color with the wall. 
4.03.31.  Industrialized and modular buildings. 
A.  Modular and industrialized buildings within nonresidential zoning districts: OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, MU, M-1 and M-2 are permissible subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section, and must receive architectural review approval from the architectural review committee. 
B.  Industrialized and modular buildings shall not be utilized for residing in or any other residential purpose. 
C.  The following site design standards are required for industrialized and modular buildings in all nonresidential zoning districts. 
Table 4.03.31(C). Standards for Industrialized and Modular Buildings. 

 
4.03.32.  Adult entertainment establishments. 
A.  An adult entertainment establishment shall only be allowed in designated areas within the M-1 (light-manufacturing) zoning district, as listed below and depicted in figure 4.7: Adult Entertainment Development Areas, Unincorporated Henry County, GA, and shall be subject to the site design standards of the M-1 zoning district, unless otherwise stated in the M-1 supplemental standards (section 4.03.32). 
B.  Adult entertainment establishments may only be located on: 
1.  The south side of Highway 155, within one (1) mile of the Exit 216 Interchange, as measured from the traffic signal of each respective off ramp, or 
2.  Any M-1 zoned parcel located on the west side of Business Center Drive, north of the Norfolk Southern Railroad line. 
C.  In addition to meeting the requirements of all other applicable code provisions, including, but not limited to, the zoning code, the following standards apply to adult entertainment establishments (where the provisions of this section conflict with other provisions of the Code of Henry County, the most stringent provisions shall apply): 
1.  Buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment facility shall be separated at least forty (40) feet from the building and structure of any other business establishment, and a minimum of forty (40) feet from all property lines. 
2.  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located in any strip shopping center, mall, or other group structures; and 
3.  Adult entertainment establishments must be placed in a separate building on their own lots. 
4.  No adult entertainment establishments may be located within three thousand (3,000) feet of any parcel of land containing another adult entertainment establishment. 
D.  For the purpose of this section, distance shall be by straight line, airline measurement from property line to property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel" as applied to this section shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
4.03.32.1.  Pawn shops. 
A.  Pawn shops are permissible in the following zoning districts: C-2, C-3, and IAC and are subject to the supplemental standards set forth in this section: 
1.  Pawn shop licenses shall be limited to one (1) per twenty-one thousand, one hundred eighty-two (21,182) population. 
2.  Pawn shops shall not be [located] within one thousand (1,000) feet of a similar use. 
3.  No application for license to do business as a pawn shop, shall be considered or approved or a license issued where the total number of pawn shop licenses issued and in effect at the time of such application numbers at least one (1) for each twenty-one thousand, one hundred eighty-two (21,182) residents according to the latest officially and finally published annual population estimates by the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC). 
4.  If, during this period, applications are received which exceed the number of newly available licenses, there shall be held a lottery, administered by the Henry County Business License Department, to determine the order in which applications shall be processed. Thereafter, the applications shall be processed in the order reflected in the results of the lottery. Once the proceeding of applications has resulted in the issuance of licenses up to the limit contained in this chapter, the remaining applications shall be returned to the applicants, unprocessed. 
B.  The enforcement of the total number of pawnshops permitted in Henry County shall be maintained by the Henry County Business License Department in accordance with the process outlined in the licenses and taxation requirements in chapter 3-3, article VI of the Henry County Code of Ordinances. 
4.03.33.  Private membership recreational facilities (not in a subdivision). 
A.  It is the intent of this section to provide citizens with large residential properties the opportunity to operate types of businesses that are compatible within larger tracts of land. A private membership recreational activity is defined as a facility open only to members and guests of the private organization operating the facility. 
B.  Private membership recreational facilities are permitted in all residential zoning districts outside of a platted subdivision with an approved Conditional Use subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards of this section. The permitted uses are outdoor activities that include swimming, court sports, archery and similar outdoor uses. Prohibited uses include commercial recreation activities wherein the principal use is an indoor activity consisting of exercise and/or training rooms, equipment, etc. The regulations provided are to protect, maintain and preserve the agricultural and/or rural character of the area by not creating a nuisance in exceeding traffic, smoke, noise, dust or be a fire hazard. 
C.  The following site design standards are required: 
Table 4.03.32(C). Standards for Private Membership Recreational Facilities. 

 
D.  The zoning advisory board may require additional requirements and restrictions as conditions of approval, such as, but not limited to, more restrictive hours of operation, number of classes per day and/or students per session. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(9, 10), 6-15-10, Ord. No. 10-12, § I, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 10-14, § I, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 10-07, § I, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 11-04, § I, 7-19-11; Ord. No. 11-09, § I, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 12-04, § I, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 12-05, § I, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 12-10, §§ II, III, 5-1-12; Res. No. 13-05, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 15-05, § I, 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 4.04.00. - Conventional subdivision design standards. 
4.04.01.  Generally. 
A.  The purposes of subdivision design standards are: 
1.  To provide for safe and efficient traffic circulation by development of a coordinated street system in relation to major streets, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; 
2.  To achieve individual lots of reasonable utility and livability; 
3.  To provide for the acceptance of land for public rights-of-way; 
4.  To provide for the installation and construction of utilities, streets, stormwater management facilities, and other public improvements essential to service land being subdivided; 
5.  To assure that public improvements will be constructed according to safe and durable standards; 
6.  To enable the dedication or reservation of land for public schools, parks, and other public purposes; 
7.  To assure that development will occur within an environmentally compatible setting and free of flood hazards; 
8.  To provide for the subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; and 
9.  To establish the procedure for submittal, approval, and recording of subdivision plats within Henry County. 
B.  The standards for design and layout of conventional subdivisions are contained in section 4.04.00. The standards for design and installation of public improvements and infrastructure for subdivisions and all other developments are contained in chapter 8. 
C.  Alternative designs for subdivisions. At the discretion of the property owner and applicant, subdivision design may be proposed in compliance with alternative design standards. Clustering, through the application of conservation subdivision standards, is allowed. Design standards for these and other alternative arrangements are set forth in chapter 6. 
D.  General requirements for subdivision design and layout. All subdivision design shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which the land is located. In addition, subdivisions which are proposed to contain commercial or industrial uses shall be designed to ensure consistency with the requirements for commercial buildings as set forth in section 4.01.03. 
4.04.02.  Major and minor subdivisions. 
A.  Approval required. 
1.  No person shall subdivide or rearrange a lot line of any lot or parcel of land, grade or modify the contours of the land, install streets, install utilities, or make other improvements to the land without complying with the provisions of section 4.04.00. 
2.  No building permits shall be issued and no public improvements or services shall be authorized or installed in any unapproved subdivision. 
3.  Procedures for application, review, and approval of preliminary and final plats, and acceptance of public improvements, are set forth in chapter 12 of this ULDC. 
B.  (Reserved.) 
C.  Subdivisions that are not lot divisions as defined herein are major subdivisions. 
D.  Lot divisions as defined herein are exempted from the requirements specific to major subdivisions, but shall conform to all of the applicable requirements of the ULDC, including, but not limited to, minimum lot size requirements for the applicable zoning district. Any flag lots shall have a minimum of sixty (60) feet of road frontage per lot as measured at the right-of-way. The administrator (or their representative) shall have the authority to approve lot divisions. No building permit shall be issued for a tract of land created as the result of a lot division without it being approved. 
E.  Periodic lot divisions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this ULDC, any parcel may be subdivided into no more than five (5) tracts every five (5) years without regard to the requirement for paved roads and without the necessity of submitting development plans for review and approval. For the purposes of this Code section, the term "parcel" shall mean and refer to tracts or parcels of land that are identified by the Henry County Tax Parcel Map, prepared and maintained by the Henry County Tax Assessor's Office, which map is incorporated herein by this reference. 
4.04.03.  General design standards for major subdivisions. 
A.  General requirements for public improvements and infrastructure are set forth in this section. Technical standards for the design and construction of improvements are set forth in chapter 8. 
B.  Subdivision entrance signs. Signs are permissible on the ground to identify the name and entrance of a residential, commercial, or industrial subdivision pursuant to the standards for signs, set forth in section 7.04.00. 
C.  General requirements for potable water system. Water mains properly connected with the county water supply system or with an alternate supply system approved by the county health department shall be constructed in such a manner so as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat for both residential use and fire protection. All materials, labor, equipment, and other items related to construction of the water distribution system shall be provided in accordance with policies and specifications of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
D.  General requirements for public sewer system. When the subdivision is located within the service area of a public sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all lots with connection to the public system. Where sanitary sewer service is not feasible or available, all lots without connection to the public system shall be developed with a private on-site sewage disposal system approved by the Henry County Health Department, consistent with the minimum lot area requirements of section 4.01.01. 
E.  General requirements for utilities. The subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility companies for the installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas, electrical and telephone communication services. 
F.  General requirements for public lands. Where a site within a tract of land proposed for a subdivision is determined to be necessary for a public park, school, fire station, water or sewage treatment plant, water reservoir, public works yard, or other public facility, the necessary land area shall be reserved or dedicated to the appropriate county authority having jurisdiction over the operation and maintenance of the proposed facility. The preliminary and final plats for the subdivision shall show these sites as being reserved or dedicated. 
4.04.04.  Design standards for blocks and lots. 
A.  Subdivision blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth and length. The length, widths, and shapes of block, shall be determined with regard to: 
1.  Dimensional requirements for lots, as set forth in section 4.01.01; 
2.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
3.  Convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic; and 
4.  Topographic condition. 
B.  Blocks shall be not less than five hundred (500) feet or more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length, except where topographic or other conditions of the site make such dimensions impractical. 
C.  Mid-block pedestrian easements: For blocks over eight hundred (800) feet in length, one (1) public crosswalk of not less than ten (10) feet wide near the center and entirely across the full width of the block shall be required, in order to provide access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
D.  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight lines or radial to curved street right-of way lines. Side lot lines shall be in line with cross drainpipes under streets where they are located. 
E.  Through lots or double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of the property to be subdivided. Access to through lots or double frontage lots shall be from the lower classification street. 
F.  Flag lots shall be prohibited in subdivisions unless topographic conditions (certified by a professional engineer), or the shape and orientation of the property to be subdivided make the inclusion of some flag lots necessary. 
1.  Flag lots are intended only to provide use of the rear portion of the extremely deep tracts of land for residential purposes. 
2.  Where it is necessary to design flag lots, no more than five (5) percent of the lots in a subdivision shall be flag lots. 
3.  The street frontage for a flag lot shall be at least fifty (50) percent of the lot width required for the zoning district in which the subdivision is located. 
4.  Front setbacks for flag lots shall be measured from the first widest part of the lot. No structures shall be built on the access strip that provides access from the building site to the street. 
G.  Easements. 
1.  All lots within a subdivision shall provide easements for stormwater drainage and detention systems for future sanitary sewer installations, and for gas, electric, and telephone utilities five (5) feet from the ROW line. 
2.  Rear lot line easements. Easements along all rear lot lines shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide. Ten (10) feet shall be provided on the final plat from each adjoining lot. Wider easements may be required by the water and sewerage authority depending on the size, location, and depth of proposed or existing sewers. 
3.  Side lot easements. Easements along side lot lines shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide, ten (10) feet along each adjoining lot. Wider easements may be required by the water and sewerage authority depending on the size and depth of proposed or existing sewers. 
4.  Easements along streams and drainageways. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater drainage easement and sanitary sewer easement or drainage easement or drainage right-of-way along each side of the watercourse for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving, or protecting such easement. The easement, an undisturbed buffer, shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet wide. A wider easement may be required for large streams and drainageways and for future sanitary sewer installations. 
5.  Stormwater detention facility easements. All stormwater detention facilities shall be accessible from a public street by a minimum twenty (20) feet wide easement and there shall be an easement for the detention facility including a minimum of twenty (20) feet around the outside perimeter of the facility. 
6.  All easements shall be shown on final plats. 
H.  Minimum lot area and easements. Proposed subdivision lots which are traversed by utility easements for gas, electric, telephone, and, water and sewer utilities shall contain the minimum buildable area defined by the zoning district, exclusive or outside of areas occupied by these easements. 
Illustrations of Design Concepts and Requirements: 


( Ord. No. 16-01, § I, 7-19-16 ) 
Sec. 4.05.00. - Highway corridor overlay district. 
4.05.01.  Purpose of article. 
A.  [Purpose.] The purpose of the Henry County Highway Corridor Overlay District is: 
1.  To promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the community where residents and visitors can live, work, eat, and play. 
2.  To promote economic development by diversifying the employment base for a stronger Henry County. 
3.  To improve public health and provide safe and efficient movement within the overlay district by promoting development patterns that encourage physical activity such as walking and bicycling. 
4.  To encourage a balanced mix of retail, professional, residential, civic, entertainment, and cultural uses. 
5.  To improve the efficient operation of traffic around Henry County. 
6.  To provide accessible, sufficient parking in an unobtrusive manner. 
7.  To create an attractive gateway that is aesthetically appealing and environmentally responsible. 
8.  To encourage innovative development projects that set standards for landscaping, open space, community design, and public amenities. 
9.  To establish consistent and harmonious design standards for public improvements and private property development within the overlay district so as to unify the distinctive visual quality of Henry County. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, unless specifically stated otherwise, the following terms shall be defined as indicated. Words used in this section but not defined herein shall be as defined by appendix A. Where any definition herein conflicts with a definition in appendix A, the definition contained herein shall prevail. 
1.  Administrator: Director of the Henry County Planning and Zoning Department or their designee. 
2.  Architectural review committee (ARC): A panel of Henry County staff which consists of the planning and zoning, building, environmental compliance/plan review and transportation departments. 
3.  Civic use: "Social, Institutional, or infrastructure-related activities; social, cultural, or religious assembly" as established in table 2.03.03, and hospitals. 
4.  Commercial use: A term collectivity defining retail, office, and lodging uses. 
5.  Existing street: A public street that is open, under construction, or completely funded, or approved at the date of application for review under this section. 
6.  Front: To place an element, such as a building, along the front setback. 
7.  Front yard: In addition to the definition established in appendix A, all yards abutting a street shall meet the setback requirement for front yards. 
8.  Industrial use: "Industrial use, manufacturing, and waste-related activities" as established in table 2.03.03. 
9.  Lodging use: Premises available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms, including motels and hotels. 
10.  Mixed-use building: A building containing at least two (2) different uses. 
11.  Occupiable space: Covered and conditioned building area utilized for any use except parking, storage, or mechanical features. 
12.  Office use: "Offices activities" as established in table 2.03.03 and medical and dental offices and related services. 
13.  Overlay district: Henry County Highway Corridor Overlay District. 
14.  Retail use: "Shopping, business, or trade activities" and "restaurants-type activity" as established in table 2.03.03 and fitness clubs, spaces, and gyms. 
15.  Residential use: "Residential activities" as established in chapter 2, table 2.03.02. 
16.  Sidewalk area: An area improved for walking along an existing street, primary grid, or secondary grid that begins at the street curb, or edge of pavement if no curb exists, and consists of a contiguous and continuous landscape zone and pedestrian zone. 
a.  Sidewalk landscape zone: The paved or unpaved portion of the sidewalk area adjacent to the street and reserved for trees, groundcover, and street furniture including, waste receptacles, traffic signs, newspaper boxes, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
b.  Sidewalk pedestrian zone: The paved portion of the sidewalk area reserved for pedestrian passage and unobstructed by any permanent objects to a height of eight (8) feet above the paved surface. The pedestrian zone shall be adjacent to the landscape zone and shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two (2) percent. 
17.  Use: A land use or function of classification category. 
C.  Variations. There shall be two (2) types of variations from the requirements of this district: administrative waivers and variances. Whether a variation requires an administrative waiver or a variance shall be determined by the administrator. 
1.  Administrative waivers permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific provision of this section, but is justified by its intent or purpose, or by hardship. The administrator or their designee shall have the authority to approve or disapprove administratively a request for an administrative waiver in accordance with section 11.03.00, administrative waiver, in addition to granting relief from the following: 
a.  Site planning. 
b.  Development standards. 
c.  Sidewalks and streets. 
d.  Frontages. 
e.  Architecture. 
2.  Variances permit a practice that is not consistent with a provision nor the purpose of this section. Variances shall be granted only in accordance with section 11.02.00, variances. 
D.  Procedural requirements. 
1.  Procedural requirements shall adhere to section 12.02.00. 
F.  Site planning. All sites. 
1.  Notwithstanding, the requirements of section 5.02.00, buffer requirements, there are no minimum buffers within this district other than the stream buffer protection requirements, according to section 3.03.00. Where this district abuts an area not within it, the requirements of section 5.02.00 shall apply. 
2.  The requirements of section 8.01.04 shall apply to all sites regarding joint access driveways and cross access easements. 
3.  The requirements of section 3.04.00 shall apply to all sites regarding watershed protection areas. 
4.  Open space areas should be delineated on each conceptual plan, which shall receive approval from the building and plan review department. 
4.05.02.  Boundaries. This ordinance section applies to land parcels of record within unincorporated Henry County as depicted on exhibit "A" which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. These boundaries are further depicted on the Henry County official zoning map adopted as amended on the date of adoption of this ordinance, which is attached hereto as exhibit "B" and incorporated herein by reference. The Henry County Highway Corridor overlay district boundaries include all unincorporated parcels of land abutting Highway 138 East and West, Highway 155 North and South, Highway 20 East and West (excluding Bruton Smith Overlay District), Highway 81 East and West, Highway 42 North and South, Jonesboro Road, Jodeco Road, Eagles Landing Parkway, Hudson Bridge Road, East Lake Parkway, East Lake Road (between Highway 155 and Highway 20), Fairview Road, East Atlanta Road, West Village Parkway, Anvil Block Road, West Panola Road, Panola Road, Flakes Mill Road, North Henry Boulevard, Highway 19/41, and the Henry County Airport. All state routes and associated rights-of-way are within the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) and any improvements within these respective rights-of-way are subject to GDOT. This Henry County Corridor Overlay District Boundaries also includes the Henry County Airport. All property contained within any parcel subject to this ordinance section on the date of adoption of this ordinance shall continue to be subject to this ordinance, even if the parcel is subdivided in the future. 
4.05.03.  Effect of highway corridor overlay district provisions. 
A.  Application. This overlay district is supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in the Henry County Unified Land Development Code governing all properties and approvals within this overlay district. The provisions of this ordinance section shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations and other Henry County ordinances. The planning and zoning director or their designee is authorized to promulgate and enforce such rules, regulations, guidelines, and standards as may be reasonably necessary or desirable to give effect to the provisions of this ordinance section. 
B.  Relationship to underlying zoning district standards and other provisions of unified land development code. In any case where the standards and requirements of the overlay district conflict with those of the base-zoning district or with other provisions of the unified land development code, the standards and requirements of the overlay district shall govern. 
C.  Exceptions. The provisions of this ordinance section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Completion of work subject to preliminary plats, site development plans, construction plans, building permits, or interior finish permits approved prior to the effective date of adoption of this ordinance section for those parcels not previously covered within the highway overlay district. 
2.  Improvements and additions that are made to a single-family residence previously permitted and built on a lot of record prior to enactment of this ordinance section for those parcels not previously covered within the overlay district. 
3.  Construction of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record within a single-family residential subdivision with final plat approved prior to enactment of this ordinance section, for those parcels not previously covered within the overlay district, provided that the new construction shall be of a similar floor area, materials and design as the single-family dwellings on adjacent lots in the same subdivision. 
4.  Construction, rehabilitation, restoration, repair of a nonresidential structure, interior renovations or interior finishes within an existing structure, or addition to an existing nonresidential structure that was permitted prior to the enactment of this ordinance section for those parcels not previously covered within the highway corridor overlay district shall not be subject to the provisions of the highway corridor overlay district, provided that such construction is on a lot of record. 
D.  Nonconforming uses. 
1.  Within the overlay, there may exist lots, structures, or uses of both land and structures which were lawful prior to the adoption of this ordinance, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance as adopted or subsequently amended. Nonconforming lots, uses, and structures may continue in their nonconforming status with the limitations and/or requirements of section 11.01.00. "Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses" of the ULDC. 
2.  Vested/grandfathered nonconforming uses. To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of this overlay or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this overlay, except that the nonconforming use: 
a.  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
b.  Shall not be re-established after abandonment or removal from the property for more than fifteen (15) days in the case of a nonconforming manufactured home, or its abandonment for six (6) months or more for all other uses, unless the premises are under a continuing lease but are unoccupied by the nonconforming use, regardless of the intent of the owner or occupier to resume the nonconforming use. 
c.  Shall not be extended to occupy any area of land not contained within the current lot of record. 
d.  Shall not be extended into any new building or structure unless such new building or structure is connected to existing buildings or structures and is contained wholly within the land currently utilized for the nonconforming use; however, where a new building or structure is not to be attached to an existing building or structure, the nonconforming use may be extended into such a new building [or] structure provided that any such new building or structure has a coverage area which does not exceed three (3) percent of the total square footage of the lot and is contained wholly within the land currently utilized for the nonconforming use. 
e.  If an existing use was lawfully established in a zoning district that is subsequently amended to require conditional use approval for such use, the existing use shall not require a conditional use permit. 
f.  Any intended but not yet existing nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired prior to the adoption of this overlay or the adoption of an amendment to it shall be prohibited unless such intended nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired is actually commenced within one (1) year of the adoption of this overlay district or the adoption of an amendment to it, regardless of the intent or expectation to commence or abandon such nonconforming use. 
3.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the vested/grandfathered status created herein may be transferred and assigned to a new owner of the real property to which such rights apply, provided, however, that the new owner, in order to avail himself of such rights, must put the property to the vested/grandfathered use within six (6) months of the date of the sale of the real property. 
E.  Building plan application. 
1.  All building plans submitted pursuant to an application for a building permit should clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each facade as described in ordinance section. 
2.  The plans should clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentages of all building materials per facade. 
3.  Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. 
4.05.04.  Network standards. 
A.  Access management standards. 
1.  Connectivity. Within all nonresidential or multifamily developments or any single-family residential development of five (5) or more acres, the following standards shall apply unless a variance is sought and obtained from the zoning advisory board pursuant to chapter 11 due to unusual topography or environmental constraints such as major streams and rivers that create a severe and unique hardship: 
a.  No local street may be longer than six hundred (600) feet without an intersection with another local through street. Cul-de-sac streets shall not count as through streets. 
b.  Continuous pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect building entrances to required ten-foot wide sidewalks along street frontage. 
c.  A cul-de-sac street that ends within two hundred (200) feet of the right-of-way of an adjacent collector or arterial street shall provide a five-foot wide sidewalk in a ten-foot wide easement connecting the sidewalk on the cul-de-sac to the sidewalk on the adjacent collector or arterial street. 
d.  Dead-end streets, including cul-de-sac streets, shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet in length and shall not serve more than thirty (30) dwelling units. 
2.  Vehicular access points: Minimum number of driveways or streets required per Table 4.05.04.A.2 below. 
Table 4.05.04.A.2: Minimum Vehicular Access Points 

 
3.  Utilization and provision of connections to and from adjacent developments and developable parcels. 
a.  All development plans shall incorporate and continue all sub-arterial streets stubbed to the boundary of the development plan by previously approved development plans or existing development. 
b.  All development plans shall provide for future public street connections to adjacent developable parcels by providing a local street connection spaced at intervals not to exceed six hundred (600) feet along each development plan boundary that abuts potentially developable or redevelopable land. 
4.  Interparcel access. For developments along an arterial or collector street, except where a variance is sought and obtained from the zoning advisory board pursuant to chapter 11 because of topographic or other site-specific constraints that create a unique and severe hardship, compatible developments, as determined by the planning director, shall provide a network of nonresidential access streets that meet the following: 
a.  Access streets shall be constructed for a commercial or multifamily residential development that abuts another commercial or multifamily residential development, whether existing or planned. The development of the site shall incorporate the following: 
i.  Continuous nonresidential access street, where necessary to connect adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
ii.  Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access. 
b.  New commercial or multifamily property that abuts a planned, new or existing multifamily residential property shall provide for a five-foot wide sidewalk connecting the two (2) uses. 
c.  New multifamily residential development that abuts a planned, new or existing commercial property shall provide for a five-foot wide sidewalk connecting the two (2) uses. 
5.  Driveways. Driveway connections to public streets shall be consistent with the following standards: 
a.  Driveway connections shall not be permitted within the controlled access zone of an intersection. 
b.  Outparcels with less than two hundred (200) feet of road frontage are restricted to internal access only. 
c.  Driveways that enter a major thoroughfare at traffic signals must have at least two (2) outbound lanes (one (1) for each turning direction) of at least eleven (11) feet in width, and one (1) inbound lane with a maximum width of eleven (11) feet. All lanes shall align with respective lanes on the opposite side of the intersection. 
d.  No residentially developed property may have a curb cut in excess of thirty (30) feet in width, and no nonresidential property may have a curb cut in excess of forty (40) feet without approval of the Henry County Department of Transportation Director. 
e.  Except for single-family and two-family residences, driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
f.  Except where driveways are on opposite sides of a raised median, commercial or industrial driveways, or public roads, on opposite sides of a street shall either directly align or have offsets per ULDC section 8.01.03.D.3., as measured between the extended centerlines of such driveways. Along county roads, where property frontage width is such that the minimum offsets cannot be met, or intersection sight distance cannot be met with a driveway location that meets or exceeds the minimum spacing requirement, the Henry County DOT Director may allow placement of a driveway with a lesser offset distance. Where lack of frontage does not provide for the minimum spacing, the driveway may be required to be a joint use driveway with the adjoining owner. 
g.  Whenever possible, driveways on undivided arterials, collector streets, or local streets should align with driveways (if any) on the opposite side of such street. 
h.  On a divided arterial street that includes a median, driveways should align with median breaks whenever possible. Driveways not meeting this standard shall be limited to right turn access and right turn egress. 
i.  Driveway throat length. The length of a driveway or "throat length" for a commercial or office development shall be designed in accordance with the vehicle storage required for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site vehicle circulation. The throat lengths specified in Table 4.05.04.A.5 are generally acceptable guidelines intended for the major entrance driveway of a commercial development. 
Table 4.05.04.A.5: Driveway Length for Commercial Centers 

 
6.  Deceleration lanes. 
a.  A major driveway entering a street classified as a collector or above with a regulated arterial speed thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater shall be required to provide a deceleration lane consistent with the standards set in chapter 8. 
b.  An acceleration or deceleration lane that would begin or end within seventy-five (75) feet of another driveway or intersecting street shall be lengthened so that it connects with the adjacent street or driveway. 
7.  Crosswalks. 
a.  All intersections on streets posted at twenty-five (25) mph or less shall contain crosswalks that connect to sidewalks in all quadrants. For streets posted at over twenty-five (25) mph, crosswalks shall be placed when determined as warranted by engineering study by a professional traffic operations engineer and such studies are subject to Henry County DOT's review and approval. 
b.  Crosswalks shall be either demarcated with high-reflectivity thermoplastic paint or brick pavers, as determined by Henry County DOT. 
B.  Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be required as in chapter 8 of the Henry County Unified Land Development Code, except as provided in this subsection: 
1.  Maximum number of parking spaces. The maximum number of parking spaces that may be constructed on impervious surfaces shall be no more than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the minimum number of required parking spaces. Parking spaces in excess of one hundred five (105) percent shall be constructed on pervious surfaces recommended in paragraph 3.b. of this subsection. 
2.  Pedestrian circulation. Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and convenient use by pedestrians. Commercial and multifamily developments shall provide designated pedestrian pathways or sidewalks connecting the front entrance of the principal building to the sidewalk along the abutting street, including marked crosswalks across interior driveways. 
3.  Paving materials for parking lots. 
a.  All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or pervious materials approved by the Henry County Department of Transportation Director. 
b.  Pervious paving. Recommended pervious paving materials include those described in the current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as the porous concrete or modular porous paver systems under the limited application stormwater structural controls. 
c.  Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
4.  Landscaped strip to screen parking lots and loading areas. 
a.  Where a parking lot or loading area for a commercial, industrial, or institutional use is located adjacent to the public right-of-way, it shall be screened from the public right-of-way consistent with chapter 5 of the Henry County Unified Land Development Code. 
b.  Setbacks for screening areas facing the highway corridor overlay district shall be based on future right-of-way consistent with chapter 8 Henry County DOT guidelines. 
4.05.05.  Public improvement standards. Public rights-of-way (new and existing streets/roads) within the highway corridor overlay district shall be improved in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Street standards. Public rights-of-way located within the highway corridor overlay district shall be classified by type (i.e. arterial, collector, local, or nonresidential access) by the Henry County Department of Transportation and shall be consistent with section 4.05.03 design guidelines as follows: 
1.  Arterial: 
a.  Forty-five (45) mph design speed. 
b.  Minimum one hundred twenty-foot right-of-way. 
c.  Ten-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip located outside of planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including a ten-foot wide sidewalk. 
d.  Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip. 
e.  Street trees are required in landscaped strip. 
2.  Collector: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) mph design speed. 
b.  Minimum eighty-foot right-of-way. 
c.  Depending on adjacent land use, lanes shall conform to one (1) of the following two (2) options: 
i.  Two (2) travel lanes at twelve (12) feet with center turn lane at fourteen (14) feet in commercial areas. 
ii.  Two (2) travel lanes at twelve (12) feet with turn lane at intersection provided between intersections for planned developments or residential areas. 
d.  Twenty-four-inch wide curb and gutter. 
e.  Eight-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip along outside curb. 
f.  Eight-foot (minimum) wide sidewalk outside landscaped strip. 
g.  Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip. On roads posted at thirty (30) mph or greater, pedestrian lights shall be placed per chapter 5 of the GDOT Design Policy Manual. 
h.  Street trees are required in landscaped strip. On roads posted at thirty (30) mph or greater, street trees shall be placed per chapter 5 of the GDOT Design Policy Manual and the GDOT Policy for Landscaping. 
3.  Local streets: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) mph design speed. 
b.  Minimum fifty-foot right-of-way. 
c.  Two (2) travel lanes at eleven (11) feet each. 
d.  Twenty-four-inch wide curb and gutter. 
e.  Eight-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip along outside curb. 
f.  Eight-foot (minimum) wide sidewalk outside landscaped strip. 
g.  Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip. 
h.  Street trees are required in landscaped strip. 
4.  Nonresidential access street: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) mph design speed. 
b.  Minimum fifty-foot right-of-way. 
c.  Two (2) travel lanes at eleven (11) feet each. 
d.  Eighteen-inch wide curb and gutter, twenty-four (24) inches if public right-of-way. 
e.  Five-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip along outside curb, eight-foot if public right-of-way. 
f.  Eight-foot (minimum) wide sidewalk outside landscaped strip. 
g.  Street trees are required in landscaped strip. 
5.  Underground utilities are required for all street frontages. Upon written application pursuant to chapter 11, an exception may be granted by the zoning advisory board in cases where, due to unique topography or the presence of rock, the installation of underground utilities would present a severe and unique hardship. 
B.  Street trees. Subject to Henry County DOT's review and approval, canopy trees shall be provided in street rights-of-way including medians and required landscaped strips adjacent to all streets. For roadways/streets either classified as collector or above, or posted at thirty (30) mph or greater, the tree types, sizes, and lateral offset to trees are to be governed by chapter 5 of the GDOT Design Policy Manual and the GDOT Policy for Landscaping. Trees and vegetation shall be located such that such vegetation shall not be located within the required sight lines necessary for intersection sight distance based on the road's posted speed limit. 
1.  Appropriate street tree species include the following: 
a.  Large trees—Average spacing forty (40) feet on center: 
•  Nuttall Oak 
•  Shumard Oak 
•  Sawtooth Oak 
•  Gingko (Variety: President, Autumn Gold, male gender) 
•  Princeton Elm 
•  Chinese Elm (varieties Allee, Athena, Drake, Bosque) 
•  Bald Cypress (variety: Shawnee Brave) 
•  Zelkova (variety Green Vase or Village Green) 
•  Northern Red Oak 
•  Trident Maple 
b.  Small trees—Average spacing twenty (20) feet on center: 
•  Crepe Myrtle 
•  Saucer Magnolia (variety: Butterflies) 
•  Chinese Fringe Tree 
•  Golden Rain Tree 
•  Texas Redbud (Cercis reniformis) 
•  Kousa Dogwood 
•  Washington Hawthorn 'Princeton Sentry' 
•  Zelkova (variety: Wires) 
2.  No more than twenty-five (25) (or twenty-five (25) percent of the total number, whichever is greater) of the trees installed may be of any one (1) genus. 
3.  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the street trees used in a single development shall be of the small tree species, unless limited by roadway classification or posted speed limit that affect tree type placement. 
C.  Improvement guarantees. At the option of Henry County, the developer may be required to provide to the county financial security to guarantee the installation of project improvements required in this ordinance section. The developer's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
1.  An escrow of funds with the county; 
2.  An escrow of funds with a bank upon which the county can draw; 
3.  An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment upon which the county can draw; 
4.  A performance bond for the benefit of the county upon which the county can collect; and 
5.  Any other form of guarantee approved by the board of commissioners that will satisfy the objectives of this subsection. 
The guarantee shall be in an amount sufficient to secure the full costs, as determined by the Henry County Department of Transportation Director, of the construction cost of the improvements, based on the most recent edition of Georgia Department of Transportation "Item Means Summary" or other comparable standardized cost estimation procedure. 
4.05.06.  Property development standards. 
A.  Additional uses. Parcels zoned for commercial uses shall be allowed to be developed with a mixture of commercial and residential uses according to the development standards of section 4.01.05 provided the future land use map provides a maximum density for the subject parcel. 
B.  Prohibited uses. 
1.  Self-service storage (except indoor storage designed to mirror class "A" commercial office space), mini-warehouses, or warehousing and storage distribution not currently zoned for these uses (M-1 or M-2), as of adoption of this ordinance section. 
2.  Salvage, junk, wrecking, recycling, waste, and scrap yards. 
3.  Adult bookstore. 
4.  Sexually oriented businesses or establishments. 
5.  Pawnshop or loan brokers, other than mortgage loan brokers. 
6.  Rooming and boarding houses. 
7.  Automotive repair and maintenance, except car washes. 
C.  Ground floor area limitation. New commercial buildings may not exceed one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) gross square feet in ground floor area. New commercial buildings greater than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) gross square feet must obtain conditional use approval. In determining whether to grant an increase in ground floor size beyond one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet, the zoning advisory board shall consider the following factors, in addition to those listed in chapter 11: 
1.  The building site will provide convenient inter-connections with adjacent uses and properties that serve both pedestrians and automobiles. 
2.  The floor area of the proposed building is the smallest feasible to serve the function of the proposed use. 
3.  The architectural design of the building reduces the perceived size of the building by appropriate articulations and variations in the massing, façade, roofline, materials, colors, and textures of the building exterior. 
4.  The building and site meets or exceeds all other standards set forth in this ordinance section and by the Henry County Unified Land Development Code. 
D.  Lot standards. 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  For outparcels or stand-alone commercial projects: One (1) acre. 
b.  For commercial lots within a common development with shared parking and interconnectivity: One-half (½) acre. 
2.  Minimum commercial lot frontage: One hundred seventy-five (175) feet along an arterial. 
3.  Nonresidential lots shall be generally rectangular with a ratio of depth to frontage not greater than 4:1. 
4.  Residential subdivisions shall comply with one (1) of the following two (2) requirements: 
a.  Reverse-fronting lots are required for residential subdivisions along streets classified as arterials or collectors, subject to subparagraph b. below. Reverse-fronting residential lots shall be platted with a landscaped access easement restricting vehicular access placed adjacent to the public right-of-way. Such easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in depth and include one (1) of the following: 
i.  A continuous four-foot high solid wall constructed entirely of brick or stone masonry. 
ii.  A four-foot high fence constructed of a combination of brick or stone masonry pillars with iron pickets. 
iii.  A vegetated strip of canopy trees, shrubs, and groundcover that provide a full landscape buffer. 
b.  If a residential lot is separated from the arterial or collector street by a minimum twenty-foot wide landscaped strip and a residential street, a residential lot may face an arterial or a collector street. 
E.  Environmental controls. 
1.  Stormwater management design shall comply in all respects with the current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and ULDC. 
2.  Parking lot landscaping. Parking areas shall incorporate landscaped areas as required in chapter 5. Such landscaped areas shall cover at least twelve (12) percent of the parking area. 
F.  Dumpsters. 
1.  Location. 
a.  Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be located where they are not visible from adjacent residentially zoned properties and shall be adequately screened from view from all other adjacent properties and streets. 
b.  Dumpsters shall be enclosed either within a building or out of sight from public streets or located outside to the rear of the principal building. 
c.  Dumpsters shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all property lines. If a buffer is required on the subject property line, the dumpster shall not be located within the buffer. 
2.  Pad. 
a.  Dumpsters shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
b.  Restaurants and other food service establishments shall place dumpsters on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
G.  Lighting. 
1.  Parking lot, sidewalk, and building illumination. 
a.  Lighting shall be designed to prevent light spillover on to adjacent properties. All lighting shall be fully shielded, have recessed luminaries, downcast, or be cut-off luminary fixtures mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is directed downward and does not cross any property line of the site. 
b.  Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide, low-pressure sodium, LED, or color corrected, high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type of lighting must be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one (1) site. 
c.  Pedestrian lights shall be consistent with table 4.05.06.G.1 and chapter 8. 
d.  Pedestrian lights shall be spaced in such a manner that full coverage is provided. 
e.  Parking light fixtures shall be the box head type, shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, and shall employ a fluted pole. All parking light fixtures and poles shall be black. 
Table 4.05.06.G.1: Lighting Specifications 

 
2.  Security lighting restrictions. 
a.  Full cutoff luminaries shall be used for all security lighting. 
b.  The number of luminaires remaining on for security lighting shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) the total number of each type of luminaire number by four (4), any remainder is counted as a whole number. 
3.  Drive-under canopies and pump islands at fueling stations. The luminaire shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the luminaire does not extend below the ceiling. 
H.  Architectural standards. The following design guidelines and standards apply to all newly constructed buildings used for commercial, industrial, or residential purposes. 
1.  General architectural requirements. 
a.  The use of a common palette of building materials should be maintained for building facades to create a consistent and traditional architectural identity. Traditional architecture shall include, for example, the use of brick, pitched roofs, low-profile signage, and subdued colors. For large commercial/retail buildings and multifamily buildings, variations in façade, roofline and depth should be provided to lend the appearance of multitenant occupancy. All design and construction shall be subject to architectural review by the county or its designated architect to ensure adherence with this subsection K and the structures of traditional architecture. 
b.  All ground or roof-mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be screened from public street view (within three hundred (300) feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence made of brick, stucco, split face block, or landscaping. 
c.  For all commercial buildings, roof-mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be screened from public street view (within three hundred (300) feet) on all sides by a raised parapet or pitched roof along the edge of the roofline. 
d.  Contrasting accent colors on any single facade shall be limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total wall area for any single façade. 
e.  Materials otherwise not permitted, may be used for an accent provided that a contrasting materials accent on any single façade shall be limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total wall area for any single façade. 
f.  Permanent mounted exterior neon lights shall not be allowed. 
g.  Buildings that are located on outparcels and all accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials complementing the principal building with which they are associated. 
h.  Back-lit awnings, roof-mounted lights, and/or roof mounted flag poles are not permitted. Satellite dishes shall be located and painted to blend with the background as much as practical. 
2.  Building materials. Table 4.05.06.H.2 and this subsection outlines allowed building materials that are may be used and combined to create a consistent, attractive, interesting and long-lasting building design: 
Table 4.05.06.H.2: Allowed Building Materials 

 
a.  Allowed building materials. 
i.  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
ii.  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
iii.  Split-face block/concrete masonry unit (CMU) is restricted to ten (10) percent of the surface area of the facade; 
iv.  Tilt/architectural pre-cast concrete permitted for industrial developments only; 
v.  High grade stucco is restricted to fifty (50) percent of the surface area of a facade; 
vi.  Natural wood and/or cementitious fiberboard siding are allowed only for residential buildings; 
vii.  Glass; 
viii.  Exposed concrete block, metal, and tile are not allowed as building materials on a façade. 
b.  Ratios and amounts of allowed building materials. 
i.  Accent/trim exterior building material. Small amounts of building materials such as wood, tile, etc., may be used to enhance the facade of the building or for decorative elements, but should not exceed ten (10) percent of total wall area per facade. 
ii.  Facade calculations. With the exception of accent/trim materials, there shall be no more than two (2) primary building materials used. When stucco is used as a building material for a façade, it is restricted to fifty (50) percent of the total. The allowed facade materials shall not apply to entry doors and/or roll-up doors. 
c.  The amount of permitted material shall be calculated using the gross square footage of wall area per façade. 
For example, a building has a front facade with a gross facade area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet with four hundred (400) square feet consisting of windows and doors. Begin with one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet for required building material calculations. A wall area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet shall have no more than six hundred (600) square feet of stucco on the front façade [e.g. (one thousand two hundred (1,200) × fifty (50) percent = six hundred (600))]. The balance shall be brick or other allowed material. Trim or accent material may account for up to ten (10) percent or one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
3.  Roof requirements. Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper or factory finished sheet metal. 
a.  Pitched roofs. All buildings less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area must have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of 4:12. All one-story buildings less than ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet must have a pitched roof (between 3:12 and 12:12); provided, however, that if a pitched roof is not possible, a combination of flat roof and pitched roof is required. Provide a pitched roof on front and side of the building to screen view of any flat roof. Create arcades, drive-under canopies, porches, and other features with pitched roof. 
b.  Mansard roofs. Mansard roofs shall have a maximum pitch of 12:12 with a minimum twelve-foot vertical surface length. 
c.  Flat roofs. Building materials for flat roofs shall meet local codes. 
Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory finished sheet metal. If factory finished metal flashing is used, such as standing seam, the color must be subdued to blend with other materials or of a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze. All buildings with flat roofs should include parapet articulation on the front facade(s) of such building. There shall be roof articulations/offsets at a minimum of one (1) per each one hundred twenty-five (125) linear feet of length by a change in the top line of the parapet. Additional articulation may occur at any lesser distance. If the front facade is less than one hundred twenty-five (125) linear feet of length, then a minimum of one (1) roof articulation must occur. 
d.  Other. Drive under canopies for gasoline pumps may have flat roof with vertical or factory formed facing of finished sheet metal. 
4.  Arcade/structural canopy for retail use. For any multitenant commercial development, a covered arcade/structural canopy shall be provided along the front facade of the building. Arcades are covered walkways connected to the principal building. They should be a minimum of five (5) feet in width and designed to provide covered areas for relief from the weather. Different arcade/structural canopy designs may be used for each individual tenant/business within a multitenant commercial development provided that they blend aesthetically with the front façade of the building and has the approval of the building owner and the planning director. 
5.  Street orientation. Principal building entrances shall be oriented to public streets. 
6.  Building height. Unlimited for new development. 
7.  Building massing and modulation. The massing of building facades longer than one hundred fifty (150) feet that are approximately parallel to the right-of-way and oriented to a public street shall be modulated to increase visual interest, as follows. 
a.  Building facades that are less than five hundred (500) feet long shall be modulated at intervals no greater than one hundred (100) feet in length. 
b.  Building facades that are more than five hundred (500) feet long shall be modulated with intervals no greater than twenty (20) percent of the length of the façade. 
8.  Minimum area. No nonresidential building shall have less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of heated floor space. 
9.  Minimum cornice height. Building design shall include minimum one-foot high contrasting cornices along the entire front façade of buildings and extending for a distance of at least ten (10) feet along the sides of buildings. 
10.  Minimum high-contrasting base. Building designs shall include a minimum two-foot high contrasting base, along the entire front façade of buildings and extending for a distance of at least ten (10) feet along the sides of buildings. 
11.  Satellite dish antennae. No satellite dishes shall be permitted within view from public streets. 
12.  Off-street loading areas. Off-street loading areas shall be located in the rear of buildings and screened from view from adjacent property or streets. 
I.  Signage. Except as provided in this subsection, signage shall comply with the regulations in section 7.04.00 of the Henry County Unified Land Development Code. 
1.  Freestanding and project entrance signs shall be limited to ground signs. Ground signs shall be limited to a monument base, and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
2.  The maximum sign area of any ground sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members shall be: 
a.  Ground signs on lots zoned commercial or industrial, including shared signs, on lots with more than one (1) tenant shall be no greater than fifty (50) square feet in sign area. 
b.  Ground signs on lots zoned commercial or industrial with one (1) tenant shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. 
c.  Ground signs on lots zoned O-I shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet of sign area. 
d.  Ground signs for single business premises shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. 
3.  Sign illumination. 
a.  Automatic changeable copy signs and neon signs are prohibited. 
b.  Signs may be illuminated internally, subject to ULDC requirements. LED is acceptable. External lighting fixtures are acceptable provided that fixtures are directed downward and away from streets and adjacent property and public streets. All lighting shall be fully shielded, have recessed luminaries, or be full cut-off luminary fixtures. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § I, 3-21-17 ; Ord. No. 18-06, § I, 11-27-18 ) 
CHAPTER 5. - LANDSCAPING, BUFFERS, AND TREE PROTECTION 

Sec. 5.00.00. - Generally. 
5.00.01.  Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for the landscaping and buffering of developments and for the protection of existing trees in all zoning districts, in order to enrich the urbanized and natural environment of Henry County. 
B.  General requirements for landscaping a development site are set forth in section 5.01.00. Requirements for landscaped buffers are set forth in section 5.02.00. Requirements for the protection of trees are set forth in section 5.03.00. 
C.  It is the intent of the county to reduce the adverse visual, environmental, and aesthetic effects of development in order to: 
1.  Minimize the rate of stormwater runoff; 
2.  Maximize the capability of groundwater recharge in urban or suburban areas; 
3.  Increase air filtration and the removal of particulate and gaseous pollutants through plant materials; 
4.  Provide shade and noise attenuation; 
5.  Filter and reduce the glare of headlights and reflected sunlight from parked automobiles onto the public street rights-of-way and adjacent properties; 
6.  Improve the appearance of parking areas and vehicular surface areas; and 
7.  Minimize the visual blight created by large expanses of paved surface area. 
5.00.02.  Applicability and provision of landscape plans. 
A.  The requirements of chapter 5 shall apply to all properties to be used, developed, or redeveloped within the county, except as may specifically be exempted in subsection 5.00.02.C., below. 
B.  In order to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter, a landscaping plan shall be submitted with applications for development approval for all development subject to these standards. The requirements and procedures for submittal, review, and approval of all applications are set forth in chapter 12. 
C.  The following types of development are exempt from the requirements to provide a landscaping plan: 
1.  Single-family dwellings; 
2.  Duplex buildings; and 
3.  Applications for accessory uses, accessory structures, or temporary uses. 
5.00.03.  Maintenance requirements. 
A.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained to ensure that plant materials are healthy and thrive. Any diseased or dead plant materials shall be replaced as soon as reasonably possible based on the growing season, but not later than six (6) months following identification of the need for replacement. 
B.  Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the landscaped and buffer areas serve the intended purpose. 
Sec. 5.01.00. - Landscaping requirements. 
5.01.01.  Landscape standards for nonresidential development. 
A.  Required landscaped areas, including general landscaping, parking lot landscaping, perimeter landscaping, and buffer areas shall not be disturbed by grading, property improvements, or construction activities, except where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin natural growth which is too dense to permit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers. 
B.  All landscaped areas, including general landscaping, parking lot landscaping, perimeter landscaping, and buffer areas, shall utilize existing natural vegetation in an undisturbed state provided that the existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion. 
C.  A minimum of twelve (12) percent of the total buildable area in any parcel shall be devoted to landscaping. 
D.  The requirement to provide landscaping is in addition to any buffers as required in section 5.02.00. 
E.  The site design standards for landscaping are shown in the following table: 
Table 5.01.01(E) Site Design Standards for Nonresidential Landscaping 

 
5.01.02.  Residential landscape standards. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, any parcel of land for which a building permit has been requested shall have preserved or planted trees, meeting the following standards: 
1.  The minimum dbh is one and one-half (1½) inches. 
2.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of planted trees shall be hardwoods. 
3.  All recorded lots within a subdivision shall have planted or preserved the required number of trees according to the zoning district, as set forth in subsection 5.01.02.B. 
4.  Requirements for planting or preserving trees are in addition to requirements for landscaping and buffer areas but can be included in the landscaping and/or buffer areas. 
B.  Tree planting requirements. 
Table 5.01.02(B) Tree Planting Requirements 

 
C.  Standards for subdivision entrances. For each subdivision entrance sign located on private property, there shall be a minimum of one (1) large tree, one (1) medium or small tree, and five (5) shrubs. The type, size, and location of these plant materials shall conform to the specifications set forth in section 5.01.04. Plant materials shall not be located to interfere with the clear visibility requirements of section 8.01.07. 
5.01.03.  Landscape requirements for parking lots. 
A.  Perimeter landscaping for parking lots. A minimum of a ten-foot wide strip of land, located between the property line and a parking lot shall be landscaped. Width of sidewalks shall not be included within the ten-foot wide front setback perimeter landscape area. 
B.  Interior landscaping. 
1.  Parking lots with twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall provide interior landscaping. 
2.  Interior planting areas may be located in tree islands, at the end of parking bays, or between rows of parking spaces. Planting areas may also be located within driveway medians, provided the median is a minimum of ten (10) feet wide. 
3.  There shall be one (1) tree required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of internal landscape areas. 
4.  Parking lots shall be designed so that no more than twelve (12) parking spaces occur in an unbroken row. 
5.  Landscape islands, peninsulas, or medians shall conform to the planting area specifications set forth in subsection 5.01.04.E. 
6.  Vehicle stops or curbing shall be used to ensure that vehicles do not overhang required landscaped areas. 
5.01.04.  Landscape plant material standards. 
A.  Trees for landscaped and buffer areas shall be selected from Table 5.01.04(A). Where the planting area is within a power line easement, small trees shall be selected. (Plants noted with * are preferred for buffers; recommended trees for all landscaping and reforestation are noted with #) 

 
B.  Shrubs to be installed in landscaped or buffer areas shall be selected from the following list: 
Table 5.01.04(B) Landscape Materials — Shrubs 

 
C.  Grass and ground cover shall be selected from the following list: 
Table 5.01.04(C) Landscape Plant Materials — Grass and Ground Cover 

 
D.  All plant materials shall meet the following general requirements: 
1.  All plant material shall be nursery grown, number 1 grade, and installed according to accepted planting procedures. 
2.  All plant materials shall meet current American Association of Nurseryman Standards. 
E.  Plant materials shall meet the following specifications for size and location: 
5.01.04(E) Plant Material Specifications 

 
F.  Where both large and medium/small trees are planted, they shall be planted in a double staggered row, alternating large and medium/small trees. 
G.  Spacing requirements for trees shall include consideration of trees planted on abutting properties. Trees may be grouped, so long as a sufficient planting area is provided as set forth in paragraph I., below. 
H.  Trees shall be planted to avoid septic tanks and drain fields. 
I.  Planting areas shall meet the following specifications: 
1.  A planting area of one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet shall be required for each medium or large tree. 
2.  A planting area of ninety (90) square feet shall be required for each small tree. 
3.  The minimum dimension of any side of a planting area shall be ten (10) feet. 
J.  Notwithstanding the above, street trees shall be shown on a development landscape plan. 
Sec. 5.02.00. - Buffer requirements. 
5.02.01.  Purpose and intent. The intent of these requirements shall be to enhance the visual and aesthetic appearance of the county. The purpose of these buffer requirements is to: 
A.  Provide space definition and landscape continuity within the built environment; 
B.  Provide screening and relief from traffic, noise, heat, glare, odor, and the spread of dust and debris; 
C.  Reduce the impact of development on the drainage system and reduce flooding; 
D.  Provide for a sense of privacy; 
E.  Provide for reduction or elimination of incompatibility; 
F.  Reduce the visual impact of unsightly aspects of adjacent development; and 
G.  Provide for the separation of spaces. 
5.02.02.  Location, measurement, and design of buffers. 
A.  Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel boundary line. Buffers shall not occupy any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street, or right-of-way. 
B.  Buffer width is normally measured from the property line; however, design variations are allowed. Average width shall be measured at the two (2) end points of the buffer and two (2) additional points which are each approximately one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total linear distance from the end point. 
C.  The buffer shall be designed to avoid or minimize plantings within drainage, utility, or other easements. 
D.  Buffers shall be designed taking into consideration the site's soils conditions, topography, and natural resources. Native vegetation shall be used for landscaping and buffering unless the applicant demonstrates that the use of non-native, drought-resistant plants would best serve the site. 
E.  Buffers shall be established by the owner of the proposed development site. 
F.  Buffers shall be maintained by the property owner. 
5.02.03.  Buffer area standards. 
Table 5.02.03 Buffer Area Standards 

 
5.02.04.  Plant materials in buffers. 
A.  Buffers required for nonresidential uses: Buffers shall be planted with a combination of plant materials. 
B.  Existing plants within the designated buffer area shall not be removed, unless the plants are dead or diseased. Where the administrator determines the existing buffer to be inadequate the following plant materials are required for each fifty (50) linear feet of buffer: 
1.  One (1) large tree. 
2.  Two (2) medium or small trees. 
3.  Ten (10) screening shrubs. 
C.  Buffers for residential uses: The following plant materials are required for each fifty (50) linear feet of buffer: 
1.  One (1) large tree. 
2.  Two (2) medium or small trees. 
3.  Ten (10) screening shrubs. 
D.  Buffer areas shall meet the standards for landscape plant materials set forth in section 5.01.04. 
Sec. 5.03.00. - Tree and vegetation protection. 
5.03.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the protection, conservation, and replacement of trees and landscaping in order to improve the urbanized and natural environment of Henry County. It is the policy of Henry County to minimize the removal of trees on development sites and, upon proper site completion, achieve replacement of trees by uniform standards set forth in this section. 
5.03.02.  Applicability. 
A.  The terms and provisions of this section and the standards set forth shall apply to: 
1.  Individuals engaged in any activity, private and/or governmental, on real property which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit within the county according to subsections 12.02.06.F—H. 
2.  Individuals engaged in the building and/or development of single-family homes or subdivisions, multifamily and manufactured home developments, and all nonresidential uses. 
3.  Owners of individual properties more than five (5) acres in size and which are not part of a platted subdivision. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow the removal of any tree or vegetation in a required stream buffer, watershed buffer, buffer adjacent to waters of the state, or other undisturbed or planted buffer located for protection of natural resources, except where such removal has been specifically authorized as set forth in this ULDC. 
5.03.03.  Specific requirements for timber lands. 
A.  Land that is used for silviculture shall comply with the requirements of subsection 5.03.03.B. or subsection 5.03.03.C., below. 
B.  Land that is declared silviculture shall be exempt from the requirements for tree protection provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  A certificate from the tax assessor indicating agricultural preference; 
2.  A forest management plan, demonstrating compliance with the erosion control standards set forth in section 8.05.00; and 
3.  A commitment to follow the Georgia Forestry Commission's "Best Management Practices" as set forth in paragraph E., below. 
C.  Land that has been designated silviculture may subsequently be developed, provided that a development plan has been prepared and approved by the administrator prior to any clearing, grading, clear-cutting, or other land disturbance. The purpose of the development plan is to ensure that cutting or harvesting of trees occurs in such a manner as to avoid the practice called "clear-cutting" prior to any subsequent development. 
D.  Prior to clearing, harvesting, or cutting trees, or any grading or land disturbance, a combined timbering and logging permit shall be obtained from the county, according to procedures set forth in subsection 12.02.06.H. The development plan shall include a forest management plan for the timberlands site. The management plan shall demonstrate compliance with erosion control standards set forth in section 8.05.00, protection of soil and water resources, and compliance with best management practices. 
E.  Georgia Forestry Commission's "best management practices" (BMPs) include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Analyze and plan site preparation, taking into account all aspects of streamside management zones. 
2.  Avoid the cutting of roads or trails unless absolutely necessary. If roads/trails are necessary, do not locate them on ridge-tops and avoid use of soft roads/trails during wet ground conditions. 
3.  Avoid harrowing, root raking, or bulldozing. 
4.  When forestry activities are completed for a particular period of time, temporary access roads shall be retired. This includes reshaping, mulching, and seeding, in combination with water bars. 
5.  Leave logging debris on exposed soil, dry washes, and at points of concentrated drainage from skid trails and road. Do not pile debris in live or wet-weather streams. 
6.  Do not service logging equipment where it will have an impact on soil or water quality. 
7.  Skidding on steep slopes shall be done on a gradual grade rather than straight up the slope and skidding shall be alternated between several skidding trails to minimize soil exposure and disturbance. 
F.  In addition to the BMPs set forth above and by the Georgia Forestry Commission, the property owner shall not conduct any other land disturbing activities for a period of three (3) years after the completion of such forestry practices. (See subsection 8.05.01.A.6.) 
5.03.04.  Exemptions. The following situations are exempt from the provisions of section 5.03.00. 
A.  Individual homeowners within platted subdivisions. The exemption does not include an exemption from requirements for protective buffers along streams, creeks, and reservoirs as set forth in chapter 3. 
B.  All properties for which a covenant has been established with the Henry County Board of Tax Assessors, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-7.1 and 48-5-7.4, shall be exempt from the terms of this appendix so long as such covenant has not been breached and/or remains in effect. 
C.  The following situations within all residential districts shall also be exempted: 
1.  Where the addition to a principal structure will constitute structural and exterior changes to the home. 
2.  Where the construction of an accessory structure(s) and/or uses including, but not limited to, swimming pools and tennis courts, is permitted, including an accessory residential living facility (a.k.a. guest quarters). 
3.  The removal of diseased, deceased, infested or dying trees, or living pine trees or other trees which may pose a danger to an existing or proposed home, or other structure. 
4.  Mass grading is allowed for lots ten thousand eight hundred ninety (10,890) square feet or smaller. 
5.03.05.  Requirements in all zoning districts. 
A.  Residential development plans that propose the mass grading and/or clear-cutting of properties and/or parcels of land which are five (5) acres in size or greater, except as noted in subsection 5.03.04(C), shall be required to implement a master drainage plan and on-site preservation practices in an effort to preserve water quality, as detailed in subsections 12.02.02(3) and 3.03.05(3), respectively. As to each such development, only so much land area shall be cleared as is necessary for the development and construction of roadways, utilities, and amenity areas (i.e., parking lots for clubhouses, pool areas, tennis courts, etc.), and to accomplish the master grading and associated master drainage plan. 
B.  Mass grading and clear cutting of any lot in a residential subdivision are prohibited, except as noted in subsection 5.03.04(C), unless a master grading/drainage plan has been approved for the site. On such lots, land area shall be cleared only as is necessary for purposes of the proper development of said lot. Clearing shall be limited to the specific development and an area not to exceed ten (10) feet from the specific development, including areas for: 
1.  The placement of the individual home; 
2.  The placement of driveways and sidewalks; 
3.  The placement of utilities and detention ponds; 
4.  The placement of septic systems; 
5.  The placement of roads; 
6.  The placement of decks and patios; and 
7.  Proper drainage as required by the county. 
5.03.06.  Protection of trees during construction. Methods and standards for tree protection shall be required as follows: 
A.  Trees identified to be preserved and/or planted, and being counted as credit for meeting the requirements of section 5.03.00, shall have a valid, recognizable method of tree-protection (tree-save) marking or delineation installed at the critical root zones. 
B.  No person engaged in the construction of any structure(s) or improvement(s) shall encroach on a designated tree-save/critical root zone area with heavy machinery or the storage of heavy building materials. 
C.  During construction, a tree save area must be designated around any trees that are to remain at the end of construction. Desirable trees should be identified and a physical barrier set up around the tree or group of trees. This barrier can consist of a four-foot high orange safety fence, wide plastic caution tape, a simple fence made of lumber, or other appropriate methods that can identify the noninvasive drip line area. 
D.  The barrier should be placed beyond the drip zone (critical root zone) and should prevent the stockpiling of soil or building materials, dumping cleaning solvents, or parking vehicles or equipment within this barricaded area. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § I, 12-5-17 ) 
CHAPTER 6. - ALTERNATIVE SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 6.00.00. - Generally. 
6.00.01.  Purpose. Flexibility, creativity, and innovation in design are often limited through applying conventional standards. It is the intent of the county to expand the opportunities for property owners and developers to achieve creative and/or innovative site designs. Alternative site design standards are provided in this chapter for a variety of situations. 
6.00.02.  Applicability. 
A.  At the discretion of the property owner, the site design standards set forth in sections 6.01.00 and 6.02.00 may be applied to the design, construction, and use of property. The property owner may choose to design and develop a parcel according to the standards set forth herein. 
B.  Proposals to design and develop land according to one (1) of the alternative situations described in this chapter shall conform in all respects to the alternative design standards applicable to the situation that is chosen by the property owner. 
C.  An applicant shall select either conventional standards or alternative standards, but not both. Conventional standards and alternative standards shall not apply in the development of a parcel; only one (1) set of standards shall be used in the design and development of a site. 
D.  Future modifications, extensions, or expansions to a site designed according to alternative design standards in this chapter shall also comply with the alternative design standards. 
Sec. 6.01.00. - Alternative design standards. 
6.01.01.  Green infrastructure and low impact development. 
1.  A predesign meeting with county staff is required to review preliminary designs involving the green infrastructure and low impact development items listed below. County staff, including the stormwater quality and pollution prevention department director and/or designee, will evaluate proposed design options on a case-by-case basis to determine potential impacts to safety considerations and adjacent properties, practicability, compliance with local, state, and federal regulations and rules, etc. Site designs utilizing green infrastructure/low impact development must be approved by the stormwater quality and pollution prevention department director and/or designee during the predesign stages of site plan development. It is the responsibility of the property owner, developer, contractor, agent, operator, etc. (those responsible for day-to-day operational control of project plans and specifications to ensure compliance) to have such approvals prior to advancing with site design strategies or applying for necessary permits from the county or other municipalities, agencies, etc. 
2.  The county will consider design options including, but not limited to, the following items: 
A.  Site preservation and conservation considerations (i.e. greenspace, extended buffering of aquatic resource areas and features, mature canopy and/or preferred vegetative community preservation, reduced impervious surface footprint, avoidance of soil disturbance to steep slopes, etc.), especially in those areas where native vegetation and/or highly productive soils are present; 
B.  Redevelopment sites, where proposed post-construction conditions would result in runoff water quality and/or other environmental improvements to the existing condition of the site; 
C.  Use of pervious/permeable material(s) for parking areas and private roadways under twenty-five (25) mph; 
D.  Use of pervious/permeable material(s) for driveways, consistent with current Georgia Stormwater Management Manual specifications; 
E.  Use of bio-retention islands and/or other green practices which accomplish increased on-site infiltration; 
F.  Implementation of rain gardens, rain barrels, and/or other rain collection practices, so long as such practices are constructed and maintained in accordance with other applicable ordinances; 
G.  Collection of roof stormwater drainage and/or discharge into undisturbed, appropriate pervious areas, as determined by a certified soil scientist, environmental scientist, geologist, or other appropriate professional; 
H.  Tree saves, native species planting, extended vegetated buffers, and other practices that increase post-development shading; 
I.  Parking lot size reduction/use of parking decks, consistent with current Georgia Stormwater Management Manual specifications; 
J.  Landscaped/bioretention islands in roadways and/or cul-de-sacs; 
K.  Reduction of residential driveway widths; 
3.  Additional and further guidance on alternative green infrastructure and low impact development design considerations is provided in the most current Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. As required, Henry County has adopted the most current Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance and implementation of green infrastructure and low impact development site designs. 
6.01.02.  Traditional neighborhood development (TND). (Reserved) 
6.01.03.  Rural neighborhood commercial (RNC). (Reserved) 
6.01.04.  Transit-oriented design (TOD). (Reserved) 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § I, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 6.02.00. - Alternative subdivision design standards. 
6.02.01.  Conservation subdivision development (CSD). An approved conditional use subject to section 11.05.00 of this ULDC shall be required for all conservation subdivisions. 
A.  Purposes. 
1.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
2.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
3.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
4.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
5.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
6.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
7.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
8.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
9.  To encourage street designs that reduces traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
10.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
11.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and view of open space. 
12.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
B.  General regulations. 
1.  Applicability of regulations. The conservation subdivision is available in the following zoning districts: RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, MU, and IAC zoning districts. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
2.  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownerships. If held in multiple ownerships, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
3.  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in a conservation subdivision shall be determined using the following yield plan method: 
Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. The following shall not be included in the net acreage of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
C.  Conservation subdivision development standards. 
Table 6.02.01(C) CSD Dimensional Standards 

 
D.  Design options. 
1.  Multiple pod design: The subject property is divided into individual pods connected by the open space areas. A density bonus will be permitted when more than forty (40) percent of the total acreage of the project is designated as permanent, protected open space. For each additional whole acre greater than forty (40) percent, additional lots or units may be developed as follows: 
a.  Additional lots allowed per multiple pod design for each acre of protected open space greater than forty (40) percent are as follows: 

 
b.  The number of bonus lots shall be counted in addition to the number of lots calculated using the conventional subdivision design plan (yield plan). 
c.  The distance between residential pods shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet. 
d.  A one hundred-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained along all exterior streets (not to prohibit access to the site) and a twenty-foot undisturbed buffer along the perimeter of the remainder of the property where a multiple pod design option is utilized. 
e.  If timber on the property has been cut within the last five (5) years or if the property is partially wooded and partially open or entirely open, the above required buffers in the wooded area shall be undisturbed and buffers in the wooded area shall be undisturbed and buffers in the open or timbered areas shall be enhanced with a planted vegetative buffer. Said vegetative buffer shall consist of a minimum of four (4) rows of trees planted with twenty-foot separation between trees and staggered so as to provide a vegetative screen. Three-quarters (¾) of the trees must be large screening trees as outlined in subsection 5-01-04.A., of the ULDC, and the remainder shall be made up of large, medium or small trees. 
f.  A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the development plan review department for review and approval. 
2.  Single pod design: The lots are located in one (1) pod on the subject property surrounded by the open space area. 
a.  A one hundred-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained along all exterior streets (not to prohibit access to the site) and a fifty-foot undisturbed buffer along the perimeter of the remainder of the property where a single pod design option is utilized. 
b.  If timber on the property has been cut within the last five (5) years or if the property is partially wooded and partially open or entirely open, the above required buffers in the wooded area shall be undisturbed and buffers in the wooded area shall be undisturbed and buffers in the open or timbered areas shall be enhanced with a planted vegetative buffer. Said vegetative buffer shall consist of a minimum of four (4) rows of trees planted with twenty-foot separation between trees and staggered so as to provide a vegetative screen. Three-quarters (¾) of the trees must be large screening trees as outlined in subsection 5-01-04.A., of the ULDC, and the remainder shall be made up of large, medium or small trees. 
c.  A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the development plan review department for review and approval. 
E.  Application requirements. 
1.  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this chapter. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation area labeled by type, as described in the "open space" section of 6-02-01; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
2.  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in the "Open Space" Section of 6-02-01, shall be prepared and submitted at the time of application. 
3.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in the "open space" section of 6-02-01, shall be recorded on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
4.  Other requirements. The application shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the zoning district and the subdivision ordinance. 
F.  Open space. 
1.  Open space within a conservation subdivision is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
2.  Standards to determine open space. 
a.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. 
b.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this chapter. The primary conservation areas shall be illustrated on the applicant's plat. 
i.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
ii.  Buffer zones of at least seventy-five (75) feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
iii.  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
iv.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
v.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
vi.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
c.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and may be included within the open space area. The secondary conservation areas shall be illustrated on the applicant's plat. 
i.  Important historic sites; 
ii.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one (1) acre contiguous area; 
iii.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight (8) inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
iv.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
v.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area; and 
vi.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
d.  Aboveground utility rights-of-way and publicly owned land may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the forty (40) percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). 
e.  At least fifty (50) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and nonprotected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
f.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Nonadjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
3.  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archaeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
g.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
h.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this appendix. 
4.  Prohibited uses of open space. 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
d.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
5.  Ownership and management of open space. 
a.  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
b.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
i.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
ii.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
iii.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and 
iv.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
c.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, Henry County may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners' association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners' association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
6.  Legal instrument for permanent protection. The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one (1) of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in functions; or the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its [duties]; 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this chapter. If the entity accepting the easement is not Henry County, then a third right of enforcement favoring Henry County shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by Henry County. 
The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restriction contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
6.02.02.  Residential fly-in neighborhoods (RFN). 
A.  Generally. 
1.  The intent of this section is to permit flexibility of design in order to allow the design and development of subdivisions that accommodate residences with aircraft hangars and private landing strips or private airports. 
2.  The two (2) existing RFNs, Mallard's Landing and Kitty Hawk, are not subject to the standards of [section] 6.02.02. The two (2) RFNs shall be allowed to continue to develop according to the approved plats. 
3.  Residential fly-in neighborhoods (RFN) are alternatives to conventional subdivisions. The procedures for applications, preparation of preliminary and final plats, and design and installation of improvements are the same for RFN subdivisions and conventional subdivisions. Procedures for application, review, and approval of preliminary and final plats, and acceptance of public improvements, are set forth in chapter 12. 
4.  A legal entity shall be created to be responsible for ownership and maintenance of any common space. See section 12.02.07 regarding the standards for a plan for the management of open space and common facilities. 
5.  RFN subdivisions shall only be located in the RA zoning district. 
B.  The minimum area of a RFN subdivision shall be sixty (60) acres. 
C.  A RFN subdivision shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Uses and activities may include the following: 
a.  Runway(s), taxiways, parking ramps, and hangars for the use of individual homeowners and their invited guests for the parking and storing of aircraft. 
b.  Residential dwellings, not to exceed the density of the zoning district in which the RFN subdivision is located. 
c.  Noncommercial fuel facilities for the not-for-profit use of homeowners and guests, provided the facility is properly permitted to meet health and safety standards. Such facilities shall be located in a common area and be maintained by a homeowners' association. 
d.  Accessory structures shall not exceed the total square feet of the principle structure. 
2.  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Any uses not specifically listed in [paragraph] C.1., above that may otherwise be associated with the operation of an airport, including, but not limited to, flight instruction, aircraft storage (other than hangars for use by homeowners), aircraft maintenance, aircraft fueling (other than the provision of limited fuel facilities for homeowners), and other similar airport activities. 
b.  Any commercial, business, or other use not specifically permissible in the zoning district. 
c.  Structures in the approach zone exceeding the height limits established by the FAA (Advisory Circular 150). 
3.  Any private airport or landing strip allowed by this ULDC shall be compatible with the established character of the surrounding neighborhood. Development of the RFN subdivision shall be of a scale and intensity that shall not result in an adverse impact on residential uses in the surrounding neighborhood. 
4.  All land needed for the private airport or landing strip approach zone(s) shall be part of the common ownership of the airport and shall not be privately owned by individuals other than the owner of the airport. Land within the approach zone(s) shall not be platted into separate parcels apart from the parcel on which the airport or landing strip is located. 
5.  A buffer shall be provided at the boundary of the approach zone, and may be required to include noise abatement features, vegetation, walls, or berms. The purpose of the buffer shall be to screen sight or sound of airport activities from adjacent and nearby residential neighborhoods. The buffer shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width, and shall conform to the plant material requirements and specifications set forth in section 5.02.04. However, two (2) small trees may be substituted for each required large tree in order to avoid encroachment in any approach zones. 
6.  Design standards for the airport, landing strip, and associated uses: 
a.  The airport shall demonstrate compliance with applicable laws and regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration. 
b.  Airports and landing strips in RFN subdivisions shall not be lighted for night operations. 
7.  Design standards for lots and blocks: 
a.  RFN subdivisions are not required to comply with the design and layout standards for conventional subdivision lots and blocks in section 4.04.05. The standards for design and layout of lots shall comply with [subparagraphs] 7.b. through 7.d., below. 
b.  RFN subdivision lots shall meet the minimum lot area and lot width standards for the zoning district. In addition, lot area shall be sufficient to accommodate any proposed private hangars on the same lot as the principal structure (dwelling unit) in full compliance with the setback requirements in subsection 4.01.02.H. 
c.  Lots may be located to allow direct access from the lot to the landing strip or taxiway. 
d.  Lots may be designed according to conventional subdivision design standards, with hangars located in a common area to provide access to the landing strip or taxiway. 
e.  All requirements regarding access, infrastructure and improvements, signs, landscaping, and natural resource protection shall be met in the design and development of a RFN subdivision. 
Sec. 6.03.00. - Standards for a planned development (PD). 
(Reserved) 
Sec. 6.04.00. - Transfer of development rights (TDR). 
(Reserved) 
CHAPTER 7. - STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 7.00.00. - Generally. 
The provisions of chapter 7 apply to accessory uses, accessory structures, and temporary uses. Home occupations are considered accessory uses to residential development. Standards for home occupations are set forth in section 7.01.00. Standards pertaining to accessory structures are set forth in section 7.02.00. Standards for temporary structures and uses are set for in section 7.03.00. Standards for signs, which may be either accessory structures, or the principal use on a parcel, are provided in section 7.04.00. Standards for wireless communication facilities, which may be located on a lot or parcel with a principal use, or which may be the principal use, are provided in section 7.05.00. 
Sec. 7.01.00. - Home occupations. 
7.01.01.  Generally. 
A.  A home occupation is permissible in a lawfully established dwelling unit in any residential zoning district. Home occupations shall meet the standards set forth in this section. 
B.  The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: 
1.  Office for professionals, such as attorneys, drafters, realtors, insurance agents, engineers, architects, and other consultants; 
2.  Instruction or teaching, such as academic tutoring, performing arts, or fine arts; 
3.  Administrative or clerical support services, such as transcription, court reporters, stenographers, notary republic, or addressing services; 
4.  Personal services, such as beauty or barber shop, manicurists, dress-making or tailoring; 
5.  Pet grooming; 
6.  Child day care or nursery school for six (6) or fewer children; 
7.  Adult day care for six (6) or fewer adults; 
8.  Personal care home for three (3) or fewer persons; 
9.  Medical practitioner (excluding veterinarians); 
10.  Manufacturers' and internet sales representative; 
11.  Studios for artists, or photographers; 
C.  Agricultural activities associated with the raising of crops and farm animals on properties over three (3) acres in size shall not be subject to the requirements for home occupations. 
D.  Activities not listed are prohibited as home occupations. 
E.  Home occupations may employ up to two (2) persons, who work on the premises, but who do not reside in the dwelling located on the premises, satisfying the following criteria: 
1.  Must be located within the RA (residential-agricultural) zoning district, outside of a subdivision. 
2.  Must adhere to all other applicable standards for home occupations, set forth in sections 7.01.01, 7.01.02, 7.01.03, and 7.01.04. 
7.01.02.  Standards for all home occupations. 
A.  All home occupations shall obtain a business license from Henry County. 
B.  Employees of the home occupation not meeting the requirements outlined in section 7.01.01.E. shall be limited to the residents of the dwelling. At least one (1) member residing on the premises must be the primary operator of the business. 
C.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling. 
1.  The use of the dwelling for a home occupation shall not change the residential character of the building. 
2.  No internal or external alterations which are inconsistent with the residential use or character of the dwelling shall be permitted. 
D.  Products for sale or use in the home occupation shall not be visible from the street. 
E.  Use of a dwelling for a home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total square footage of one (1) floor, except for personal care homes and adult or child day care. 
1.  Floor plans shall be provided to reflect the dimensions of the entire floor and room which will be utilized for the home occupation. Each floor plan shall be drawn to scale. 
F.  The home occupation shall not constitute a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood. 
G.  Outside storage of materials used in connection with a home occupation is prohibited. 
H.  A home occupation shall not use or be located in an accessory building. 
I.  Only passenger vehicles shall be used in connection with the operation or management of a home occupation. 
J.  No business shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
7.01.03.  Standards for specific home occupations. 
A.  Instruction shall be limited to two (2) students at any one (1) given time. 
B.  Beauty shops, barber shops, manicurists, pet grooming and similar services shall be limited to two (2) chairs or stations and one (1) shampoo chair or station. There shall be no more than two (2) clients on the property at any one (1) given time. 
C.  Personal care homes and adult or child day care facilities shall provide an approved state license prior to the issuance of a county business license. 
7.01.04.  Specific standards for agricultural home occupations in the RA zoning district. 
A.  Agricultural product sales shall be allowable in the RA zoning district, provided that the lot or parcel is not part of a subdivision. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions in section 7.01.02 above, agricultural products grown on the premises in the RA zoning districts may be visible from the street. 
C.  Only agricultural products produced on the premises may be sold on the premises. 
D.  Trucks and vehicles other than passenger vehicles may be used in connection with the operation of an agricultural home occupation. 
E.  An accessory building may be used in connection with an agricultural home occupation, subject to compliance with the following standards: 
1.  The accessory building shall maintain a residential appearance. 
2.  No automotive painting, body work, salvage, major automotive or heavy equipment repairs are to be conducted. 
3.  No machinery or equipment shall be used which generates noise detectable outside the accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 10-17, § I, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 7.02.00. - Accessory structures. 
7.02.01.  Generally. 
A.  It is the intent of this section to regulate the installation, configuration, and use of accessory structures. Regulation is necessary in order to ensure that accessory structures are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and are consistent with the character and intent of the zoning district in which the accessory structures are located. 
B.  Permissible accessory uses and structures are identified in Table 2.03.04. 
C.  Accessory structures shall be on the same lot and subordinate to the principal use or structure. 
D.  Standards for specific accessory structures are set forth in sections 7.02.02 through 7.02.07. All accessory structures shall comply with the standards set forth below: 
1.  Accessory structures shall be located within the side or rear yard, unless otherwise provided in sections 7.02.02 through 7.02.07 and except for buildings in RA zoning districts where the lots are a minimum of three (3) acres in area and are not part of a platted subdivision can be located in the front yard; 
2.  Accessory structures shall not be erected on a lot prior to the construction of the principal structure, except for the agricultural purpose storage buildings in RA zoning districts where the lots are a minimum of three (3) acres in area and are not part of a platted subdivision; 
3.  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations for impervious surface ratio or lot coverage standards and for stormwater management standards; 
4.  Accessory structures, other than fences located in compliance with the requirements of section 7.02.04, shall not be located within any required buffer or landscaping area, parking lot, protected resource area, or stormwater management area; 
5.  Accessory structures located in any residential zoning district shall not be used for any type of commercial operation, except as provided in section 7.01.04; 
6.  Accessory structures shall not be used as a dwelling unit, except as provided in section 7.02.02 which sets forth standards for accessory dwellings; 
7.  Accessory structures shall comply with the dimensional standards set forth in the following table: 
Table 7.02.01(D) Dimensional Standards for Accessory Structures 

 
7.02.02.  Accessory dwellings (guest houses, caretaker houses). 
A.  Accessory dwellings include basement apartments, garage apartments, caretaker or other employee quarters, guest houses, and other accessory dwellings. 
B.  Accessory dwellings shall not be used as rental property. 
C.  Accessory dwellings are permissible within the principal dwelling or as a freestanding dwelling in the following zoning districts: RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and RS. Accessory dwellings are permissible within the following zoning districts as freestanding dwelling units: M-1 and M-2. 
D.  Accessory dwellings contained within a principal dwelling in the RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or RS zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling in a principal dwelling unit. 
2.  One (1) additional parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling. 
3.  The accessory dwelling shall comply with all building and health code standards. 
E.  Freestanding accessory dwellings in the RA, R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) freestanding accessory dwelling unit per residential lot. 
2.  The accessory dwelling unit may be located on the second floor over a detached garage or may be a separate structure. 
3.  The accessory dwelling shall be located within the side or rear yard except in the RA zoning districts where the lots are a minimum of three (3) acres in area and are not part of a platted subdivision the accessory dwelling can be located in the front yard. 
4.  Accessory structures shall comply with minimum setbacks set forth in [section] 2.01.02. 
5.  The residential lot shall comply with the minimum lot area standards set forth in Table 2.01.01, except that in no case shall an accessory dwelling unit be located on a lot with less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet of lot area if the property is served by county sewer; lots must be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet if utilizing an on-site sewage management system. 
6.  One (1) additional parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling unit. 
F.  Freestanding accessory dwellings in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit per development site; 
2.  The accessory dwelling shall be intended for use by a caretaker or security person for the industrial development; and 
3.  The accessory dwelling shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in floor area. 
7.02.03.  Fall-out shelters. 
A.  Fall-out shelters are permitted as an accessory use in any zoning district. 
B.  Shelters shall be maintained so as not to become a hazard or blight to the community. 
C.  One (1) fall-out shelter shall be permissible per lot. 
D.  A fall-out shelter shall comply with the setback requirements pertaining to the zoning district. 
E.  A joint shelter may be constructed to serve two (2) adjacent lots with an administrative waiver (see section 11.03.00). 
7.02.04.  Fences and walls. 
A.  Location of fences and walls. 
1.  Fences and walls may be located on or inside property lines. 
2.  Setback requirements applicable to buildings shall not prohibit or restrict any necessary retaining wall, below ground foundation, or fence which shall be necessary for the proper development of a site as required by the county. 
3.  Fences and walls shall be located to avoid interference with the required clear visibility area designated in section 8.01.07. 
4.  Fences and walls shall not obstruct, hinder, or impede the movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and shall not present a nuisance, danger, or hazard to the general public. 
5.  Fences and walls do not require a building permit, with the exception of walls exceeding four (4) feet in height. 
B.  Types of fences. 
Table 7.02.04(B) Types of Fences. 

 
* All requests for a fence in the front yard shall be handled administratively, based on a justification and/or hardship. The request will be evaluated by the Architectural Review Committee. 
C.  Electrical fencing shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Electrical fencing shall be permissible only on residential lots that are not within a platted subdivision; 
2.  Electrical fencing shall be limited to the side and rear yard, except on parcels that have more then three (3) acres and are not within a platted subdivision, which may have electric fencing anywhere on the property; 
3.  Signs are required to provide a warning of the type of fence and the voltage of the fence; 
4.  Warning signs in residential zoning districts shall be placed at each corner of an electrical fence; 
5.  Warning signs in nonresidential zoning districts shall be placed fifteen (15) feet apart along the entire fence; and 
6.  Warning signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
D.  Height standards. 
1.  Heights of fences shall be measured from ground level at the base of the fence to the topmost part of the fence. 
2.  Table of height standards. 
Table 7.02.04(D)(2). Height Standards for Fences. 

 
7.02.05.  Outside storage. 
A.  Outside storage involving machinery and equipment, service areas for vehicles in need of major service or repair, materials for construction or distribution is permissible only in the C-3, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. 
B.  Outside storage involving machinery and equipment is permissible only in the RA zoning district (not within a subdivision) on a minimum lot size of two (2.0) acres, where the machinery or equipment is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
C.  Outside storage shall be located within a rear yard or side yard. 
D.  Outside storage shall be fully concealed with a solid fence, in addition to any buffer requirements set forth in section 5.02.00. 
E.  Outside storage of parts and materials, service areas, refuse, or work activity areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. 
F.  Materials shall not be stored within any required buffer area. 
7.02.06.  Satellite dish antennas. 
A.  Residential satellite dish antennas shall be permitted as an accessory use only in rear and side yards unless it can be documented that reception is impaired by such a location. 
7.02.07.  Swimming pools and pool enclosures. 
A.  Swimming pools, accessory to residences, shall be constructed in accordance with the Swimming Pool Code as adopted by Henry County and shall be approved by the Environmental Health Department prior to obtaining a building permit. 
B.  All residential accessory swimming pools shall meet the following standards: 
1.  A swimming pool shall comply with minimum side and rear yard requirements for accessory structures. Setbacks for accessory swimming pools shall be measured from the decking or closed part of the pool structure to the property line. 
2.  A pool shall be enclosed by a security fence of not less than four (4) feet in height from ground level. All above ground pools which are greater than four (4) feet in height shall not be required to be enclosed by a fence, but the entrance to such pool shall be restricted with a gate. A gate shall be installed at all entrances to any deck structure attached to such pool and/or at all ladder structures accessing such pool. 
3.  All gates attached to such security fences shall contain self-closing positive latch devices to ensure the pool is enclosed and secure at all times. 
4.  The required security fence shall be installed prior to occupancy and/or any use of the swimming pool. 
5.  No ladders shall be affixed to a pool for purposes of entry or exit while self-closing positive latch entrance gates are open. 
6.  All security fences shall be installed with a solid and permanent foundation, which shall include fastening such materials a minimum of one (1) foot into the ground. 
7.  A security fence may include decorative materials, such as brick, wrought iron, stone, wood, or masonry. 
C.  Any constructed or prefabricated pool used other than in conjunction with a private single-family residence shall be deemed a public swimming pool. 
1.  Public pools, including, but not limited to, those constructed and operated by a public agency, or as part of a multiple-family residential development, a subdivision association, a two-family residential development, a condominium association or a private club shall be enclosed by a security fence of not less than five (5) feet in height. 
2.  Security fences shall be transparent and shall not include privacy fences or fences that obstruct the view of the pool from the outside. 
3.  Security fencing and gates shall comply with the standards in subsection 7.02.07.B., above. 
4.  Swimming pools shall comply with the standard setback requirements within its zoning district. 
7.02.08.  Employee support facilities in the OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, IAC, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. 
A.  The following facilities may be allowed to serve employees of the establishment: Child day care facilities; cafeteria, restaurant, coffee shop, deli, or dining room; newsstand; fitness center or similar recreation facility; and banks. 
B.  The facility shall be an integral part of a permitted principal use. It shall be located, oriented, and designed to serve the employees of the principal use. 
C.  Employee support facilities may be located within the principal building on the site, and shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Any individual facility listed in paragraph A., above shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the principal building(s) on the site. 
2.  The cumulative total floor area for all employee support facilities shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the principal building(s) on the site. 
D.  Employee support facilities may be located in an accessory structure, and shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The accessory structure shall meet the standards in subsections 7.02.01.D.1 through 4. 
2.  Employee support facilities may be combined within one (1) accessory building. No more than two (2) accessory buildings shall be permissible for purposes of locating employee support facilities. 
3.  Accessory buildings to contain employee support facilities may share the parking lot serving the principal building, provided that the accessory building is no more than six hundred sixty (660) feet from the principal building. 
E.  Signs to identify employee support facilities shall be limited to wall signs, not to exceed four (4) square feet in sign area, or directional signs, not to exceed two (2) square feet in sign area. 
F.  Employee support facilities shall not indicate availability to the public through signage, advertising, or other methods to attract the general public. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(11), 6-15-10; Ord. No. 12-23, § I, 7-17-12 ; Ord. No. 14-05, § I, 2-4-14 ) 
Sec. 7.03.00. - Temporary structures and uses. 
This section provides for temporary structures and uses during construction and for temporary uses and structures during special events. 
7.03.01.  Temporary structures and uses during construction. A temporary building or use in connection with a construction project or land subdivision development shall be permitted on the land of the project during the construction period. The following standards shall be met by temporary uses established during construction or land subdivision: 
A.  A building permit shall be required as set forth in appendix B [of this ULDC]; 
B.  Timeframe to utilize temporary structure. 
1.  Temporary structures related to a subdivision development shall be removed when eighty (80) percent of all lots are occupied by completed homes or within four (4) years of the issuance of the permit, whichever occurs first. 
2.  The Henry County Building Official or his/her authorized designee, upon written request by the owner including the reason for the request and an updated account of completed houses within the subdivision, may issue a one-time, one (1) year extension of completion time for cause beyond the original compliance/completion period, in accordance with section 7.03.01.B.1. Approval will be based upon, but not limited to, current maintenance and aesthetics of the temporary structure and property, and verification that all required erosion control measures are in place. Applicants shall apply for the one-time extension within thirty (30) business days of the expired date of the temporary structure permit. Granted or denied extensions of compliance/completion period shall be in writing and signed by the building official or his authorized designee, within ten (10) business days. All extension approvals will be subject to a fifty-dollar renewal fee. Permission for a greater extension of time beyond the one[-year] period may be granted only by the Henry County Board of Commissioners in regular public session. An application to appear before the board of commissioners shall be on forms provided by the Henry County Building Department and shall be accompanied by a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
C.  Temporary offices may be located on a construction site to be used for administrative functions during construction. Temporary construction offices may have the name of the construction company printed on a permanently affixed sign on the outside of the building. Such sign shall be a maximum of four (4) feet by eight (8) feet. In addition, the proposed construction building shall meet tie-down requirements for mobile structures, and have a contract for sewage pump-out. Construction buildings shall be removed within thirty (30) days of completion of the construction site for which they are permitted; 
D.  On-site outdoor storage of equipment and construction materials shall be allowed during the period of construction; 
E.  Portable toilet facilities shall be allowed; 
F.  Construction and demolition debris dumpsters are allowable and are not required to be screened; 
G.  A temporary office which meets parking, handicapped and landscape requirements shall be allowed. A temporary office may be used for sales functions or sales offices, allowing for the sale, resale, or marketing of dwellings, structures, or property within the development in which it is located, or adjacent developments under the same control; and 
H.  On-site temporary use of structures and equipment for the building of roads, public utilities, and government projects shall be allowed. 
7.03.02.  Portable or mobile restaurants and food services, temporary outdoor sales (transient merchant), and sidewalk sales. 
A.  Applicability. Mobile food services, portable restaurants, temporary outdoor sales, and sidewalk sales are permissible in the following zoning districts MU, C-1, C-2, C-3, IAC, M-1, M-2. Portable restaurants shall be inspected and approved by the Henry County Environmental Health Department prior to obtaining a business license. All structures pertaining to this section shall remain portable. These temporary uses are permissible on vacant lots or on lots containing a business in accordance with the standards of this section. 
B.  The applicant shall have written permission of the property owner and all business owners on the lot to conduct retail sales. 
C.  The applicant shall possess a valid occupational license. 
D.  No temporary use shall be located within: 
1.  The public right-of-way; 
2.  Any required setback area, including required parking area, or required buffer area; 
3.  Any driveway or access way, or in such a manner as to block a driveway or access way; or 
4.  Any designated fire lane or in such a manner as to block a fire lane; 
E.  Transient merchants shall provide parking spaces: 
1.  Parking spaces shall be provided in addition to any required parking serving an established use on the lot. 
2.  One (1) additional parking space shall be provided for every two hundred (200) square feet of display area. 
3.  Handicapped parking and access shall be provided according to section 8.02.06. 
F.  Roadside vendor signs shall only be permitted according to subsection 12.02.06.C., regarding temporary signs. 
G.  Certificate of organization from the Secretary of State of Georgia shall be required. 
H.  Electrical service from the primary structure only. Separate service is not allowed. 
7.03.03.  Special events. Special events may include carnivals, fairs, festivals, seasonal sales, or other periodic events of a temporary nature. (Specific requirements for special events involving a seating capacity of at least ten thousand (10,000) persons are contained in the Henry County Code of Ordinances, section 3-15-1.) Such events are typically outdoors. 
A.  The following standards apply to carnivals, fairs, festivals, and similar events and activities: 
1.  A permit is required according to the procedures set forth in section 12.02.06 subject to state regulations and the county fire code; 
2.  The applicant shall ensure the provision of adequate sanitation facilities, sewage disposal, garbage and refuse disposal, potable water supply, and food service during the special event; 
3.  The site shall have floodlighting for the special event and parking areas, if any activities are to be offered during darkness. Lighting shall be shielded and directed to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties; 
4.  The site shall have adequate parking facilities. Parking may be on-site or off-site. Where off-site parking is provided, there shall be adequate plans for transporting or conducting patrons from the parking facilities to the special event area; 
5.  The applicant shall provide an adequate plan for traffic control and security in and around the special event area; and 
6.  All stages, booths, tents, scaffoldings, or structures of any nature on, under, or within which persons may congregate, shall conform to applicable building, health, and other construction codes. 
B.  The following standards apply to seasonal sales: 
1.  A temporary use permit is required according to the procedures set forth in section 12.02.06. 
2.  The area devoted to seasonal sales shall not be located on any designated setbacks, buffers, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, driveways, fire lanes, or other traffic circulation areas. 
3.  Goods, tents, equipment, or materials used for the seasonal sales activity shall not be located within any right-of-way. 
4.  Designated parking spaces shall be provided to support the seasonal sales activity. 
5.  The applicant shall ensure the provision of adequate garbage and refuse disposal. 
6.  The applicant shall demonstrate conformance with all applicable building, health, and other federal, state, or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, § I, 10-18-10) 
Sec. 7.04.00. - Signs. 
7.04.01.  Purpose. The purpose of the sign regulations set forth in section 7.04.00 are as follows: 
A.  A comprehensive regulation is necessary because of the current burgeoning growth in Henry County and because a major interstate highway runs through the center of the county and attracts signs that are unrelated to business uses inside the county, leading to poor aesthetics and dropping property values. 
B.  To ensure that the county remains an attractive residential area as well as a viable commercial area, it is necessary to maintain a visually satisfying environment. A plethora of signs of a certain size and nature, no matter how tasteful, can have an undesirable effect upon traffic safety and the well being of the entire community. The county is more likely to attract commercial enterprises and permanent residents if it improves and maintains its appearance. County residents will ultimately benefit from enhanced retail and commercial environments and improvements in the quality of life as a result of these regulations. It is a rational desire of the community, and most specifically of those who live therein from day to day, to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized. 
C.  Further, the county has an obligation and a right to protect the rights of adjoining landowners to adequate light and air, to promote desirable living conditions and sustain stability of neighborhoods, to protect property against blight and deprivation, and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the county. 
D.  Accordingly, in consideration of the county's rights and obligations to promote traffic safety, to preserve property values, to provide for the convenience and enjoyment of public travel, to eliminate annoyance to travelers, to attract tourists, residents and industry, to serve the public health, safety and morals, to advance the general prosperity of the community, and to serve the general welfare, the board of commissioners hereby imposes the regulation of signs contained in this section. 
E.  The board of commissioners finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals and entities may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as well as a traffic hazard. Such signs may also constitute an aesthetic nuisance and be a detriment to property values and the county's public welfare. The board of commissioners intends by enacting this section to: 
1.  Balance the rights of individuals and entities to convey their message through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
2.  Protect the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the county; 
3.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
4.  Maintain the historical image of the county; 
5.  Protect property values by minimizing the potentially adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
6.  Promote economic development; and 
7.  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
7.04.02.  Procedures. Procedures for sign permits and temporary sign permits are set forth in chapter 12. Procedures regarding nonconforming signs are set forth in chapter 11. 
7.04.03.  Construction standards; all signs. 
A.  Building code compliance. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the county building code. 
B.  Materials required. All signs for which a permit is required by this ULDC, except those covered by section 7.04.05 of this ULDC and temporary signs, shall be constructed of noncombustible material. 
C.  Reflectors. Reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs, roof signs, and wall signs; provided, however, that the reflectors and lights shall be provided with proper glass lenses so that no light creates a hazardous or dangerous condition. 
D.  Internal illumination. The illumination of internally illuminated signs shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles of incandescent light measured at a distance of ten (10) feet from such structure. 
E.  External illumination. Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted so that no lights are positioned in such a manner that light glares or shines into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians so as to create a hazardous or dangerous condition. Additionally, illuminated devices (on- and off-premises) shall be placed and shielded so that light from the sign itself will not directly cast into any residential district, [or] sleeping rooms in any district. 
F.  Other code compliance. All building, construction, setback, zoning or other relevant codes excluding permitting (other than that provided elsewhere herein) shall be applicable to the location, construction and siting of signs and shall be read in harmony with this ULDC. 
7.04.04.  Sign setbacks and restrictions. 
A.  All signs shall be required to be located within the required property lines, and shall not be permitted to extend beyond the property line into the right-of-way, easements or adjacent property. The location of signs shall not interfere with the view of a traffic signal or traffic vision in accordance with other county standards. 
B.  Where the charts in section 7.04.10 make reference to this subsection, in order to erect a second sign a use shall have frontage on two (2) publicly dedicated streets when each street includes an existing legal curb cut or where property has both frontage on a publicly dedicated street and frontage along an interstate highway. In addition, there shall be a minimum lot area of one (1) acre to permit a second such sign to be erected. In those instances where one (1) of the street frontages is on a street serving a residential subdivision, a second sign shall be prohibited. 
7.04.05.  Prohibited signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect flashing signs, or aerial view signs in the county. 
7.04.06.  Exemptions. 
A.  The following signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of this ULDC; provided, however, that such signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this ULDC: 
1.  Wall signs: One (1) square foot and smaller. 
2.  Stake signs: Eight (8) square feet and smaller. 
3.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and dates of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible materials. 
4.  Any temporary sign that has less than or equal to thirty-two (32) square feet of maximum signable area per side, which sign is posted, erected or constructed during the period commencing upon the date which is ninety (90) days prior to the date of any primary election, general election or run-off election and ending twenty (20) days following the date on which the primary election or run-off election is conducted (such a period of time is hereinafter referred to as the "permit exempt season"). Unless permitted elsewhere in this article, no sign shall remain posted, erected or constructed after the conclusion of the permit exempt season unless all requirements of section 12.02.06 and all other requirements of this article have been and remain satisfied. 
5.  Temporary ground or wall signs signifying the grand opening of an establishment, that are erected for a maximum of fifteen (15) days. A signed affidavit and photo, with sign dimensions must be submitted to the planning and zoning department, prior to erecting a sign. 
B.  The following signs are exempt from all provisions of this ULDC: 
1.  Signs that are not visible from any public right-of-way or any adjacent property; 
2.  Directional signs used to move consumers through a lot; 
3.  Temporary signs required to be posted by federal law, state law or by the ULDC; and 
4.  Decals affixed to or signs painted on equipment, fuel pumps or other types of vending equipment used for dispensing retail products, provided that such decals or signs have a signable area not exceeding four (4) square feet on any single piece of equipment. 
7.04.07.  Special limitations. In addition to the limitations set forth in the other sections of this ULDC, the following limitations shall apply to these specific types of signs: 
A.  Wall signs. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projected signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than twenty-four (24) inches from the wall. 
2.  Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five (5) feet. 
B.  Roof signs. 
1.  Setback from roof edge. No roof sign shall be erected or maintained within five (5) feet of the outside wall toward which the sign faces. 
2.  Prohibited obstructions. No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure in such manner as to prevent free passage from one (1) part of the roof to any other part thereof or interfere with openings in the roof. 
3.  Not more than one (1) roof sign structure off-premises or on-premises may be erected on the roof of any one (1) building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than twenty-five (25) feet above the elevation of the roof. 
C.  Projecting signs. 
1.  No projecting sign may be placed over streets, alleys, or ways available for vehicular traffic. 
2.  All projecting signs shall be installed at a ninety-degree angle to the building facade. 
D.  Temporary signs. 
1.  Temporary signs are subject to the permitting process as described in this ULDC. Permits for temporary signs are valid for one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date the permit is issued, except for banners placed in county parks, which shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours after placement on the lot. Stake signs are exempt from the application and permitting process. 
2.  All temporary signs shall be securely installed, and shall meet all applicable safety standards as prescribed by the building code, electrical code, or as promulgated by the board of commissioners. 
3.  Temporary subdivision signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced no less than three hundred (300) feet apart. All signs shall be removed when seventy-five (75) percent of the lots are conveyed. 
4.  Sites that are under construction are permitted to have one (1) nonilluminated sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, displaying the name of the building, contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, and the financial agencies. Such signs shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days after the completion of the project. 
5.  If any temporary sign is erected or maintained in such a manner so as to be in violation of this ULDC or any other ordinance or law of the county, the code enforcement department may give written notice to the owner thereof and to the owner of the property and premises upon which the sign is located that the sign shall be removed within three (3) days. If the sign is not thereafter removed, the board of commissioners may cause its removal and impose the cost of the removal as a lien upon the property upon which the sign sits. 
E.  Awning signs. 
1.  Awning signs shall be painted or installed directly on the valances of the awning. 
2.  Awning signs shall not have lettering or graphics exceeding ten (10) inches in height. 
3.  No awning sign may be internally illuminated. 
4.  The signable area of any awning sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the surface area of the awning. 
F.  Entrance sign and subdivision signs. All entrance and subdivision signs shall be placed on private property and may not be placed in the right-of-way. 
Exception: A sign may be placed in the right-of-way in a center median if it meets the following. 
1.  The sign has two (2) faces; 
2.  The location has been approved in writing by the Henry County Department of Transportation; and 
3.  The applicant agrees to be responsible for maintenance and repair of the entrance sign and ensures that the existence of the entrance sign is documented on the final plat for the development. 
G.  Flags. 
1.  In ground. A flag may be flown from a metal pole permanently placed in the ground. The flag flying from such pole shall not exceed three (3) feet in width and five (5) feet in length and the pole shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height on a residentially zoned property. In a commercial or industrial zoned property the flag flying from such pole shall not exceed nine (9) feet in width and fifteen (15) feet in length and the pole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or fifty (50) feet in height when located within five hundred (500) feet of an interstate highway. 
2.  Projecting. A flag may be flown from a metal or wooden pole attached to a bracket projecting from the side of a building or door frame. The pole shall not exceed six (6) feet in length, nor one (1) inch in diameter. The flag flying from such pole shall not exceed three (3) feet in width and five (5) feet in length. Additionally, the flag displayed in such manner shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
3.  Hanging. A flag may be hung in either the primary facade or secondary facade of a property appropriately zoned under this ULDC. The flag shall count against the percentage of window signage permitted for the zoned property as delineated in section 7.04.10. 
4.  Limit. Only three (3) flags (either ground, projecting or hanging) shall be flown or displayed on each property. The flag shall count against the allocation of the ground, projecting or window signage permitted for each property in section 7.04.10. 
H.  Banners in county parks. 
1.  In accordance with subsection 7.04.07.A, county sponsored or operated events shall be exempt from sign regulation. 
2.  Banners shall be considered temporary signs as defined in appendix A of this ULDC. 
3.  In addition to the special limitations found in subsection 7.04.06.D. of this ULDC, banners placed in county parks shall be further regulated as follows: 
a.  Banners in the county's parks can be displayed for no more than seventy-two (72) hours; 
b.  No person shall be permitted to display more than one (1) banner on the premises, and only one (1) banner shall be displayed on the premises at any given time; 
c.  Each person is responsible for erecting and removing its banner; 
d.  No banner shall be any larger than sixty (60) square feet; and 
e.  All banners shall be attached to poles provided by the county, and no banner shall at any time be attached to trees within the park. 
I.  Home occupation signs. 
1.  One (1) nonilluminated wall sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area is permitted on the premises of a home occupation(s) in addition to a stake sign meeting the requirements of section 7.04.06.A.2. 
2.  For those premises of a home occupation(s) zoned RA (residential-agricultural) located outside of a subdivision platted with internal streets and containing a minimum of one (1) acre and one hundred (100) feet of road frontage, one (1) nonilluminated ground sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area with a maximum height of six (6) feet is permitted provided that all the requirements of section 12.02.06 have been and remain satisfied. 
7.04.08.  Special requirements for all signs. 
A.  County property. All lots, buildings, structures or property owned or operated by Henry County shall be exempt from all requirements of this ULDC. No sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way, unless such sign was in place and subject to removal based upon county initiated action. In such instance the county may allow the owner to obtain a sign permit to replace the removed sign, one (1) foot outside of the clear zone and under conditions and stipulations required by the zoning administrator/public works director or their respective designee. However, in no event shall the replacement sign be enlarged or increased in number (i.e. no additional sign) or a different structure/character than the permitted original sign. The owner shall be required to complete and permit a new sign application, but all fees shall be waived. 
B.  All signs shall be placed upon a lot. No sign may be placed on any lot, which lot does not meet the minimum requirements of this ULDC. 
C.  Obstruction to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window, or fire escape; nor shall any sign be attached to any stand pipe or fire escape. 
D.  Sign not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this ULDC shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision from vehicles thereupon; or be placed at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; or make use of the words "STOP", "DANGER", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse motorists. 
E.  Posting on trees, poles, etc. No sign shall be allowed to be tacked, painted, posted, marked, or otherwise affixed on trees, utility poles, or other similar structures, or on rocks, the ground itself, or other natural features. Except for temporary pennants or streamers located in commercial shopping center parking lots. 
F.  No posting on supports. No message or advertisement may be displayed on any portion of the structural supports of any sign. 
G.  Maintenance. All signs regulated by this ULDC shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose connections, and the premises surrounding the signs shall be maintained by the owner in a sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, and debris. 
H.  Special situations. Those developments which include at least one (1) building of three (3) stories or more may be permitted to have a wall sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet per primary and secondary facade on such buildings three (3) stories or more. The sign allowance provided under this subsection shall be exempt from the aggregate signage allowed per lot. 
I.  No simulation of public signal. No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control, warning sign or public service signal. 
7.04.09.  Special requirements by zoning classification. (See section 7.04.10, tables of sign standards, for additional requirements.) 
A.  Entrance signs, subdivision signs, and signs on properties with a conditional use permit utilized for religious facilities may be illuminated. 
B.  In any MU zoning district, in addition to those limitations found in section 7.04.10 of this ULDC, the following requirements shall be observed: 
1.  A uniform design scheme of signs shall be established for the development as a whole and/or for each building in the development and approved as part of the development plan. Decals may be allowed provided they do not exceed four (4) inches in width and twelve (12) inches in length or forty-eight (48) square inches in size. 
2.  Plans for the development shall include detailed descriptions of all signs, including but not limited to, size, height, location, type, colors, and materials to be used, lighting and ownership responsibility. 
3.  Plans for signs shall undergo the same review and approval process as is required of other aspects of the development; provided that the board of commissioners may make no modification of these regulations which would permit a sign otherwise prohibited under this ULDC. 
4.  All signs shall be designed, erected, and maintained in accordance with an approved plan. 
5.  In addition to the signage allowed in section 7.04.10, each individual unit with a store front may have one (1) wall sign with signable area not to exceed one (1) square foot for each horizontal linear foot of store front. 
C.  A master sign plan shall be submitted for multiple-occupancy developments/subdivisions within zoning districts MU, IAC, RS, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2 that are five (5.0) acres or more in area. The master sign plan shall establish standards and criteria for all signs in the complex, which require permits and shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  Proposed sign locations; 
2.  Approved materials and colors; 
3.  Type of illumination, including fixture specifications and wattage; 
4.  Design of freestanding and wall sign structures; 
5.  Size and quantity; 
6.  Uniform standards for non-business signage, including directional and informational signs; and 
7.  Identification of delivery. 
Approval by the administrator or designee shall apply only to the architectural elements, uniformity of size, color and placement of the master sign plan. The review by the administrator shall not address the content of any sign within the master sign plan. 
All applications for sign permits for signage within a multiple-occupancy development/subdivision shall comply to the master sign plan. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or leasing agent of the property to provide the occupant with a copy of the approved master sign plan. 
Any signage for new businesses within the existing projects shall comply with the provisions of this ULDC. 
7.04.10.  Tables of sign standards. In addition to all other regulations in this ULDC, all signs shall conform with the requirements of the tables contained in this section. 
A.  Lots zoned RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RS, RD, and RMH (Where a residence is on the lot). 
Table 7.04.10(A). Residential Lot Sign Standards (Where a residence is on the lot). 

 
Note: Wall signs are prohibited where a residence is on the lot, with the exception of home occupations which are allowed a maximum 2-square foot plaque on the premises. 
B.  Lots zoned RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RS, RD, and RMH (Where no residence is on the lot). 
Table 7.04.10(B). Residential Lot Sign Standards (Where a nonresidential use is on the lot). 

 
Note: In addition to those regulations set forth in the above table, no person may maintain any sign or signs on a lot zoned RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RS, RD, and RMH (where no residence is on the lot) so that the aggregate signable area exceeds three hundred (300) square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
C.  Lots zoned RM. 
Table 7.04.10(C). Multifamily Lot Sign Standards. 

 
D.  Lots zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, and IAC (multiple businesses per lot or business subdivision). 
Table 7.04.10(D). Commercial Lot Sign Standards (Multiple businesses). 

 
Note: In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign or signs on a lot zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, or IAC so that the aggregate signable area exceeds five hundred (500) square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. (Interstate signs, see section 7.04.12.) 
* Ground signs shall not be permitted on nonresidential lots where there is no structure. 
E.  Lots zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, and IAC (single business per lot). 
7.04.10(E). Commercial Lot Sign Standards (Single business). 

 
Note: In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign or signs on a lot zoned C-1, C-2, or C-3 so that the aggregate signable area exceeds three hundred (300) square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. (Interstate signs, see section 7.04.12.) 
* Ground signs shall not be permitted on nonresidential lots where there is no structure. 
F.  Lots zoned M-1 and M-2 (Multiple businesses per lot). 
Table 7.04.10(F). Industrial Lot Sign Standards (Multiple businesses). 

 
Note: In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign or signs on a lot zoned M-1 or M-2 so that the aggregate signable area exceeds five hundred (500) square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. (Interstate signs, see section 7.04.12.) 
* Ground signs shall not be permitted on nonresidential lots where there is no structure. 
G.  Lots zoned M-1 and M-2 (Single business per lot). 
Table 7.04.10(G). Industrial Lot Sign Standards (Single business). 

 
Note: In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign or signs on a lot zoned M-1 or M-2 so that the aggregate signable area exceeds three hundred (300) square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs, interstate signs, see section 7.04.12. Entrance and subdivision signs are prohibited. 
* Ground signs shall not be permitted on nonresidential lots where there is no structure. 
H.  Lots zoned MU and OI. The board of commissioners may further reduce the amount of signage where necessary to avoid conflict with the architectural design or physical features of the building. 
Table 7.04.10(H). OI zoning district and Lot Sign Standards within MU. 

 
Note: Entrance, roof and subdivision signs are prohibited for the OI zoning district and Lot Sign Standards within MU. 
* Ground signs shall not be permitted on nonresidential lots where there is no structure. 
7.04.11.  Unsafe and unlawful signs. 
A.  If the administrator or designee shall find that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or unstable, or is a menace to the public health or safety, or is abandoned, or is maintained in a dilapidated condition, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this ULDC, the administrator or designee shall notify the applicant, owner, or occupant of the property on which the sign is located by certified mail of such violation. Said notice shall include a brief and complete statement of the violations to be remedied. If the applicant, owner, or occupant of the property where the sign is located cannot be located, notice shall be given by the administrator or designee by affixing the notice to the sign or to the building on which the sign is erected. 
B.  If the applicant or property owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten (10) days after such notice, the permit for such sign shall be revoked and the applicant or property owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 12.07.00. 
C.  In any case in which a sign is an immediate threat to the physical safety of persons or adjoining property, the administrator or designee may cause such structure to be removed summarily and without notice and cause the cost of same to be placed as a lien on the property upon which the sign sits. 
7.04.12.  Signs along interstate highways. 
A.  Section 7.04.12 shall apply to all signs visible from I-75 or I-675 and located within the following area: One thousand two hundred (1,200) feet long beginning five hundred (500) feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp along I-75 and I-675. (See figure 7.1 interstate highway sign locations.) 
B.  No new sign shall be erected unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this section. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
C.  Nonconforming signs. Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this section may be allowed to remain until purchased by the GDOT provided that the sign meets the requirements of state laws, rules and regulations governing such signs or the sign can be replaced with a sign that would meet the provisions of this ULDC and any state laws, rules and regulations governing such signs. 
D.  New signs. New signs shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The outside measurement of all new signs shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height and forty-eight (48) feet in length, with or without trim, except that existing factory manufactured metal signs, now located within the 1,200-foot zones set out previously and if holding a conforming state permit on December 7, 1982, are considered to be conforming with respect to size requirements until such time as the sign is moved, enlarged, raised or otherwise physically altered with respect to dimensions or changes from its present configuration or sign type; 
2.  A fall zone area shall be provided equal to half the height of the supporting structure for the sign away from all residential dwelling units; 
3.  Only one (1) sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back sign, but prohibits two (2) signs (side-by-side or stacked atop one another) facing the same direction; 
4.  Sign locations shall be no less than five hundred (500) feet apart measuring from the two (2) closest points; 
5.  Sign structures shall be no less than ten (10) feet from any property or right-of-way line; and 
6.  Three (3) signs shall be allowed per quadrant of an interchange adjacent to the Interstate. This will allow a maximum of twelve (12) signs per interchange. These signs shall be within an area zoned commercial or industrial as specified in state law. 
7.  Sign erection at historic area locations is prohibited. No sign shall by placed in or obstruct the view of an area of designated historic interest. 

(Ord. No. 10-16, § I, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 10-20, § I(12—16), 6-15-10; Ord. No. 11-01, § I, 4-4-11; Ord. No. 11-07, § I, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 14-01, § I, 1-9-14; Ord. No. 17-07 , 5-2-17) 
Sec. 7.05.00. - Wireless communication facilities (WCF). 
7.05.01.  Purpose. It is the purpose of these wireless telecommunication regulations to ensure that residents and businesses in Henry County have reliable access to wireless facility networks and state of the art communications services, while also ensuring that this objective is achieved in a fashion that preserves the character of the community, and is accomplished according to Henry County's zoning, planning, and design standards. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 preserved, with certain limitation, local government land use and zoning authority concerning the placement, construction, and modification of wireless communication facilities. Henry County recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset to Henry County and a significant benefit to its residents. To accomplish the above-stated objectives and to ensure that the placement, construction, or modification of wireless telecommunication facilities complies with all applicable federal laws, and is consistent with Henry County's land use policies, Henry County is adopting comprehensive wireless communications regulations. These regulations are designed to meet the following: 
A.  Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by regulating the siting of and establishing development standards for WCFs and related equipment; 
B.  Encourage the location of WCFs in nonresidential areas; 
C.  Encourage the location of WCFs on existing structures, including utility poles, signs, water towers, buildings, and other WCFs where feasible; 
D.  Encourage collocation and site sharing of new and existing WCFs; 
E.  Facilitate the use of public property and structures for WCFs; 
F.  Locate telecommunications support structures and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; 
G.  Encourage design and construction of support structures and antennas to harmonize the visual impact of support structures and antennas with the existing natural and/or built environment; and 
H.  Encourage the siting of small cell technology consistent with the design and aesthetics of the existing streetscape. "Small Cell Technology" is defined as (1) individual small cell wireless antennas; or (2) networks of spatially separated small cell wireless antenna nodes connected to a common source via transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area. 
7.05.02.  Applicability. The regulations set forth in section 7.05.00 apply to all wireless communication facilities, except as enumerated below: 
A.  Antennas or support structures located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the county or one (1) of its agencies, divisions, or entities, with an approved license or lease authorizing such antenna or support structure. 
B.  Small cell technology located in the right-of-way (ROW) adjacent to nonresidential zoning districts and not exceeding seventy (70) feet in height including antenna, lightning rod, etc.) provided that such facilities shall comply with the requirements of section 7.05.03.F as well as the requirements for utilities in the right-of-way including those of section 3-4-451. 
C.  Ordinary maintenance of existing telecommunications facilities and support structures, as defined herein. 
D.  Any support structure, or the installation of any antenna, that is under thirty-five (35) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
E.  A temporary, commercial WCF, upon the declaration of emergency by federal, state, or local government, or determination of public necessity by the county, and approval by the county manager, provided that such WCF complies with all federal and state requirements. The exemption may continue up to one hundred twenty (120) days after the duration of the state of emergency with the approval of the county manager. 
7.05.03.  Administrative approval for WCFs. 
A.  Minor modifications of existing WCFs shall be permitted in any zoning district after administrative approval in accordance with the standards set forth in section 7.05.04. 
B.  Concealed attached or non-concealed attached WCFs and collocations shall be permitted in any zoning district after administrative approval in accordance with the standards set forth in section 7.05.04. 
C.  Support structures, antennas, and/or antenna arrays for AM/FM/TV/HDTV broadcasting transmission facilities that are licensed by the FCC are permitted in any zoning district after administrative approval. 
D.  Monopoles or attached WCFs located in utility easements or right-of-way shall be permitted in any zoning district after administrative approval in accordance with the standards set forth in this ULDC, provided that: 
1.  The utility easement or right-of-way shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet in width. 
2.  The easement or right-of-way shall contain overhead utility transmission and/or distribution structures that are eighty (80) feet or greater in height. 
3.  The height of the monopole may not exceed by more than thirty (30) feet the height of existing utility support structures. 
4.  Monopoles and its accessory equipment shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from all boundaries of the easement or in accordance with clear zone requirements as established by the Henry County Department of Transportation for structures located within the right-of-way. 
5.  Poles that use the structure of a utility tower for support are permitted under this section. Such poles may extend up to twenty (20) feet above the height of the utility tower. 
E.  Support structure replacement. Support structure replacements are permitted in any zoning district after administrative approval in accordance with the standards set forth in section 7.05.04, and without regard to the requirements of sections 7.05.05 through 7.05.09, provided that: 
1.  The support structure replacement is located within eight hundred fifty (850) feet of the existing WCF, irrespective of whether the support structure replacement and the existing support structure are on the same parcel. 
2.  If the support structure replacement will be located on a different parcel from the existing support structure, then the underlying zoning district and the Future Land Use Map designation of the parcel on which the replacement WCF is to be located shall be the same or more intense than the zoning district and Future Land Use Map designation of the parcel on which the existing WCF is located. 
3.  If the existing support structure is nonconforming, the applicant demonstrates that the proposed support structure replacement will mitigate the nonconformity. This demonstration shall meet at least two (2) of the following factors: 
A.  Change of design that achieves a more preferred design (for example, from a lattice-style to a monopole-style support structure or a nonconcealed to a concealed support structure); 
B.  At least a ten-percent height reduction; 
C.  From a lighted support structure to a non-lighted support structure; and 
D.  Exceeding the current wireless code requirements for setbacks on all sides. 
4.  The existing support structure that is being replaced shall be removed within one hundred twenty (120) days after the support structure replacement is completely constructed and operational. 
F.  Additional requirements. 
1.  Wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way are to be located outside of the clear zone as per AASHTO Roadside Design Guide as determined by HCDOT. 
2.  The permittee of approval to install wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way is to abandon or relocate the wireless communication facilities at its sole expense if required to do so by a government agency requiring relocation. Access to private property from the public right-of-way shall take precedence over the use of the public right-of-way for a utility facility/support structure. Should the location of a utility facility/ support structure prevent all access to a lot of record, that utility facility/support structure shall be removed or relocated by the utility facility/support structure owner at its sole expense within the same timeframe as otherwise required by section 3-5-451(c). 
3.  The wireless communication facility permittee shall be a member of the GA 811, One Call Center, and shall be required to mark any underground facilities that the utility has when a locate request is made (or respond to the GA 811 call center that they have no conflicts if that is applicable). The marking shall be done within the industry standard timeframe when locate requests are made. 
4.  Wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way shall be required to meet the requirements of section 12.02.13 to provide a removal bond. 
5.  The zoning administrator shall require any modification without limitation to reduce potential hazards within the fall zone of a wireless communication facility in the public right-of-way. 
6.  Wireless communications facilities in the public right-of-way as well as associated conduit (pipes or tubes) shall be required to be a dark color/material meeting the same color requirement for streetlights in the same district in which the facility is located. 
7.  Wireless communications facilities in the public right-of-way shall be located no closer than a distance equal to the height of the utility facility to be permitted from another utility facility in the public right-of-way unless the facility shares the support structure. 
8.  Wireless communications facilities in the public right-of-way shall be required to obtain an approved utility permit. Applicants shall be required to provide the latitude and longitude of the proposed location of the utility facility. Permittees shall provide before and after photos of the work site to demonstrate site conditions. In the event that there is remaining damage to or deterioration of the conditions of the right-of-way after the installation of the utility facility, the indemnity bond or other acceptable security may be used to correct the situation as permitted by law including section 3-5-451(a). 
7.05.04.  Administrative review process. 
A.  All administrative review applications must contain the following: 
1.  Administrative review application form signed by the applicant. 
2.  All application requirements outlined in section 12.02.06.D. with the exception of Parts 14 through 18. 
3.  Administrative review application fee as outlined on the department's most recently adopted fee schedule, and in accordance with O.C.G.A. 36-66B-7. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to address issues that will help to expedite the review and permitting process. 
2.  Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date an administrative review application is filed, the administrator shall determine if it is a complete application, and if it determines the application is not a complete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application. If additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the thirty-calendar day review period set forth. Information requested to complete the application may only include the documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the county's existing wireless telecommunications regulations, ordinance, and forms pertaining to the location, construction, collocation, modification, or operation of wireless facilities. 
3.  Once the application is complete, the administrator will issue a written decision granting or denying the request within thirty (30) days unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant. Failure to issue a written decision with thirty (30) days shall constitute an approval of the application. 
4.  Should the administrator deny the application; the administrator shall provide written justification for the denial. The denial must be based on substantial evidence of inconsistencies between the application and the ULDC. 
5.  The appeal of any decision of the administrator approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application or deeming an application incomplete, shall be in accordance with section 12.04.00 of this ULDC, except as set forth in subsection 6, below. 
6.  Additional procedures for support structure replacements. 
A.  The administrator shall provide notice of receipt of an application for support structure replacement in accordance with the provisions of ULDC section 12.03.04, except that the notices shall be mailed within fifteen (15) calendar days from the administrator's receipt of a complete application. 
B.  After making a decision with respect to an application for a replacement tower or monopole, the administrator shall have ten (10) calendar days to post a sign on the subject property which reflects the decision of the administrator and includes the deadline for taking an appeal of the decision. Aggrieved person(s) shall have fifteen (15) calendar days from the posting of the sign to appeal the administrator's decision by filing an appeal to the zoning advisory board. A person shall be considered aggrieved for purposes of this section only if said person or said person's property was the subject of the action appealed from, or said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
7.05.05.  Administrative waiver. The administrator shall have the power to reduce specific site design and development standards of this ULDC where the intent of the ULDC can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a waiver of standards. The authority to grant a waiver shall be limited to the following: 
A.  A reduction in the minimum width of utility easement or right-of-way provided the following standards are met: 
1.  Clear zone requirements, as reviewed and approved by the Henry County Department of Transportation (DOT). 
B.  A reduction in the minimum height of existing overhead utility transmission and/or distribution structures, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  The proposed WCF is within a twenty-percent height variance of existing overhead utility transmission and/or distribution structures. 
7.05.06.  WCF applications (non-administrative approval). 
A.  Telecommunication facilities and support structures not permitted by administrative approval shall be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use from the zoning advisory board in accordance with the standards set forth in the ULDC. 
B.  WCF applications shall contain the following: 
1.  Conditional use application form signed by the applicant. 
2.  All documents required by section 12.02.06.D. 
3.  WCF conditional use application fee as outlined on the department's most recently adopted fee schedule, and in accordance with O.C.G.A 36-66B-7. 
C.  Procedure. Procedures for conditional use applications are outlined in section 11.05.00 of the ULDC. 
D.  Timing; application completeness. 
1.  Within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days of the date a conditional use application is filed, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the administrator and the applicant, the zoning advisory board shall: 
A.  Make its final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and 
B.  Advise the applicant in writing of it final decision. 
2.  Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date a conditional use application is filed, the administrator shall determine if it is a complete application, and if it determines the application is not a complete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application. To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the calendar day review period set forth in subsection 1, above. Information requested to complete the application may only include the documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the county's existing wireless telecommunication regulations, ordinances, and forms pertaining to the location, construction, collocation, modification, or operation of wireless facilities. 
7.05.07.  Siting hierarchy. 
A.  Siting of WCFs shall be in accordance with the following hierarchy of facility alternatives, ranked from highest to lowest preference as follows: 
1.  Concealed attached. 
2.  Collocations o existing WCFs. 
3.  Non-concealed attached. 
4.  Concealed freestanding. 
5.  Non-concealed freestanding monopole. 
7.05.08.  Evidence of need report. For all conditional use applications for WCFs, a report certified by a radio frequency engineer shall be provided that demonstrates the need for the WCF at the proposed location. The following information shall be provided with the report: 
A.  Identification of efforts to comply with the facility and location hierarchy in section 7.05.07. If a concealed freestanding or nonconcealed freestanding WCF is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate that existing facilities or the mitigation of existing facilities within the applicant's geographic search area (GSA) cannot be reasonably made to accommodate the applicant's need because: 
1.  There are no existing WCFs in the GSA that meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and why. 
2.  The existing WCFs, buildings and structures in the GSA are not of sufficient height and cannot be increased in height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  The existing WCFs, buildings and structures in the GSA do not have sufficient structural strength and cannot be structurally improved to support the applicant's proposed WCF and related equipment. Such information shall be certified by a Georgia-licensed professional engineer. 
4.  There are other limiting factors that render existing WCFs in the GSA unsuitable. 
B.  A written report demonstrating applicant's meaningful efforts to secure shared use alternative buildings or other structures within the county. The applicant shall provide: 
1.  A list of all existing structures that are potential alternatives to the proposed location. 
2.  A written explanation why the alternatives considered were either unacceptable or infeasible due to technical or physical reasons. 
3.  Copies of written requests and responses for shared use, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection. 
C.  For all WCFs proposed in a residential district, a written report demonstrating applicant's meaningful efforts to secure alternative sites in nonresidential areas. The applicant shall provide: 
1.  A list of all alternative sites that are potential alternatives to the proposed location. 
2.  A written explanation why the alternatives considered were either unacceptable or infeasible due to technical or physical reasons. 
3.  Copies of written requests and responses for shared use, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection. 
D.  Graphics to be provided shall include: 
1.  A map of the GSA to include the location of the proposed WCF and all existing WCFs (including those not owned by the applicant). The exact location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest tenth), including the height of the WCFs, and height, type and number of existing antennas shall be provided. 
2.  A map of the GSA and all existing structures that are potential alternatives to the proposed monopole. 
3.  A color plot demonstrating the existing coverage of all WCFs owned and proposed by the applicant within the GSA. 
4.  Additional maps and calculations as may be deemed necessary by the administrator to prove need for the proposed WCF. 
7.05.09.  Visual impact assessment. All conditional use applications for WCFs shall furnish a visual impact assessment. All or a portion of the analysis shall be performed for administrative approval when, in the opinion of the administrator, the proposed type of WCF and its location requires additional assessment (i.e., within a residential district, recognized historic area, or scenic vista/landscape). The analysis shall include: 
A.  Line-of-sight analysis. The applicant shall provide a line-of-sight analysis, including elevation views of the proposed facility. The analysis shall include a description of natural and manmade features that affect the buffering of the potential visual impact of the structure. 
B.  Photo simulations. The applicant shall provide photo-simulated post-construction renderings of the completed proposed support structure, equipment compound and/or equipment cabinets, ancillary structures, and landscaping, if any, from locations determined at the pre-application conference. 
1.  The views shall incorporate before and after scenarios, a scaled color image of the proposed type of facility, an aerial map with the location of the selected views, and a description of the technical approach used to create the photo simulations. The simulations shall include a minimum of four (4) vantage points (north, south, east, and west). 
2.  At the pre-application meeting, the applicant may be required to provide other pictorial representations from other viewpoints, including, but not limited to, state highways and other major roads, state and local parks; other public lands; historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the public, and from any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. 
7.05.10.  Development standards. WCFs are allowed in all zoning districts, subject to the limitations set forth in this article. To ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses, protect public safety and natural, cultural and scenic resources and preserve and enhance the character of neighborhoods, all WCFs subject to section 7.05.00 shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with the following: 
A.  Design. 
1.  Attached WCFs shall have both antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment that are of a neutral color identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
2.  Monopoles shall consist of a galvanized steel finish that, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, shall be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. The design of the accessory equipment compound shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend to the natural setting and built environment. New wireless facilities that are not concealed or attached shall be monopoles except when providers can document and demonstrate need for the design to be a tower. 
3.  Monopoles shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Monopoles shall be designed to accommodate at least three (3) telecommunications providers. 
B.  The compound area surrounding the monopole must be of sufficient size to accommodate accessory equipment for at least three (3) telecommunications providers. 
C.  Unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission, or the Federal Aviation Administration, monopoles shall have a galvanized silver or gray finish. 
4.  Concealed telecommunications support structures shall be designed to accommodate the collocation of other antennas whenever economically and technically feasible or aesthetically appropriate, as determined by the zoning advisory board. 
5.  Upon request of an applicant, the zoning advisory board may waive the requirement that new support structures accommodate the collocation of other service providers if it finds that collocation at the site is not essential to the public interest, or that the construction of a shorter support structure with fewer antennas will promote community compatibility. 
B.  Aesthetics. 
1.  Lighting and marking. Attached WCFs or WCF support structures shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the Federal Communications Commission, or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other governmental entity. 
2.  Attached WCFs or WCF support structures shall contain a sign no larger than four (4) square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities and shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. The sign shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited. 
C.  Landscaping and buffer requirements. 
1.  Attached WCFs or WCF support structures shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscape requirements contained in sections 5.00.00 through 5.03.00 of the Henry County ULDC, except for additional requirements stated herein. 
2.  Landscaping and buffer requirements for attached WCFs or WCF support structures can be waived by the administrator where the WCF applicant makes other means of screening the support structure base and adjacent equipment faculties (i.e., opaque fencing, etc.) and if the applicant otherwise demonstrates consistency with the purposes and intent of this ordinance. 
3.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided, however, that vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the equipment facility may be trimmed. 
4.  Existing vegetation on site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the administrator. 
5.  Additional landscaping and buffer requirements: 
A.  The perimeter of concealed and non-concealed freestanding WCFs shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in width for landscaping and include the following: 
1.  A row of evergreen trees a minimum of ten (10) feet in height at the time of planting with a minimum two-inch caliper, spaced a maximum of twelve (12) feet apart and a row of evergreen shrubs a minimum of two (2) feet tall at the time of planting, planted four (4) feet on center. 
2.  Within a year of planting, the trees and shrubs shall achieve eighty (80) percent opacity of the security barrier and/or equipment enclosure. Existing trees and vegetation may be used as an alternative or in combination with new plantings to achieve the opacity requirement subject to approval of the administrator. An easement may be required to ensure that vegetation remains intact. 
6.  Maintenance. It will be the responsibility of the owner/tenant to keep all landscaping material (as part of the landscaped area) free from disease and properly maintained in order to fulfill the purpose for which it was established. The owners of the property, and any tenant on the property where buffers and landscaping are required, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the buffer and landscape areas free from litter and debris, to keep plantings healthy, and to keep planting areas neat in appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes part of the buffer or landscaping shall be replaced in the event it dies. 
D.  Setbacks. 
1.  Attached WCFs. Attached WCFs are exempt from the setback standards of this section but are not exempt from the setbacks for the zoning districts in which they are located. 
2.  Towers and monopoles. Towers and monopoles shall meet the following setbacks: 
A.  From all property lines a distance equal to their height. 
B.  Residential dwellings. From all off-site residential dwellings, a distance equal to the height plus ten (10) percent. There shall be no setback requirement from dwellings located on the same parcel as the proposed tower or monopole. 
C.  Unless otherwise stated herein, all accessory equipment shall be setback from all property lines in accordance with the minimum setback requirements in the underlying zoning district. 
D.  The zoning advisory board and the administrator may reduce or waive the setback requirements of subsection A. or B., above upon the request of the applicant if: 
1.  The tower or monopole will be less visible as a result of the diminished setback; or 
2.  The applicant demonstrates, by virtue of a letter or report from a licensed engineer, that the structural design or characteristics of the tower or monopole mitigate the need for the full setback. 
E.  Height. 
1.  Attached WCFs. Attached WCFs shall not add more than twenty (20) feet in height to the existing building or structure to which it is attached. 
2.  WCFs with support structures. 
A.  In any residential-agricultural zoning district (RA), the maximum height for a WCF shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
B.  In all single-family residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R4, R5) and two-family residential (RD) zoning districts the maximum height for a WCF shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
C.  In all multiple-family residential (RM), mobile home development (RMH), and residential suburban (RS) zoning districts, the maximum height for a WCF shall be ninety (90) feet. 
D.  In any office and institutional zoning district (OI), the maximum height shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet. 
E.  In any neighborhood commercial (C-1), mixed-use (MU), and interchange activity center (IAC) zoning districts the maximum height shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet. 
F.  In any general commercial zoning district (C-2), the maximum height of a WCF shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
G.  In any heavy commercial zoning district (C-3), the maximum height of a WCF shall be one hundred and eighty (180) feet. 
H.  In any light manufacturing zoning district (M-1), the maximum height of a WCF shall be one hundred and ninety (190) feet. 
I.  In any heavy manufacturing zoning district (M-2), the maximum height of a WCF shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
F.  [Accessory equipment.] Accessory equipment, including any buildings, cabinets or shelters, shall be used only to house equipment and other supplies in support of the operation of the telecommunication facility or support structure. Any equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on the site. 
1.  An equipment building, shelter or cabinet must not exceed five hundred and sixty (560) square feet and twelve (12) feet in height, including the support structure for the equipment building. 
A.  Exception to size restriction. A single equipment building or shelter may exceed five hundred and sixty (560) square feet, if it: is located at ground level; is used by more than one (1) telecommunication provider; and does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
B.  Exception to height restriction. Upon the applicant's request, the zoning advisory board may waive the height restriction to allow for the stacking of equipment on top of each other. The zoning advisory board must find that there is a practical necessity for the stacking of the equipment and that any resulting impact on adjoining properties is minimal or may be minimized by the requiring of appropriate screening. 
2.  If the accessory equipment is at ground level in a residential zone, the zoning advisory board may require that the building or shelter be faced with brick or other suitable material on all sides. In the situation of stacked equipment buildings, additional screening/landscaping measures may be required by the zoning advisory board. 
G.  Separation requirements. 
1.  Freestanding wireless communication facilities located within residential zoning districts shall not be located within one (1) mile of another freestanding wireless communication facility. 
2.  Except as stated in section 7.05.09.G.1., there shall be no separation requirement for wireless communication facilities. 
7.05.11.  Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations. 
A.  All administrative approvals and conditional use approvals shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
B.  To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified, then the holder of such an administrative approval or WCF conditional use shall conform the WCF to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of twenty-four (24) months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
7.05.12.  Environmental standards. The following standards shall apply: 
A.  Freestanding WCFs shall not be located in wetlands or wetlands buffers, whether federal or state designated. 
B.  Freestanding WCFs shall not generate noise in excess of sixty (60) db at ground level at the property line. 
C.  Attached WCFs shall not generate noise in excess of sixty (60) db at ground level at the base of a habitable building closest to or part of the facility. 
7.05.13.  Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
A.  The county may determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the county warrant and require the removal of a WCF under the following circumstances: 
1.  If it has been abandoned. A WCF has been abandoned if it has not been used as a telecommunications facility for a period of six (6) months or more; 
2.  If it has fallen into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard; 
3.  If it has been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required building permit, or any other necessary authorization. 
B.  If the county makes such a determination as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the county attorney shall notify the holder of the WCF building permit within forty-eight (48) hours that said WCF is to be removed. 
C.  The holder of the WCF building permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such WCF, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the county. 
D.  If the WCF is not removed or substantial progress has not been made to remove the WCF within ninety (90) days after the permit holder has received notice, then the county may order officials or representatives of the county to remove the WCF at the sole expense of the owner or WCF building permit holder. 
E.  If, the county removes, or causes to be removed, a WCF, and the owner of the WCF does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location within ten (10) days, then the county may take steps to declare the WCF abandoned, and sell it and their components. 
F.  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the county may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the WCF, for no more ninety (90) days, for the purpose of preparing a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or relocation of the affected WCF by the holder of the WCF building permit, subject to the approval of the county. An agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the WCF building permit and the county. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the ninety-day time period, then the county may take possession of and dispose of the affected WCF in the manner provided in this section. 
7.05.14.  Prohibited conditions of approval. In regulating the placement or construction of any new wireless facility or wireless support structure, the administrator, the board or the zoning advisory board shall not: 
A.  Condition the approval of any application for a new wireless support structure on a requirement that a modification or collocation to such structure be subject to a review that is inconsistent with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 36-66B-4; 
B.  Require the removal of existing wireless support structures or wireless facilities as a condition to approval or an application for a new wireless facility or wireless support structure unless such existing wireless support facility is abandoned and owned by the applicant; or 
C.  Require the applicant to place an antenna or other wireless communications equipment on publicly owned land or on a privately owned water tank, building or electric transmission tower as an alternative to the location proposed by the applicant. 
7.05.15.  Conflict with other laws. Where this ordinance differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the county, state or federal government, this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 11-17-09; Ord. No. 14-06, § I(exh. A), 11-4-14 ; Ord. No. 17-13, 5-16-17 ) 
CHAPTER 8. - INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 8.00.00. - Generally. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and requirements for the provision of infrastructure by all development. This chapter contains requirements for the transportation system, set forth in section 8.01.00, including streets, sidewalks, streetlights, and clear visibility at intersections. Requirements for off-street parking and loading and the design of parking lots and loading areas are set forth in section 8.02.00. Requirements for utilities are set forth in section 8.03.00. 
Sec. 8.01.00. - Transportation system standards. 
8.01.01.  Generally. 
A.  No person shall do any paving work, or any other related or similar roadwork, on, or adjacent to, a county road without a permit. 
B.  All transportation system design, street design, and construction for nonlocal roadways shall comply with Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) requirements. The latest edition of the GDOT manual, "Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges," shall apply. 
C.  Where conflict arises between GDOT standards and this section concerning non-local roadways the stricter standard shall apply. Design of local roadways shall be governed by the policies as stated within the ULDC; however construction methods/practices of said roadways shall be governed by the stricter of the GDOT standards and the ULDC. 
D.  All materials, equipment, labor and other matters related to street construction shall be provided by the applicant. The following is a summary of the improvements required: 
1.  All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded to their full width right-of-way by the applicant so that the pavements and sidewalks, when installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished according to the specifications of the county (see subsections 8.01.05.I. and K. 
2.  Three (3) copies of an as-built subgrade centerline profile shall be submitted to the county. The profile shall include both proposed and as-built centerline elevations at every even station. No curb and gutter or waterlines shall be installed prior to subgrade approval. 
3.  An adequate drainage system, including necessary curb, pipes, culverts, headwalls, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, swale ditches, and detention areas, shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. The drainage system shall be designed by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
4.  After preparation of the subgrade the roadbed shall have base material and paving applied according to county specifications (see subsections 8.01.05.I. and K. 
E.  Roadways may be created by: 
1.  Dedication; 
2.  Prescription; 
3.  Express grant of an easement; 
4.  Deed; 
5.  Special statutory proceeding; or 
6.  Condemnation. 
F.  County roadways classification: 
1.  Private road. 
a.  A private road is a roadway that is created by an easement from a landowner to a certain individual or individuals and the use of said road can be controlled by the parties to the easement. 
b.  Only one (1) building permit shall be issued by a private easement roadway. 
c.  A private roadway shall not be maintained by the county. 
2.  Public road. 
a.  A paved public roadway is a roadway where the general public has acquired an implied easement for a roadway over the property of others by virtue of the unobstructed use of said roadway for a sufficient length of time to establish a public easement over the roadway. Public roadways are roadways over which the public has the right to travel, but have not been accepted by the board of commissioners as county roads and the county assumes no responsibility to maintain said roadways. 
b.  An unpaved public roadway with rights-of-way of sixty (60) feet or greater is used for the general public purpose and is maintained by the county consistent with the maintenance policy developed by the Henry County Department of Transportation (county DOT). 
c.  An unpaved public roadway with deeded rights-of-way of fifty (50) feet or greater but less than sixty (60) feet is used for the general public purpose and was deeded to the county at a time when a fifty-foot right-of-way was sufficient according to the ordinances in effect in the county at the time of acceptance. These roadways shall be maintained by the county consistent with the maintenance policy developed by the county DOT and in accordance with deeded rights-of-way. 
d.  An unpaved public roadway with rights-of-way less than sixty (60) feet is used for the general public purpose and is maintained by the county in accordance with the maintenance policy developed by the county DOT, but shall not be maintained to the same standard as roads categorized in subsection 8.01.01.E. hereof, because of insufficient rights-of-way. These roads shall be upgraded to subsection 8.01.01.E. as rights-of-way of sixty (60) feet or greater and deeded to Henry County by adjoining landowners. 
3.  County road. A county roadway is one that has been acquired by dedication, prescription, by the express grant of easement, by deed, by statutory proceedings, or by condemnation, and further has been accepted by the board of county commissioners and designated as a "county road" and the county has assumed the responsibility to maintain said road for the general public. 
G.  Upon compliance with all of the provisions of the ULDC, building permits may be issued for building on public roads upon the applicant signing a "statement of understanding" that said roadway is a public road and that the county assumes no responsibility for the maintenance of said road until such time as it becomes feasible and advisable to accept said roadway as a "county road." The county at such time shall accept said road as a county road provided that the property owners along said road convey a right-or-way to the county conveying the minimum width required by the county. 
H.  Upon compliance with the provisions of this ULDC, building permits may be issued on county roads. 
8.01.02.  Traffic impact studies (TIS). 
A.  Purpose and intent. Understanding the demands placed on the county's transportation network by development is an important dimension of assessing the overall impacts of development. All development generates traffic, and it may generate enough traffic to create congestion and thus require the community to invest more capital funds into the transportation network in the form of new roads, traffic signals and intersection improvements. Traffic congestion results in a number of problems, including economic costs due to delayed travel times, air pollution and accidents. By requiring traffic impact studies for proposed developments meeting certain thresholds, the county will be better able to determine the transportation demands of development proposals and provide for reduction of adverse impacts on the transportation system. 
B.  Objectives. The county finds that requiring a traffic impact study for proposed developments that meet certain thresholds will help to achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  To foster and support the coordinated and comprehensive transportation plan. 
(b)  Provide transportation investments that reinforce the land use plans and development vision of the county. 
(c)  Forecast additional traffic associated with new development, based on accepted practices. 
(d)  Determine the improvements that are necessary to accommodate the new development. 
(e)  Allow the county government to assess the impacts that a proposed development may have and assist the county government in making decisions regarding development proposals. 
(f)  Help to ensure safe and reasonable traffic conditions on streets after the development is complete. 
(g)  Reduce the negative impacts created by developments by helping to ensure that the transportation network can accommodate the development. 
(h)  Protect the substantial public investment in the street system. 
(i)  Provide information relevant to comprehensive planning, transportation planning, future transit planning and the provision of programs and facilities for traffic safety, road improvements, transportation demand management, pedestrian access and other transportation system considerations. 
C.  Thresholds of applicability. A traffic impact study shall be required for all developments that are expected to generate more than one hundred (100) new trips during an a.m. or p.m. peak hour or more than seven hundred fifty (750) new trips in an average day or involves the construction of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater of nonresidential building space, in single or multiple phases. Developments of regional impact (DRIs) are exempt from the aforementioned criteria. All DRIs shall adhere to the guidelines set forth by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA). The traffic study shall be prepared in accordance with industry accepted standards, including at a minimum, level of service impacts for adjacent roadways and intersections and a mitigation package to address the cumulative effects from the project's impact. Said applicant shall be also required to coordinate and fund any recommended mitigation measures limited to project related improvements with applicable federal, state and local agencies including the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA) and the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC). The determination of a traffic study shall be made during the zoning request stage or during the phase in which a site plan is submitted for a land disturbance permit. The transportation planning director or his/her designee shall notify the appropriate departments within five (5) business days. Traffic impact studies shall be required for submittal during the land disturbance stage and shall not be required during the zoning process. 
D.  Exemptions. 
(a)  A traffic impact study is not required if a development proposal is initiated by the county. 
(b)  A development proposal may be exempted from the traffic impact study requirement by the director of transportation planning, if a prior traffic impact study for the subject property has been submitted to the county and determined to fulfill the impact study requirement based on existing road conditions. 
(c)  Any development of regional impact that complies with rules of the department of community affairs, including the Atlanta Regional Commission and Georgia Regional Transportation Authority shall be exempt from this ordinance. 
(d)  A traffic impact study will not be required by the county for those developments with frontage and access along a state route. 
E.  Trip generation data. The source for trip generation rates for the purposes of this ordinance shall be "Trip Generation" published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), most recent edition, unless otherwise approved by the director of transportation planning. Determinations of whether this ordinance applies shall be made based on application of data from ITE Trip Generation, which may change from time to time, or as otherwise approved by the director of transportation planning. 
F.  Determination of applicability. At the time a development proposal is filed, or during any pre-application meeting for zoning proposal, exclusive of variances and modifications to a zoning condition, the transportation planning director or his/her designee shall determine whether a traffic impact study shall be required according to this section. The planning and zoning and development plan review directors shall submit a proposed concept plan including proposed land uses to the transportation planning department. In order for a calculation to be made on the expected trip generation of the proposed development and compare it to the thresholds specified in this section to determine whether a traffic impact study is required. 
Applicants for development proposals shall provide sufficient information about the development proposal (e.g., number of dwelling units, square footage of buildings, number of employees, land area of the development, etc.) for the transportation planning department to apply professionally accepted trip generation rates to the proposed development. The planning and zoning director shall not accept a development proposal for processing unless it contains the data on the proposed development necessary to apply available trip generation rates. The transportation planning director shall issue a letter of determination to the departments of planning and zoning and development plan review within five (5) business days, should it be determined that a traffic impact study is warranted. All traffic studies shall be required to be submitted before the issuance of any development permits, including, but not limited to, a land disturbance, clearing and grading, building permit and/or development permit. 
G.  Cases where data are not available. In the event that information submitted by the applicant of the development proposal is sufficient to calculate the trip generation that would be expected to result from the proposed development, but trip generation rates or other data are not available or in sufficient quantity of studies to make a determination of applicability under the terms of this section, the following shall apply: 
(a)  The planning and zoning and/or development plan review department director and the director of transportation planning shall coordinate with each other to determine if: 
(1)  Professionally acceptable trip generation rates applicable to the subject development exist from other reputable sources, such as the Journal of the Institute of Transportation Engineers; 
(2)  Other trip generation studies of similar developments are available; or 
(3)  Professionally acceptable trip generation rates for one (1) or more similar land uses can be used in making the determination of applicability. 
If the director of transportation planning is able to provide such information and determines it is professionally reputable, then the planning and zoning and/or development plan review department directors shall use said data as may be interpreted by the director of transportation to make the determination of applicability. The directors shall have no more than ten (10) working days to comply with the provisions of this paragraph, when it applies. 
(b)  In the event the director of transportation planning pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, the director of transportation planning shall notify the department that initiated the review to notify the applicant in writing that professionally accepted trip generation rates are not available for purposes of making a determination of applicability. 
(c)  Upon receipt of notice described in paragraph (b) of this section, the applicant for a development proposal shall have thirty (30) days to have a qualified professional prepare and submit a peak-hour trip generation study as defined by this ordinance. 
H.  Specifications for peak-hour trip generation studies. 
(a)  Discounting of pass-by trips. The peak-hour trip generation study may subtract from the empirical data on actual vehicle trips those trips that are reasonably considered to be "pass-by" trips as defined by this ordinance, using professionally accepted assumptions about the percent of pass-by trips approved by the director of transportation planning. 
(b)  Reduction for internal trips in multiuse or mixed use developments. In calculating the new trips generated from a proposed development containing multiple uses or mixed uses, a qualified professional with the approval of the director of transportation planning may apply a percentage reduction to the total vehicle trips shown in any peak hour trip generation study to account for internal trips, as defined in this ordinance, so as to account for (discount) the number of internal trips reasonably expected to occur in such multiuse or mixed use development. Said reduction shall not exceed twenty-four (24) percent of total trips generated. 
I.  Study scope meeting. Once it is determined that a traffic impact study is required, a scoping meeting must be held with the developer or his or her consultant and the appropriate representatives of the county. It will be the responsibility of the developer or his or her consultant to initiate this meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the availability of site specific information concerning the development, available forecasts of traffic volumes, and to ensure the applicant understands the content requirements for traffic impact studies. 
J.  Required contents of a traffic impact study. A traffic impact study must evaluate the adequacy of the existing transportation system to serve the proposed development and determine the expected effects of the proposed development on the transportation system. The traffic impact study must provide adequate information for county staff to evaluate the development proposal and, when appropriate, recommend conditions of approval. 
The qualified professional preparing the traffic impact study is encouraged to coordinate preparation with local staff and staff from other jurisdictions, as appropriate, to ensure that all necessary components are included in the traffic impact study and to reduce revision and review time. In order to be reviewed, the traffic impact study must include the following minimum components: 
(a)  Title page. A title page listing the name of the proposed development and its location. 
(b)  Table of contents. A table of contents outlining the study shall be provided. 
(c)  Certification. The study shall be signed and stamped by a qualified professional. 
(d)  Executive summary. An executive summary, discussing the development, the major findings of the analysis and any recommendations made by the qualified professional. 
(e)  Vicinity map. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed project in relation to the transportation system of the area. 
(f)  Study area map. A map of the traffic impact study area. For purposes of this ordinance, the traffic impact study area shall be determined according to trip generation rates as follows. In the event there is a difference as a result of applying peak and total trips, the more restrictive requirement (larger study area) shall apply. 
Table 08.01.02: Study Area Size Requirements 

 
(g)  Inventory of transportation facilities in the study area. A description of transportation facilities in the study area, including roadway names, locations and functional classifications, intersection lane configurations and traffic control (including signal timing), existing rights-of-way, transit routes and stops (if any), pedestrian and bicycle facilities and planned transportation system improvements. An existing lane configuration sketch shall be submitted for all roadways and intersections within the study area. 
(h)  Site plan and development data. A complete description of the proposed development, including a site plan, with the best available information as to the nature and size of each proposed use and the proposed location and traffic control of all proposed access points, including the distance from all proposed access points to adjacent accesses and/or streets, including those across a street right-of-way from the subject development. 
(i)  Existing traffic volumes. Peak and total daily traffic volumes on all arterial, collector and local streets within the study area. Traffic counts should be no more than one (1) year old when the report is prepared. Traffic counts between one (1) and three (3) years old may be used if factored to the current year. Traffic counts older than three (3) years will not be accepted. Utilizing available data from an industry accepted source, i.e., Georgia Department of Transportation, Henry County Department of Transportation, Atlanta Regional Commission. 
(j)  Facility performance. Existing performance of the transportation system, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity ratios (V/C) for all intersections and road segments, as appropriate, within the study area. Identification of any project related improvements necessary to mitigate the impact on the level of service (LOS) for the abutting roadways and unsignalized/signalized intersection resultant from the trips generated by the proposal. 
(k)  Trip generation. Complete trip generation figures for all aspects of the proposed development. The source for trip generation rates shall be "Trip Generation" published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), most recent edition, unless otherwise approved by the director of transportation planning. If phased development is proposed, the study shall include projections for the year that each phase of the development is planned to be complete. The traffic impact study shall also include trip generation data for any pending and approved developments that would affect the study area. The county staff shall facilitate the review of applicable files by a qualified professional to determine the names and development characteristics of pending and approved developments in the study area. 
(l)  Trip distribution and assignment. Trip distribution for the proposed development. For developments expected to generate more than thirty (30) truck trips per day, the study shall include separate trip distribution figures for trucks. 
(m)  Forecast traffic volumes without the development. Forecast traffic volumes without the development, on all arterial, collector and local roads within the study area, in the year that the proposed development is planned to commence, and in the horizon year. Qualified professionals should consult county transportation staff for information to determine the most appropriate sources or methods of determining future traffic volumes. If phased development is proposed, the traffic impact study shall include projections for the year that each phase of the development is planned to be complete. 
(n)  Forecast performance without the development. Forecast performance, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity (V/C) ratios of the transportation system without the development in the year that each phase is planned to be complete and in the horizon year. 
(o)  Forecast traffic volumes with the development. Forecast traffic volumes with the development, on all arterial, collector and local roads within the study area, in the year that the proposed development is planned to commence and in the horizon year. 
(p)  Forecast performance with the development. Forecast performance, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity (V/C) ratios of the transportation system with the development in the year that each phase is planned to be complete and in the horizon year. 
(q)  Sight distance. A safety analysis of the site accesses and an assessment whether adequate sight distances are provided at driveways and streets abutting the development. 
(r)  Operational characteristics. Analysis of prevailing operating speeds, if significantly different than speed limits, right and left turn lane warrants, queue lengths, acceleration and deceleration lanes including lengths and tapers, throat lengths, channelization, and other characteristics of the site accesses, which exist and may be needed, as appropriate. The traffic impact study shall address whether driveways and intersections are located and spaced safely and designed to accommodate expected traffic volumes and maneuvers. The operational characteristics analysis shall also evaluate the turning and traveling characteristics of the vehicles that will be using the proposed development and the adequacy of the geometrics of the existing and proposed roadway (public and/or private) configurations to accommodate these characteristics. 
(s)  On-site circulation. The traffic impact study shall address whether on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking layouts are safe and efficient. 
(t)  Significant impacts. Analysis as appropriate of any potential adverse or controversial effects of the proposed development on the transportation system in the area. Examples of possible effects include, but are not limited to, infiltration of nonresidential traffic into residential neighborhoods, traffic noise, creation of potential for traffic violations, conflicting turning movements with other driveways, any new pedestrian or bicycle transportation needs arising from the development, etc. 
(u)  Mitigation measures and costs. Listing of all intersections and road segments that are forecasted to be level of service "E" and "F" in the horizon year, or if phased, in the years that each phase is planned to be complete, and an identification and description of specific mitigation measures including signal, turn lane, or other warrant analyses as appropriate and necessary to bring these intersections and road segments into compliance with a level of service "C" or other county adopted level of service for said road segment or intersection. Should the proposed development reduce the level of service, mitigation factors must be included and will be included as a condition of final plat approval. If roadway improvements are needed, the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet for all recommended lane configurations. If signalization is warranted by the traffic signal warrants outlined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), a warrant analysis shall also be conducted as a part of the traffic impact study. If a traffic signal is warranted, the warrant package in the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet detailing the signal design and phasing plans. The estimated cost associated with implementing all such mitigation measures shall be provided in the traffic impact study. The traffic impact study may take into account any city/county/state-approved roadway, traffic signalization and other improvements in determining mitigation measures and providing recommendations. 
(v)  Alternative transportation. Alternative transportation (sidewalk, bicycle, transit) needed as a result of the study, shall be identified. 
(w)  References. A listing of all technical documents and resources cited or consulted in preparing the traffic impact study. 
(x)  Technical appendix. Relevant technical information, including but not limited to: copies of raw traffic count data used in the analysis, calculation sheets and/or computer software output for all LOS and V/C calculations in the analysis, and warrant worksheets for signals, turn lanes, signal phasing, etc. used in the analysis. 
K.  Additional technical specifications. The director of transportation planning is further authorized to promulgate and require the use of additional technical specifications for conducting traffic impact studies, which shall be consistent with analysis methods included in the most recent Highway Capacity Manual, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and/or Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development: A Recommended Practice (Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1991), as may be amended or republished from time-to-time. 
L.  Costs and fees. The county assumes no liability for any costs or time delays (either direct or consequential) associated with the preparation and review of traffic impact studies. There shall be no application review fee for a traffic impact study. 
M.  Submittal and review of study. The applicant for the proposed development or the qualified professional shall submit one (1) electronic copy of the traffic impact study and technical appendix, three (3) paper copies of the traffic impact study and one (1) paper copy of the technical appendix to the development plan review director. The development plan review director shall transmit the electronic copy, two (2) paper copies of the traffic impact study and the paper copy of the technical appendix to the director of transportation planning, who may at his or her discretion submit copies of the report to applicable review agencies which may include the Georgia Department of Transportation, the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority, an adjacent local jurisdiction and/or metropolitan planning organization or regional development center. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of a traffic impact study, the director of transportation shall review all calculations and analyses and determine if they are complete, reasonable, understandable, consistent and fully explained. The conclusions presented in the traffic impact study shall be consistent with and supported by the data, calculations and analyses in the report. Calculations, graphs, tables, data and/or analysis results that are contrary to good common sense or not consistent with and supported by the data will not be accepted. In such events, the director of transportation shall return the traffic impact study to the development applicant for correction. 
N.  Recommendations for mitigation of impacts. Within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of a completed traffic impact study, the departments of transportation and transportation planning shall complete his or her review of the study and submit to the development plan review department director or his/her designee all recommendations for mitigation measures as stated in the traffic impact study and include any interpretations or recommended conditions of approving the development proposal that will mitigate traffic impacts of the proposed development. 
O.  Determination of project and system improvements. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the director of transportation planning with regard to the traffic impacts of the development proposal, the transportation planning director and department of transportation engineering staff will determine which mitigation measures constitute project improvements and/or system improvements. The director of transportation planning, with the assistance of the planning and zoning service division director and public works division director will as necessary determine the proportion of the cost of such improvement(s) that can reasonably be attributed to the development as a project or system improvement. 
P.  Conditions Of Development Approval For Project Improvements. Upon the determination of project improvements needed to mitigate the traffic impacts of the development proposal as provided in section 08.02.17 of this Code, the development plan review director and/or assigned staff member shall require as part of the final development plans that the mitigation measures and roadway improvements be by the developer as conditions of approval of the development proposal. 
Q.  System improvements. The transportation planning director shall include system improvement recommendations in the conditions for approval of the development plan. In the case of system improvements, the applicant shall have the following options: 
(a)  The applicant may voluntarily agree to pay for the cost of providing the system improvements, or a pro-rated share of the cost of said system improvements that are reasonably attributed to the subject development, as determined by the county. 
(b)  If the mitigation measure is a system improvement listed in the county's comprehensive transportation plan or SPLOST Program transportation project list, then the applicant may agree to install the system improvement and the county may agree to provide a credit or partial credit for the improvement. 
(c)  The county may subsequently use the traffic impact study for future long range transportation planning efforts and may consider the recommendations of the traffic impact study in a future update of its transportation system plan, capital improvement plan and/or the capital improvement element of the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  The county may find that the proposed development will provide substantial adverse impacts on the transportation system. Mitigation measures may be necessary, if the county is unable to provide adequate transportation facilities within a reasonable amount of time after the impacts of said development would occur. The board of commissioners may reduce the development density or intensity of the development so that the adverse impacts of the development proposal do not degrade transportation facilities below adopted level of service standards. A phasing of the development may be required in a manner that adequate public facilities will be provided publicly or privately, or in cases where such alternatives do not address the adverse impacts, then an application for a development proposal may be denied. 
R.  Appeal. An applicant for a development proposal may appeal a decision of the director of transportation planning or the planning and zoning director in the administration and interpretation of this ordinance to the board of commissioners in accordance with section 12.04.00. 
8.01.03.  Access requirements. 
A.  Requirements for connection to existing street system. 
1.  All proposed development shall provide a street system that is connected to the existing or planned street system as shown in the comprehensive plan and comprehensive transportation plan. All proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned or platted streets. 
2.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be developed or subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions. 
3.  Whenever there exists adjoining the tract to be subdivided a dedicated or platted half-width street or alley, the other half-width shall be platted. 
B.  Frontage on a state highway or arterial street. 
1.  When a tract fronts on a state highway, major arterial, or minor arterial street, a frontage street may be required for access to individual lots. 
2.  All residential lots in a subdivision shall take direct access only from within the subdivision. 
3.  Any access to a state highway shall be consistent with the requirements of the GDOT. 
C.  No approval shall be granted for a subdivision, or subsequent phase or addition to an existing subdivision, unless the property is served by a paved county road, with right-of-way sufficient to meet the requirements of subsection 8.01.05.I. 
D.  Specific access requirements for developments. 
1.  Emergency vehicle access shall be provided to all lots within a subdivision. 
2.  In order to ensure emergency vehicle access, every subdivision with more than fifty (50) lots shall have at least two (2) continuously open points of ingress/egress from the existing street system. 
3.  Access points, whether private commercial/industrial drives or county roadways, shall line up directly across from one another when possible. For driveways/roadways that require an offset, the spacing between drives/roadways, whether on the same side or opposite side of the intersecting roadway shall be required to have the minimum centerline to centerline spacing: Thirty (30) mph or less → one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, thirty-five (35) mph → one hundred fifty (150) feet, forty (40) mph → one hundred eighty-five (185) feet, forty-five (45) mph → two hundred thirty (230) feet, fifty (50) mph two hundred seventy-five (275) feet, fifty-five (55) mph → three hundred fifty (350) feet. For intersecting roadways that are not classified as collector or above and have posted speed limits thirty (30) mph or less, private commercial/industrial driveways may be allowed to have a reduced offset requirement at HCDOT's discretion. (Source: GDOT Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control). 
4.  Where a subdivision is providing two (2) or more connections to the existing street system pursuant to subsection 8.01.03.D.2., the requirement for two (2) points of ingress/egress is met. The requirement for access shall not be satisfied by a stub-out to a future, planned, or platted street that has not been constructed. 
5.  A subdivision on a single, dead-end street, containing twenty (20) or fewer lots shall not be required to provide two (2) points of ingress/egress as otherwise required in paragraph D.2., above. 
6.  Where a subdivision is allowed one (1) point of access pursuant to subsection 8.01.03.D.2., that entrance street shall be designed with a three (3) lane divided entrance street, as shown in Figure 8.3. The right turn lane shall be required to have a seventy-five-foot radius to provide needed lateral separation between two (2) cars exiting at the same time. 
E.  Limitations on residential curb cuts. Within any residential zoning district (see subsection 8.01.03.D.3. for other driveway spacing requirements) where the lowering or cutting away of any curbs for purposes of ingress and egress is required, such curb cut shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Any parcel of property with frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet on any one (1) street shall be allowed only one (1) combined entrance and exit. 
2.  Any parcel of property with frontage of one hundred (100) feet to 200 feet on any one (1) street shall be allowed no more than two (2) combined entrances and exits. 
3.  Any parcel of property with frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet on any one (1) street shall be permitted additional entrances or exits after showing of actual requirements of convenience and necessity and upon approval of the HCDOT. 
4.  At street intersections, no curb cut shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the intersections of two (2) curb lines or such lines extended, or within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of two (2) property lines extended. When a culvert is required it shall receive approval from the county DOT. 
5.  The distance between any two (2) curb cuts on the same side of the street and located on one (1) property shall be not less than ten (10) feet. Curb cut distance shall be measured between the points of tangency of the curb return radii and the established curb line of the abutting street. 
6.  All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least two (2) feet from any property line. 
7.  The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed forty (40) feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
8.  The maximum width of any curb cut including curb returns shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 
9.  The sum of the two (2) curb return radii for any one (1) curb cut shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
8.01.04.  Joint access driveways and cross access easements. Joint access driveways and cross access easements shall be required in corridor overlay districts, interchange activity center zoning districts, and rural neighborhood commercial development areas according to the following provisions: 
A.  Adjacent commercial or office properties shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites through a system of joint use driveways and cross access easements as shown in Figure 8.4. The design of the joint or cross access area shall incorporate the following: 
1.  A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation; 
2.  Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive; and 
3.  Sufficient separation between side street access to the property and the major road to ensure safety. 
B.  In order to ensure continuous availability of access to all properties, all property owners shall: 
1.  Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive; 
2.  Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the thoroughfare shall be dedicated to the county and pre-existing driveways shall be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveways; and 
3.  Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners. 
8.01.05.  Design and construction standards for streets. 
A.  Location. 
1.  The location, arrangement, extent, width, and grade of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and the transportation system plan, and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The layout of a subdivision shall conform to the requirements and design principles described in this ULDC. 
2.  The location of all streets and roads shall conform to the comprehensive plan and the transportation system plan. Provision shall be made in developments for the construction of streets at locations shown in the comprehensive plan and transportation system plan. 
3.  Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes any part of a major arterial, minor arterial, major collector, or minor collector street designated on the comprehensive plan or transportation system plan, such part of said street shall be installed by the applicant in the location and at the full width indicated by the functional classification for right-of-way and pavement widths indicated in this ULDC. 
B.  Design and construction standards for curb and gutter. 
1.  Curbs shall be required in all residential subdivisions. 
2.  Curbs shall be required for streets in commercial and industrial subdivisions. 
3.  Curbs in all subdivisions shall be L-back curbs twenty-four (24) inches in overall width, six (6) inches thick, and shall have an eighteen (18) inch gutter. Rollback curbs may be installed in the R-3, R-4 or R-5 zoning districts. 
4.  Curb and gutter immediately adjacent to the major travel lane along roadways with a posted speed limit of forty (40) miles per hour or forty-five (45) miles per hour shall be L-back curbs thirty (30) inches in overall width, six (6) inches thick, and shall have a twenty-four (24) inch gutter. The curb and gutter shall be per GDOT Standard 9032B. 
5.  All curbs shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. 
6.  Curbs shall be designed to provide handicapped access at street intersections, wherever sidewalks are constructed. 
C.  Street grade standards. 
1.  Grades on major and minor arterials shall not exceed five (5) percent and grades on local residential streets shall not exceed twelve (12) percent. 
2.  All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves which adhere to the design criteria as set forth by the more restrictive of the 1990 or 2004 AASHTO Guide, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
D.  [Radius of horizontal curves.] The radius of horizontal curves on local residential streets within a subdivision shall be no less than two hundred (200) feet. The horizontal radius for collector and arterial streets or any streets with a design speed of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour shall comply with the latest version of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards. The radius of horizontal curves on local commercial and industrial streets within a subdivision shall be no less than three hundred (300) feet. 
E.  Street intersection standards. 
1.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. 
2.  In residential subdivisions no intersection shall be at an angle of less than eighty (80) degrees or more than one hundred (100) degrees. 
3.  Street intersections in commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be at an angle of not less than ninety (90) degrees, if at all possible. At HCDOT's discretion, street intersection angle may be allowed to be between eighty (80) degrees and one hundred (100) degrees. 
4.  The minimum curb radius at street intersections shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in residential subdivisions. For streets/roadways to have a dual lane exit, the exit curb radius shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet. Where a county collector or an arterial roadway intersects with another county collector or arterial roadway the minimum radii at the intersection shall be fifty (50) feet. 
5.  The minimum curb radius of street intersections for industrial and commercial subdivisions shall be fifty (50) feet. For commercial/industrial streets/roadways to have a dual lane exit, the exit curb radius shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet. 
6.  Pedestrian ramps shall be designed for all intersections in accordance with standard drawings for subdivisions and residential developments designed to include sidewalks and shall meet the minimum standards in of the Georgia Accessibility Code, Chapter 120-3-20 of The Rules and Regulations of The Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. The curb shall be de-pressed to accommodate future installations at the same time as the curb. 
7.  Interior subdivision street intersections shall have a minimum centerline offset of at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet when not aligned directly across from one another. See subsection 8.01.03.D.3 for requirements of intersection offsets on roadways with posted speed limits over thirty (30) mph. 
F.  [Minimum tangent lengths.] The minimum tangent lengths on roadways with superelevation shall be governed by the minimum runoff and runout lengths necessary to adequately transition the superelevation rates required for the curvature based on the design speed and maximum allowable superelevation rate of the roadway. Design speeds, typical sections of roadway, maximum superelevation rates, and other roadway design items are to be set by HCDOT on an individual roadway basis. The minimum tangent lengths on commercial and industrial subdivision streets is one hundred (100) feet. 
G.  [Dead end street.] Local streets designed to have one (1) end permanently closed and not connected with any existing street, proposed future street, or not intended to extend to the property line of an adjacent tract, shall be no longer than seven (7) times the lot width required by the underlying zoning district, unless necessary due to the topographic or other physical conditions of the property. 
1.  Permanent dead-end streets shall be joined by a cul-de-sac with a paved turnaround having an outside diameter of eighty (80) feet (40-foot radius) and a right-of-way of at least one hundred ten (110) feet diameter. Dead-end streets designed to be permanent and that exceed more than eight hundred (800) feet in length may be required to have a cul-de-sac turn around midway between the entrance intersection and the end of the street to provide maneuvering for emergency vehicles, when the dead-end street is the only street in a subdivision. 
2.  Stub streets which are intended to provide access for future development within a tract of land or adjacent tracts shall be required to have a temporary turnaround area having a diameter of at least eighty (80) feet, consisting of six (6) inches of graded aggregate base. 
3.  For subdivisions with a temporary turnaround, it shall be required of the applicant to provide a letter of credit equal to the cost of permanent cul-de-sac construction, in accordance with the standards of section 12.02.13. 
H.  [Alleys.] Alleys may be provided at the rear of lots in residential, commercial, and industrial subdivisions. 
I.  Right-of-way and pavement width standards. 
Table 8.01.05. Right-of-way and Pavement Width Standards 

 
* The county DOT may require additional right-of-way and pavement widths in specific situations. Roadways with medians and/or additional laneage will require extra right-of-way and pavement widths. 
† Roadways with posted speed limits of forty (40) mph or forty-five (45) mph will require thirty-inch curb and gutter. 
J.  Additional street system requirements for major subdivisions or commercial/industrial development. 
1.  Private streets are permissible and shall meet and adhere to all county standards. Every subdivision with private streets shall have a mandatory homeowners' association. 
2.  Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if needed to meet the minimum street right-of-way requirements. 
3.  Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision. 
4.  Where it is determined to be practical to require the dedication of the additional half when adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted to create a full width right-of-way serving the adjoining tracts of land. 
5.  Any subdivision or development which has an entrance onto a state highway, major arterial, minor arterial, or collector county road shall provide lanes for deceleration, ingress, and egress. Design requirements of the GDOT shall be met on state roads and design requirements of the county DOT shall be met on county roads. 
6.  Any subdivision or development which has an entrance onto a major arterial, minor arterial, or collector roadway shall be required to design and construct a left turn lane improvement if the criteria is met as stipulated in Chapter 4 of the GDOT Regulation for Driveway and Encroachment Control. The developer will also be responsible for acquisition of right-of-way as well as for the relocation of utilities. 
7.  The names of proposed streets shall not duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the word street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc., in the naming of the street. 
K.  [No parking.] No parking areas shall be established for the use of fire equipment and emergency vehicles to ensure access to the premises in cases of emergency. Said areas shall be marked "Fire Lane-No Parking." The fire lane areas shall comply with provisions of the Henry County Code of Public Safety. 
8.01.06.  Construction requirements for residential, industrial, and commercial subdivision streets. The grading, base, and pavement for street construction shall be as follows: 
A.  Grading. All streets shall be graded to the elevations shown on the approved construction plans. 
1.  The contractor may begin clearing and grubbing the project after: 
a.  A development permit has been issued by the county; 
b.  A pre-construction conference has been held, the division director or designee duly notified; and 
c.  All required silt and erosion control measures have been installed and approved. 
2.  Clearing and grubbing. 
a.  All trees, stumps, logs, roots, grass, weeds, poles, and other objectionable matter shall be cleared and grubbed from within the construction limits of the project. 
b.  A thirty-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained on all property lines prior to submission of construction plans. 
c.  No rubbish or other material resulting from the clearing and grubbing of the roadway shall be buried at the site. 
d.  If burning is permitted, all burn pits shall be located outside of the roadway construction limits. After burning, the pit shall be cleared out. A county inspection is required prior to backfilling and must be shown on the final plat. 
3.  Excavation. 
a.  All grading operations shall be planned and executed by the contractor in such a manner as to provide suitable subgrade material for the roadway with the top twelve (12) inches compacted to one hundred (100) percent maximum dry density, ninety-five (95) percent below the top. 
b.  In areas where the material in place is not suitable for subgrades, these areas shall be undercut a minimum of twelve (12) inches and backfilled with suitable material. 
c.  All rock and boulders in the roadbed shall be excavated and the space backfilled to the correct grade with suitable material. 
d.  Any stones, broken rock, or boulders resulting from the grading of the roadway may not be placed in any roadway fill area except when approved by the division director or designee and then under his supervision. 
e.  During the construction of the roadway on a day-to-day basis, the roadbed edges shall be kept lower than the center and the grading shall be done so that the surfaces of the excavated areas and fill shall be kept reasonably smooth and well drained. Adequate surface ditches shall be cut at the tops of cut slopes, extending to each end of the cuts in order to carry the water from the side hill. Side ditches or gutters emptying from cuts to fill areas shall be turned outward so as to prevent erosion of the fill slopes. 
4.  Placement of fill. 
a.  Fill construction shall not begin until all clearing and grubbing of the fill area has been completed. 
b.  All depressions in the ground shall be filled level with the adjacent surface using suitable material and compacted to the approximate density of the surrounding soil before placement of the fill is begun. 
c.  The entire area upon which fill is to be placed shall be plowed, scarified, and finely broken up to a depth of a minimum of six (6) inches. 
d.  Before the placement of fill material is begun, all loosened soil shall be compacted the approximate density of the underlying soil. 
e.  Where a depth of fill and surfacing is three (3) feet or less, the original ground shall be compacted a minimum twelve (12) inches deep to at least ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum laboratory dry density as determined from representative samples of the material being compacted. 
f.  In areas where layers of organic or other unstable materials exist, the existing ground shall be excavated, for the full width of the fill area, to an underlying stable material. The subgrade thus created shall then be compacted to the approximate density of the underlying material. 
g.  All fill material shall be deposited and spread in uniform horizontal layers, not more than six (6) inches thick, for the full width of the fill area, and these layers shall be kept uniform by the use of graders, bulldozers or other approved equipment. 
h.  Each layer shall be compacted within the range of optimum moisture content necessary to achieve the compaction required. Material containing too much water shall be dried to the correct moisture content. If the material is too dry, water shall be added and uniformly mixed with the soil before it is compacted. 
i.  Fills shall be compacted to at least ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum dry density to within the top twelve (12) inches of the fill. The top twelve (12) inches of the fill shall be compacted to at least one hundred (100) percent of the maximum dry density. 
j.  The entire roadbed shall be scarified and compacted with a sheep's foot or other approved rollers. 
k.  While the work is in progress, contractor shall maintain the surface in a manner so that the excavation, fills, subgrade, base course, and ditches always present a smooth and even surface. 
l.  The contractor shall have available on the job at all times at least one (1) motor patrol grader with adequate power to blade and maintain the roadbed. Suitable scarifiers shall also be available for use whenever necessary. 
5.  Final finishing of roadway. 
a.  After all excavation has been completed and all fills have been placed, the entire road bed surface shall be finally shaped with a grading machine supplemented with hand work whenever required, to secure a smooth surface and uniform cross-section. 
b.  Slopes of cuts and fills shall also be carefully shaped to the true section specified. 
c.  When final shaping is finished, the road surface shall conform accurately to the line, grade and cross section shown of plans, and no roots, sod, grass, stones, or other unsuitable material shall remain in the top twelve (12) inches of the finished roadbed. 
d.  All ditches and drains shall be opened to effectively drain the roadway. 
B.  Placement of curb and gutter. 
1.  After sanitary sewer lines have been installed, all storm drainage in place, and the final finishing of the roadway has been approved by the division director or designee, and the centerline profile has been approved, the installation of the concrete curb and gutter may begin. 
2.  All concrete curb and gutter shall be in accordance with Standard Drawing 3.7.1, available from the county or the county website at www.co.henry.ga.us. 
3.  Any curb and gutter which does not conform to a true section, texture, line, and grade shall be removed and replaced as directed by the division director or designee. 
4.  Water lines shall be installed after installation of the curb and gutter. 
C.  Subgrade. 
1.  Before placing any pavement base the entire surface of the subgrade shall be plowed, harrowed, and mixed to a depth of at least six (6) inches. If a subgrade stabilization material is required it shall be incorporated into the subgrade at this time. 
2.  After the material has been thoroughly mixed the subgrade shall be brought into a proper line and grade and compacted to one hundred (100) percent of maximum dry density just prior to placing the base material. 
3.  The centerline profile shall conform to the established elevations with an acceptable tolerance of one-half (½) inch. 
4.  The acceptance crown tolerance shall be one-half (½) inch. 
D.  Base construction. 
1.  The division director or designee shall be notified twenty-four (24) hours prior to the placing of any base material. 
2.  The division director or designee may authorize the placing of the base material after all equipment necessary for the proper construction of road base is on the project and the subgrade has been brought to the proper line, grade and crown, and compacted to the required density. 
3.  The division director or designee shall check the completed base course after the base material has been placed and compacted to the required density. All areas found to be deficient shall be marked and corrected before any asphalt pavement is placed. Areas where the crown is found to exceed that which is specified or the exposed edge of the concrete gutter is less than the minimum depth required, shall be reshaped and rolled to obtain the required cross-section. 
4.  After the compacted material has been approved, field tests shall be taken by the field contractor and development inspector, or by a professional engineer as directed by the division director or designee to determine the thickness of the constructed base course. Tests shall be taken at four hundred (400) feet intervals alternating between each lane and center of roadway. Measurements shall be taken per GDT-42, Method of Test for Measurement of Thickness of Bases and Subbases. Areas found to be deficient in thickness shall be corrected as directed by the division director or designee. No asphalt course shall be placed until deficiencies in base have been adequately addressed. 
5.  A copy of all delivery tickets for the graded aggregate base material shall be furnished prior to placing any asphaltic concrete paving material. A shortage in the base material used shall require that the asphaltic concrete surface course thickness be increased. 
6.  All work and materials shall be in accordance with the pertinent Graded Aggregate Construction sections of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications," latest edition. 
E.  Soil cement. 
1.  A soil cement base may be used to improve the subgrade, but shall not be used as a substitute for base construction. 
F.  Paving. 
1.  The contractor shall begin the construction of the asphaltic concrete pavement upon approval of the road base by the division director or designee. 
2.  All asphaltic concrete material and construction shall be in accordance with the "hot mix asphaltic concrete construction" sections of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications," latest edition. 
3.  The division director or designee shall check the cross section of the finished pavement. Any area found to be deficient shall be marked and a record of deficiencies made by the division director or designee. 
4.  If, in the opinion of the division director or designee, the extent of deficiencies will impair the performance of the pavement, he shall direct that an overlay of a minimum thickness of one (1) inch be placed before the roadway is opened to traffic. 
5.  A copy of the delivery tickets for the asphaltic concrete material used shall be furnished to the division director or designee at the time of completion of the work. If the delivery tickets indicate a shortage in the material used from the quantity estimated the division director or designee may require a minimum one (1) inch overlay of the streets. 
6.  As mentioned in subsection 8.01.06.D.4, the GAB (Base) thickness is to be measured and accepted by the county prior to placement of any asphalt course. The applicant shall have core tests made to verify the thickness and compaction of the two-inch asphalt pavement course. The minimum core diameter shall be such that compaction of the sample can be determined in the lab and subsequent data supplied to the division director or designee. The compaction of the course shall be required to meet GDOT specifications per the asphalt mix placed. If a two (2) course asphalt section is required, the cores for the binder layer shall be cut, reviewed, and approved by the division director or designee prior to placement of the topping lift. Also, in the event that a two (2) course asphalt section is required, the cores for the topping lift, if between one and one-half (1½) inch and one and one-quarter (1¼) inch in thickness, shall be made to determine the thickness only. All cores shall be made on four hundred (400) feet intervals, alternating between each lane and center of roadway. If these cores indicate a deficiency in thickness or compaction of the asphalt pavement, an overlay shall be required when the following deficiencies occur: 
a.  When the number of cores deficient in thickness within the allowable one-quarter (¼) of an inch tolerance, or deficient in compaction, exceeds thirty-five (35) percent of the total cores taken on one (1) street. 
b.  When two (2) or more consecutive tests show a deficiency of more than one-quarter (¼) of an inch allowable tolerance or a deficiency in compaction. When a core shows a deficiency in excess of the allowable tolerance or compaction additional cores shall be taken to delineate the area of the deficient thickness/compaction. 
7.  The applicant shall correct any deficiency with an overlay extending a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet beyond the outer limits of the deficient area for the full width of the street. Smooth, neat joints shall be saw cut normal to the roadway for full depth of asphalt pavement, removing the original pavement for a minimum of ten (10) feet at each end of the overlay. The thickness of the overlay shall be determined by the depth of the deficient area and shall not be less than one and one-quarter (1¼) inch in compacted thickness. The type of material used in the overlay shall be specified by the division director or designee. 
G.  Shoulder and drainage improvements. After the paving has been inspected and approved, the pavement edges or behind the curb and gutter shall be backfilled and compacted and the ditches and back slopes properly graded, shaped, seeded and mulched. An eighty (80) percent stand of grass shall be obtained. All swales and ditches excavated below required depth shall be backfilled and compacted to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum dry density. 
H.  [Compliance with minimum standards.] Road design and construction for residential subdivisions shall comply with the minimum standards shown below in subection 8.01.06.I. Acceleration and deceleration lane construction shall comply with the standards set forth in subsection 8.01.06.K. For roadways with more than one hundred fifty (150) lots of contributing traffic a pavement design is to be done and submitted to HCDOT for review. The GDOT Asphalt Pavement Design program is an accepted method for the pavement design submittal for roadways with more than one hundred fifty (150) lots of contributing traffic. 
I.  Table of residential subdivision street construction standards. 
Table 8.01.06(I). Residential Subdivision Street Roadway Standards 

 
J.  [Design and construction requirements.] The design and construction requirements for subdivision developments for industrial, commercial, or office use and urban streets which are to be county arterial roads shall: 
1.  Be required to have concrete curb and gutter along each side in accordance with Henry County Construction Standard No. 3.7.1. 
2.  Comply with the minimum standards shown below in subsection 8.01.06.K. 
K.  Table of industrial, commercial, and office subdivision street construction standards. 
Table 8.01.06(K). Industrial, Commercial, and Office Subdivision Street Construction Standards 

 
8.01.07.  Improvements to existing streets and rights-of-way for residential, commercial and/or industrial developments. 
A.  Existing unpaved road. Any unpaved road upon which a development has frontage and access shall be widened and paved, according to the functional class of the road, as set forth in subsection 8.01.05.I. along the frontage* of the development to the nearest intersection with a paved county road. The minimum right-of-way required according to subsection 8.01.05.I. shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the development back to the nearest intersection in which the roadway is to be improved. In addition to the design, construction, and right-of-way acquisition, the developer shall also be responsible for relocation of utilities. Where a development has frontage, but does not provide access to an unpaved road, the developer shall preserve right-of-way along the development's frontage for future improvements to the roadway. 
* - In instances where improving a roadway to the limits of the frontage causes for an undesirable termination point for the improved roadway (i.e., alignment issues, topographic issues, etc.) the improvement shall be required to be further extended in order to provide for an acceptable tie-in to the existing roadway. 
B.  Existing paved road. For any existing paved two (2) lane county road upon which a development has frontage and access that is less than twenty (20) feet in width and classified as a local roadway, or less than twenty-two (22) feet in width and classified as a collector roadway or greater, the roadway shall be widened relative to county specifications (see section 8.01.05.I. and tables 8.01.06.I. and K.) along the limits of the site's frontage. Widening of the roadway shall include improvements to the shoulder, ditch, and back-slope to meet county DOT Standards. Depending on the condition of the existing roadway (PACE's score of less than seventy (70)), there may be requirements for additional improvements to the overall roadway width along the site's frontage, such as improvements to the typical pavement section and resurfacing. For any roadway less than nineteen (19) feet in width, the roadway shall be required to be widened, possible typical pavement section improvement, placement of shoulder, ditch, and slopes to meet county DOT standards and resurfacing along the site's frontage, as well as outside of the site frontage limits up to the nearest roadway meeting Henry County standards as determined by the county DOT. The minimum right-of-way required according to section 8.01.05(I) shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the development. 
8.01.08.  Visibility at intersections. 
A.  Corner lots. On corner lots within all zoning districts, no fence, shrubbery or other obstruction shall be placed within the sight line triangles that blocks or disrupts the line of sight based on a driver eye height of three and one-half (3.5) feet located fourteen (14) feet from edge of travel lane (when there is a deceleration lane, the driver eye shall be located fourteen (14) feet from edge of decel lane) and an object height of three and one-half (3.5) feet located in the center of each respective lane. The minimum distances required are shown in Table 8.01.08(B)(2). However, streetsigns, streetlights, mailboxes, or similar shall be permitted within the sight line triangles (see Figure 8.5 below). 
B.  Intersection sight distance for all streets. 
1.  Curb cuts shall be placed so as to provide for the minimum intersection sight distance based on the intersecting road's posted speed limit. The intersection sight distance is measured using a driver-eye height of three and one-half (3.5) feet and an object height of three and five-tenths (3.5) feet with the driver eye being located fourteen (14) feet beyond the edge of the travel lane (when there is a deceleration lane, the driver eye shall be located fourteen (14) feet from edge of decel lane) and an object height of three and one-half (3.5) feet located in the center of each respective oncoming lane. 
2.  Table of minimum intersection sight distances relative to design speed posted on streets are: 
Table 8.01.08(B). Intersection Sight Distance for 2-lane Roadway 

 
Source: 1990 AASHTO Guide, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
C.  Stopping sight distance for all streets. 
1.  Minimum street centerline stopping sight distance shall be designed relative to the design speed of the street and shall be measured above the street centerline using a driver eye height of three and one-half (3.5) feet and an object height of six (6) inches. 
2.  Table of minimum centerline stopping sight distances relative to design speed posted on streets are: 
Table 8.01.08(C). Stopping Sight Distance 

 
Source: 1990 and 2004 AASHTO Guide, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
As info concerning the above minimum crest "k" values, where there is an intersecting street on or near the vertical curve, the minimum "k" value may not provide for the minimum intersection sight distance requirement. If this is the case, the "k" value for the crest curve will need to be increased in order to obtain the minimum intersection sight distance required. 
8.01.09.  Pedestrian access and facilities requirements. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet in width and four (4) inches in thickness and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. Sidewalks shall be installed no closer than two (2) feet to the back of curb line and shall not be constructed over any underground gas, electric, communications, or water and sewer utilities. Sidewalks and curbs, at street intersections, shall be designed to permit handicapped access (see construction standard detail for location of sidewalks). Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of streets within all commercial, industrial or residential subdivisions and all mixed use developments. 
B.  Sidewalks shall be installed by the builder on lots upon which a dwelling is being constructed before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. All sidewalks along common areas, including pond lots, amenity areas, open space, and lots containing existing homes or lots that are unbuildable, shall be installed by the developer before the end of the three-year maintenance period. After the three-year maintenance period has expired, any broken curbing and sidewalk will be repaired by the builder before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
C.  Twelve (12) months from the completion of at least ninety (90) percent of the dwellings in any subdivision, or phase of any subdivision, Henry County reserves the right to install sidewalks along any areas not yet containing sidewalks. The cost of construction and installation shall be repaid to Henry County via a lien placed on the adjacent property upon which the sidewalk fronts. 
D.  The provisions established in this section may be applied to any project currently under review or under bond as of the date of adoption of this Code. 
8.01.10.  Street names and signs requirements. 
A.  Street names. 
1.  All proposed street names within the county for new roads or roads within commercial, industrial, or residential subdivisions shall be approved by the division director or designee during the preliminary plat review process or prior to recording of the road and its right-of-way deed. 
2.  Any request to change the name of an existing road shall be submitted to the division director or designee for review and approval, with the board of commissioners having final approval of the change. 
B.  Street signs. 
1.  The county DOT shall determine the need and location of street signs within a subdivision. The location of the street signs shall be determined during the review of the preliminary plat. 
2.  The county's standard steel street posts or wooden four-inch by four-inch posts with horizontal reflectorized street name plates with four-inch letters shall be furnished and installed by county DOT. 
3.  The cost of street signs and their installation shall be paid by the applicant at a fee determined by the county DOT. All funds collected for these signs shall be deposited into the county general fund account. 
4.  The required fee shall be paid by the applicant when submittal of a final plat is made to the county. 
5.  The request for an invoice and the ordering of signs shall come from the division director or designee to the county DOT. 
8.01.11.  Street light requirements. 
A.  In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society (RP-8-00), as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1993), as from time to time amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the county. 
B.  Approval of lighting plan. 
1.  A lighting plan, which may be prepared by the streetlight provider, shall be provided to the division director or designee for the erection, construction, or installation of street light fixtures or equipment upon which the illumination thereof falls upon public rights-of-way. This shall include security lights of all kinds and nature. 
2.  Lighting plans shall be submitted with the final plat and any additions. 
3.  Plans shall demonstrate how the proposed lighting meets the standards of this section and include a drawing showing the exact location of streetlights. 
4.  No lighting shall be installed or operated without approval of the division director or designee. 
C.  Street light fixtures or equipment shall be erected, constructed, or installed by the applicant in such a manner to insure that the lateral light distribution which causes a glare does not inhibit the users of the rights-of-way from safely traversing and using the rights-of-way. 
D.  Streetlight requirements for new development. 
1.  Streetlights shall be provided in new subdivisions, except in the RA and R-1 zoning districts, where new streets are required to be dedicated to the county or which allow lot access to existing county streets. 
2.  The developer of residential subdivisions shall install streetlights with underground wiring. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to coordinate the installation of the streetlights with the appropriate utility and the county consistent with the standards contained in this ULDC. 
3.  Each property owner shall be assessed a rate based on the total cost of annual lighting charge within the district divided by the number of properties within the district. Unit cost of street lighting charges shall be based on fees provided by electric utility companies of both overhead and underground installation. 
4.  The rates or charges for street light service shall constitute assessments on the property so served. Those assessments shall be added to tax bills at the end of each year and shall constitute a lien upon the property. Said lien shall have the same priority as tax assessments and an execution may issue for the purpose of enforcing the lien including foreclosure and/or judicial sale. 
E.  Streetlight requirements in existing residential development. 
1.  Individuals owning real property in an existing residential area desiring to install streetlights may apply with the county to establish a street light district. 
2.  The application shall be supported by a petition signed by property owners representing more than fifty-one (51) percent of the property owners in the district which is sought to be established. 
3.  Upon receipt of a complete streetlight application, the division director or designee will contact the utility provider to request a layout, price, and contract, if necessary, for the streetlights. 
F.  Up to three (3) additional streetlights may be added to an existing street light district by the division director or designee. If four (4) or more additional streetlights are required, the request must follow the procedure in [paragraph] E.2. above. 
8.01.12.  Drainage standards for streets—Placement, location, and design. 
A.  The size, length, and location of all surface drainage pipe or structures shall be shown on all preliminary plats. All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property or through lots in the subdivision shall be extended to ten (10) feet from the rear property line. Stormwater shall be released into a channel or swale without causing scouring, erosion, or resulting in sedimentation of the receiving channel. The outlet channel shall include structural and vegetative measures to assure nonerosive velocities of stormwater. 
B.  Installations, backfilling, and compaction around drainage pipes shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications. All pipes shall have a minimum cover of eighteen (18) inches from the bottom of the road base, and head walls or inlet basins constructed at the ends of the pipes. 
C.  The design of drainage structures shall be based on recognized hydrological formulae. 
D.  Piped collection systems for public streets (catch basins, inlets, cross drains, longitudinal piping), shall be designed for the 50-year storm. 
E.  Road culverts, which carry live streams, shall be RCP and off-site drainage shall be designed for the 100-year storm and the developer's engineer is to provide a no-rise certification letter. 
F.  Cross drain pipes within the public rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed at or near a ninety-degree angle with the roadway centerline. Where a slight skew is necessary, the pipe shall be placed within an eighty- to one-hundred-degree angle with the roadway centerline. 
G.  Longitudinal pipes along a curved section of roadway shall be located on the inside of the curve to avoid pipe beneath the roadway footprint. In the event that the longitudinal pipe needs to be along the outside of the curve the pipe shall be wholly located outside the limits of the curb and gutter by use of additional junction boxes. For pipe at a cul-de-sac location, all pipe shall be wholly located outside of the footprint of the curb and gutter that encircles the cul-de-sac. 
8.01.13.  Drainage standard for streets—Materials and installation. 
A.  Standard specifications. 
1.  All of the materials, methods of the construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to stormwater conveyance facility construction shall conform to the most recent Standard Specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation (Georgia DOT). 
2.  Allowable pipe material for all applications in drainage easements and public street rights-of-way, except as specified below, are aluminum-coated (Type 2) corrugated steel pipe (ASP), corrugated aluminum alloy pipe, smooth-lined corrugated polyethylene pipe (HDPE), or reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). Usage is summarized in the table below titled pipe material alternatives. Allowable pipe materials are indicated by an "X" in the Table 8.01.13. 
3.  For roads constructed with public funds, either wholly or in part, or roads classified as major thoroughfares, materials which meet the Georgia DOT design standards shall be used unless an alternative is specifically approved by the Henry County Department of Transportation. 
4.  Only reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall be used for all dams nine (9) feet or more in height with an impounding capacity of twenty (20) acre-feet or more unless the Georgia Safe Dams Program requires another material. 
5.  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall be used under non-local roads when the ADT is greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) vehicles per day (vpd). Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) or smooth-lined corrugated high density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe shall be used under nonlocal roads when the ADT is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) vpd. 
The public works division may approve an alternative pipe material. 
B.  Minimum pipe and pipe coating requirements. The type of pipe material used shall be in accordance with subsection 8.01.13.A, standard specifications. 
1.  Reinforced concrete pipe shall be in not less than eight-foot joint lengths. All joints shall be bell and spigot type, with a rubber gasket conforming to ASTM C-443. Pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AASHTO M-170 and/or ASTM C-76. Class of pipe and wall thickness shall be in accordance with 1030-D, Georgia DOT specification, Table No. 1. 
2.  Aluminum-coated (Type 2) steel pipe shall comply with AASHTO M-274 for the coating and AASHTO M-36 for the pipe fabrication. Aluminum alloy pipe shall comply with AASHTO M-196 for material and fabrication. 
3.  See the standard drawings for the minimum acceptable combinations of gages, diameters, and corrugation configurations for corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and pipe arches, and for corrugated aluminum-coated steel pipe and pipe arches. 
4.  Each end of each pipe section, to be joined by a coupling band, shall have a minimum of two (2) annular corrugations. Coupling bands shall be so constructed to lap on an equal portion of each of the pipe sections to be joined. The connecting bands shall have a minimum of two (2) annular corrugations and fully engage, over the entire pipe periphery, one (1) corrugation on each pipe. Bands shall be fabricated from the same material as the pipe. The minimum band gauges for aluminum pipe and aluminized pipe shall be as specified in AASHTO M-196, Section 19, and AASHTO M-36, Section 9, respectively. 
5.  Gaskets may be required as determined by the county in the field, and shall be either sleeve type or O-ring type and shall meet the requirements for gaskets as specified in AASHTO M-36, Section 9.3. 
C.  [Structural plate drainage structures.] Structural plate drainage structures shall conform to the following specifications: 
1.  Corrugated aluminum alloy structural plate pipe, pipe arches and arches shall consist of aluminum plates and galvanized bolts and nuts of the size, shape and thickness as shown on the approved plans. These structures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-219. 
D.  Smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe. 
1.  This specification applies to high density polyethylene corrugated pipe with an integrally formed smooth interior (HDPE). HDPE pipe manufacturers shall be approved by the public works division. 
2.  This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-294, Type S. 
3.  Joints shall be as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the county. Connections shall create a soil tight joint at a minimum and shall use a rubber gasket, which conforms to ASTM F-477. 
4.  Installation shall be in accordance with ASTM Recommended Practice D2321, AASHTO Section 30, or as specified by the county. 
Certification from the manufacturer that the product was manufactured, tested, and supplied in accordance with this specification shall be furnished to the county upon request. 
Table 8.01.13 — Allowable Pipe Use 

 

 
Notes: 
1)  All pipe materials shall meet the minimum requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications Construction of Transportation Systems, most current edition. 
2)  Allow smoothed-lined HDPE, Type S (AASHTO M294) pipe for storm (longitudinal and cross) and side drain applications through 48-inch diameter so long as roadway's ADT is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) vehicles per day. 
E.  Pipe installation. 
1.  [Installation standards.] Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), corrugated aluminum alloy pipe, corrugated aluminum coated steel pipe and smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be installed in accordance with Section 550 of the Georgia DOT Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges. Prior to approval of a final plat, the county may require the submittal of certification from a mandrel testing agency indicating that all installed pipe (other than RCP) does not exceed five-percent deflection. Based on field inspections, video surveillance may be conducted by the county or required by the county on storm drain installations before approval of the final plat or issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If required, video surveillance should be done after completion of all activities that may damage the pipe but prior to placement of base, paving or landscaping over or near the pipe. If video surveillance indicates problems such as pipe deformation, cracking or joint separation, the pipe shall be removed and replaced before approval. 
2.  Bedding. All pipe structures shall be placed on stable earth or fine granular foundation, the characteristics of which would be expected to provide long-term stability. In all live stream pipe installations, in areas of low bearing solid or non-uniform foundations, in area where rock is encountered at the foundation level, or in other locations where conditions warrant, a minimum of six (6) inches of crushed stone bedding is required, (maximum size of stone shall be three-fourths-inch). Geotextiles or geogrids may also be required by the county in problem areas. 


3.  Backfilling. Backfill for CSP, CAP, and HDPE pipe installations shall be constructed using graded aggregate base or crusher run six (6) inches below the bottom of pipe to twelve (12) inches above the pipe crown. Backfill for RCP pipe installations shall be constructed using graded aggregate base or crusher run six (6) inches below the pipe invert to one-quarter (¼) of the pipe diameter. Foundation backfill material shall be used for RCP above one-quarter (¼) of the pipe diameter (if graded aggregate base is not used above the one-quarter (¼) of the pipe diameter) as per Type I or Type II, as specified in sections 812.01 and 812.02 respectively, in Georgia DOT Standard Specifications. These materials shall be placed in layers of not more than six (6) inches loose. Compaction of these materials shall be accomplished by hand tamping or machine tamping. Required compaction levels are as follows: 
4.  [Within street right-of-way.] Backfill within all street rights-of-way shall be compacted to ninety-five (95) percent maximum density, tested using the AASHTO Method T-99. 
5.  [In other areas.] Backfill in all other areas shall be compacted to ninety (90) percent maximum density, tested using the AASHTO Method T-99. 
6.  Construction loads and minimum covers. If drainage pipe is installed prior to the completion of grading, a minimum of four (4) feet of fill should be provided where needed to adequately protect the drainage structure during the land development phase, unless the structure itself is designed to withstand the anticipated live load during construction. 
F.  End finish. 
1.  Headwalls or other end treatments are required on all culverts and at the outlet of all piped collection systems. Where ends of pipe are located within, or near, the right-of-way and are parallel, or nearly parallel, with the roadway, safety end sections shall be required when the posted speed limit is thirty-five (35) mph and over. 
2.  Headwalls are to be precast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings, or poured in place, reinforced concrete with reinforced concrete footings. Precast concrete headwalls for corrugated aluminum coated steel pipe or aluminum alloy pipe shall be made with aluminum coated steel or aluminum alloy pipe stubs. 
3.  End treatments that conform to the slope may be pre-cast concrete end sections; aluminum coated steel or aluminum alloy end sections, masonry, PE end sections, reinforced poured-in-place slope collars, or grouted rip-rap. Concrete and metal flared end sections shall conform to applicable Georgia DOT Standard Drawing 1120, 1122, or Detail D-39. 
G.  Junction boxes and catch basins. Junction boxes and catch basins shall have metal manhole frames and lids for access. 
H.  Other structures. Natural bottom arches and box culverts may be used in accordance with the latest standard specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation. Bottomless culverts shall require that a scour analysis be done by a registered professional engineer in that field to Georgia Department of Transportation Specifications and Standards to ensure the soundness of the proposed structure. 
I.  References. 
Gwinnett County Stormwater Systems and Facilities Installation Standards and Specifications (SSFISS) Chapter 3 — rev07.06 
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 1984. Drainage of Highway Pavements. Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 12. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(18), 6-15-10; Ord. No. 1703, § I, 2-7-17 ) 
Sec. 8.02.00. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
8.02.01.  Purpose and intent. It is the intent of section 8.02.00 to ensure the appropriate location and quantity of off-street parking and loading and to ensure that all developments provide adequate and safe storage and movement of vehicles consistent with good site design principles. 
8.02.02.  Applicability. 
A.  Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a development plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and loading. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and loading facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
B.  Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established, and each addition to a structure shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. 
C.  When an addition is made to a building containing less than the required parking or loading requirements, off-street parking shall be provided for the entire building, based upon the standards in this section. 
D.  No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area, or usability of an existing parking lot or loading space, unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
8.02.03.  Maintenance. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be well maintained. Parking lots and loading areas shall be free of potholes, debris, weeds, broken curbs, and broken wheel stops. 
8.02.04.  Calculation of required parking spaces and loading spaces. 
A.  The table of parking and loading space standards specifies the required minimum number of off-street parking spaces for each listed use. Where the calculation of the required number of spaces results in a fraction, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
B.  Where the unit of measure for determining the number of parking spaces is the number of seats in a facility, the number of seats shall be the maximum occupancy allowed pursuant to building and construction codes. 
C.  When multiple uses occupy a building, or a mixed use development is proposed in separate buildings under unified control, the parking and loading requirement shall be met by each use, unless shared parking is approved according to the standards in section 8.02.08. 
D.  Where a use is not listed in the table of parking and loading space standards, the division director or designee shall determine the appropriate parking and loading standard. The determination shall be based on the standards for similar uses. 
8.02.05.  Parking and loading space standards. 
Table 8.02.05. Parking and Loading Space Standards 

 
8.02.06.  Handicapped accessible parking spaces. 
A.  All uses shall provide parking spaces designated for handicapped access. 
B.  Table of required handicapped parking: 
Table 8.02.06(B). Required Handicapped Parking 

 
C.  Handicapped spaces shall be marked on the pavement and by appropriate signage, both markings to use the universally accepted "Handicapped" symbol. Handicapped spaces shall be located in closest proximity to major building entrances, but in no event shall such spaces be more than one hundred (100) feet from an entrance. 
D.  Ramps shall meet the design standards set forth in the Georgia Accessibility Code Chapter 120-3-20 of The Rules and Regulations of The Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. 
8.02.07.  Design requirements for parking lots, parking spaces, and loading areas. Off-street parking lots, individual parking spaces, loading areas, and loading stalls shall be designed to conform to the following criteria and standards: 
A.  All multiple-family, commercial, and industrial uses shall provide a paved, dust-free surface. The use of approved permeable or pervious pavement materials is encouraged, provided such paving is approved for use by the county engineer. 
B.  All off-street loading stalls shall have access from a public street. 
C.  Loading stalls are not to hinder movement of pedestrians or vehicles over a street, sidewalk, or alley, or to and from an off-street parking area. 
D.  Off-street parking and loading areas that are to be used at night shall include proper illumination for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles, and for security purposes. Lighting shall be located and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
E.  Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows, and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
F.  All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of materials which shall assure a surface resistant to erosion. 
G.  All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. 
H.  The following design standards shall be used to achieve compliance with parking provisions of this chapter. Construction standard drawings for standard parking spaces are available from the division director or designee or the Henry County website at www.co.henry.ga.us. 
Table 8.02.07(H). Parking Space Dimensions 

 
I.  There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
Table 8.02.07(I). Parking Lot Design 

 
J.  The following are the design requirements for off-street loading stalls: 
Table 8.02.07(J). Off-Street Loading Stall Design 

 
8.02.08.  Shared parking arrangements. 
A.  Adjacent uses, multiple uses within a unified development, or establishments with multiple tenants of different uses may provide shared parking facilities. Such shared parking facilities may have a reduced quantity of parking as compared to the sum of parking spaces required for each individual use. 
B.  Where shared parking facilities are proposed, the following standards shall be met: 
1.  There shall be a paved driveway connection between the adjacent developments such that automobiles may move from one (1) parcel or use to the adjacent parcel or use without exiting to the public street. 
2.  There shall be a designated pedestrian connection from all uses to the shared parking facility. 
3.  The owners of developments involved shall execute a cross-access and cross-parking agreement, provided in a recordable instrument, acceptable to Henry County. The agreement shall guarantee the joint use of a specified number of parking spaces. 
4.  The number of spaces in the shared parking facility shall be determined by one (1) of the methods in subsection 8.02.08.C., below. 
C.  The calculation of required spaces in a shared parking facility shall use one (1) of the two (2) methods described below: 
1.  A parking study may be conducted to provide evidence of the combined parking requirements of the proposed uses. 
a.  The study shall be prepared by a professional engineer with documented traffic expertise. 
b.  The study shall include estimates of parking requirements based on professionally accepted data or studies, such as from the Institute of Traffic Engineers, Urban Land Institute, or other sources acceptable to Henry County. 
c.  Parking requirements shall be based on uses that are the same or comparable to the proposed uses. Comparability shall be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location in relationship to other uses and the transportation system. 
d.  Parking requirements shall be based upon peak hours of need for each use proposed to share parking facilities. The hours of maximum, or peak, parking demand of the respective developments shall not overlap. 
e.  The study shall document the source(s) of data used to develop recommendations. 
f.  The study shall document the extent to which transportation system management and alternative forms of transportation (pedestrian and bicycle) reduce the parking requirement. 
g.  The study shall document the availability of off-site parking to meet a portion of the parking requirements. Off-site parking shall not be located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the uses that require parking. The study shall be accompanied by documentation to demonstrate the continued availability of the off-site parking, such as easements or other recordable instruments. 
2.  Shared parking may be determined by the following method: 
a.  Calculate the parking requirement for each proposed use, as set forth in Table 8.02.05. 
b.  Multiply each amount by the corresponding percentages from the table below for each of the five (5) time periods. 
c.  Total the amount of parking for each time period. 
d.  The highest parking requirement shall be the minimum number of spaces required for the shared use facilities. 
Table 8.02.08(C). Shared Parking Demand Calculations 

 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(19), 6-15-10) 
Sec. 8.03.00. - Standards for utility infrastructure. 
8.03.01.  Generally. 
A.  All development shall include adequate provision for utility infrastructure in full compliance with the standards of section 8.03.00. 
B.  All potential utilities shall be identified on the development plan in order to indicate compliance with placement standards set forth in section 8.03.02. 
C.  All construction drawings shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. 
D.  No private utilities (including irrigation system/sprinklers) allowed in county right-of-way. If any are placed within the county right-of-way, Henry County shall not be responsible for any damage to utilities. 
8.03.02.  Placement standards for all utilities. 
A.  The standards for the placement of all utilities are shown in the figures 8-6, 8-7 and 8-8. 
B.  Utilities shall be located within one (1) foot, plus or minus, of the specified plan locations shown in figures 8-6 and 8-7. 
8.03.03.  Potable water system requirements. 
A.  All potable water systems shall comply with the design and construction standards of the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority (HCWSA). 
B.  Extension within subdivisions. The applicant shall be responsible for the material and labor cost of extending water systems within a subdivision as directed and inspected by the HCWSA. 
1.  The extensions of water mains within a subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate hydraulic capacity for future extensions to the surrounding area and shall be connected to existing surrounding water mains to accomplish desirable hydraulic looping. 
2.  Dead-end mains within a subdivision shall be avoided, based on a determination by the HCWSA. Water mains in dead-end streets shall have a fire hydrant installed at the end of the line on a common lot corner according to the standard details provided by HCWSA. 
C.  Hydrants. Hydrants shall be placed to ensure free and clear access from the nearest public right-of-way. No equipment, landscaping, mail boxes, or other structures shall be placed in such a manner as to obstruct clear access from the right-of-way to the fire hydrant. 
8.03.04.  Wastewater system requirements. 
A.  All wastewater systems shall comply with the design and construction standards of the HCWSA. 
B.  Extension within subdivisions. 
1.  The applicant shall be responsible for the material and labor cost of extending wastewater systems within a subdivision as directed and inspected by the HCWSA. 
2.  Where it is anticipated that the HCWSA will extend a trunk or interceptor sewer line adjacent to the subdivision, sewer service lines shall be installed within the subdivision and temporarily plugged or capped at the points of service connection in the proposed lateral or trunk sewer line at individual lot lines in accordance with HCWSA specifications. 
8.03.05.  Other utilities. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for structures in a subdivision or development until all necessary utilities have been installed in full compliance with the design, construction, and placement standards set forth in section 8.03.00. 
B.  Exemptions. The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided that the placement of these facilities complies with the requirement for free and clear access to fire hydrants as set forth in subsection 8.03.03.C. 
1.  Poles used exclusively for street lighting, provided that the street lighting standards set forth in section 8.01.10 are met. 
2.  Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures owned by a utility company crossing over any portion of an area from which overhead wires are allowed. 
3.  Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a bracket or similar device and extending from one (1) location on the building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any street or right-of-way. 
4.  Radio antennae and associated structures and equipment used for furnishing communications service. 
5.  Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric transformer equipment installed above ground, used to distribute communications and electric service in underground systems. 
C.  Electrical substations. Electrical substations are permissible in any zoning district, subject to the standards set forth in section 4.03.05. The utility company shall obtain an easement for these installations. The easement shall be clearly indicated on the preliminary and final plats. 
Sec. 8.04.00. - Standards for stormwater management. 
8.04.01.  Generally. 
A.  Intent. The intent of section 8.04.00 is to provide standards and criteria to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. 
B.  Purpose. 
1.  Require that new developments and redevelopments maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution, increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
2.  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
3.  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
4.  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of green space, conservation areas and floodplain to the maximum extent practicable; 
5.  Coordinate site design plans with other standards in the ULDC that address resource protection, erosion control and the connectivity of open space; and 
6.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety. 
C.  Applicability. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of section 8.03.01 prior to commencing the proposed activity. The standards and requirements of section 8.04.00 shall be applicable to all land development meeting the standards in subsection 8.04.01.C.1. through 5., where a development plan, subdivision plat, or an application for a grading or land disturbance are required, unless specifically exempt pursuant to paragraph D., below. 
1.  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover; 
2.  New development that involves one (1) acre or more; 
3.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover; 
4.  Redevelopment that involves one (1) acre or more; and 
5.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in paragraphs C.1. through 4., above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate, and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
D.  [Exempt activities.] The following activities are exempt from the requirements of section 8.04.00: 
1.  An individual single-family residential dwelling unit on a legal lot of record; 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; and 
3.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within the RA zoning districts. 
E.  Stormwater design manual. All stormwater management plans shall utilize the policy, criteria, technical specifications, and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. All references to the GSMM mean the latest edition as defined on the GSMM website at  www.georgiastormwater.com. Updates, errata, and revisions will be provided on the website. 
8.04.02.  Stormwater management plan requirements. 
A.  An application for development activity as defined in subsection 8.04.01.C., above shall be accompanied by a stormwater management plan and an inspection and maintenance agreement regarding ongoing maintenance of the stormwater management facilities. 
B.  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of section 8.04.00. 
C.  The stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in section 8.04.00. The plan shall contain the stamp and signature of a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
D.  The stormwater management plan shall contain sufficient information to demonstrate that the requirements and criteria in section 8.04.00 are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the proposed development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the GSMM. 
E.  The following information is required, at a minimum: 
1.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
b.  Acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
c.  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; 
d.  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; 
e.  Direction of flow and exits from the site; 
f.  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
g.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
2.  For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
3.  A post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
b.  Total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
c.  Calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet post-development stormwater management performance criteria; 
d.  Location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas (see chapter 3); 
e.  Documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; and 
f.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters, and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
g.  If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria shall be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
4.  The description, scaled drawings, and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: 
a.  A map and/or drawing of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero (0) to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
b.  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
c.  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
d.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
e.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria; 
f.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and 
g.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans as required in chapter 3 or open space connectivity requirements for conservation subdivisions, as set forth in section 6.02.01. 
5.  A downstream peak flow analysis is required, which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
6.  An erosion and sedimentation control plan that meets the requirements of section 8.05.00. 
7.  The landscaping plan, as required in section 5.00.02 shall describe how vegetation will be placed within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities. 
8.  Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans shall identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, and responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access, and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
9.  A minimum twenty-foot easement shall be provided to ensure access from a public right-of-way to the stormwater management facilities. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Depending on the depth of pipe, the drainage easement width may be required to be increased. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
8.04.03.  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES  OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT 
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this ________ day of ________, 20___, by and between 
[Insert Full Name of Owner] 
___________ (hereinafter called the "Landowner") as party of the first part, and Henry County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the STATE OF GEORGIA, (hereinafter called the "County") of the second part; 
WITNESSETH 
WHEREAS, the undersigned is the owner of that certain real property lying and being in the ___ Land Lot/District, ___ identified as [Tax Map/Parcel Identification Number] and being more particularly described by deed as recorded in the land records of Henry County, Georgia, Deed Book ___ Page ___, hereinafter called the "Property". 
WHEREAS, the undersigned is proceeding to build on and develop the property; and has submitted the Site Plan/Subdivision Plan known as ___________, (Name of Plan/Development) hereinafter called the "Plan", which is expressly made a part hereof, as approved or to be approved by the County, provides for detention of stormwater within the confines of the property; and 
WHEREAS, the County and the undersigned, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association, (hereinafter the "Landowner") agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Henry County, Georgia, requires that on-site stormwater management facilities be constructed and maintained on the Property; and 
WHEREAS, the County requires that on-site stormwater management facilities as shown on the Plan (the "Facilities") be constructed and adequately maintained by the Landowner. 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
1.  The Facilities shall be constructed by the Landowner, in accordance with the plans and specifications identified in the Plan. 
2.  The Landowner shall at all time, adequately maintain the Facilities. Such maintenance obligation shall include the obligation to properly maintain all pipes, channels or other conveyances built to convey stormwater to the Facilities, as well as all structures, improvements, and vegetation provided to control the quantity and quality of the stormwater. Adequate maintenance is herein defined as keeping the Facilities and all components thereof in good working condition so that these Facilities continue to perform their design functions. The Stormwater Structural Control Maintenance Checklists are to be used to establish what good working condition is acceptable to the County. 
3.  The Landowner shall inspect the stormwater management facility and submit an inspection report annually. The purpose of the inspection is to assure safe and proper functioning of the Facilities. The inspection shall cover the entire Facilities including embankments, berms, inlet and outlet structures, pond areas, access roads, etc. Deficiencies shall be noted in the inspection report. 
4.  The Landowner hereby grants to the County, its authorized agents and employees, a non-exclusive perpetual easement of ingress and egress over, across, under and through the Property for the purpose of inspecting the Facilities. The purpose of such inspections is to follow-up on reported deficiencies and/or to respond to citizen complaints. The County shall provide the Landowner copies of any inspection findings and a directive to commence with the repairs if necessary. 
5.  In the event the Landowner fails to maintain the Facilities in good working condition acceptable to the County, the County may enter upon the Property and take such steps as are necessary to correct deficiencies identified in the inspection report and to charge the costs of such repairs to the Landowner. This provision shall not be construed to allow the County to erect any structure of permanent nature on the land of the Landowner outside of the easement for the stormwater management facilities. It is expressly understood and agreed that the County is under no obligation to routinely maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the County. The Landowner grants to the County, its authorized agents and employees, a non-exclusive, perpetual easement over, across, under and through the Property for such purposes. 
6.  The Landowner shall perform all work necessary to keep the Facilities in good working order. In the event a maintenance schedule for the stormwater management facilities (including sediment removal) is outlined on the approved plans, the Landowner shall comply with such schedule. 
7.  In the event the County performs work of any nature on the Facilities in accordance with this Agreement, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the County upon demand, within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof for all actual costs incurred by the County hereunder. 
8.  This Agreement imposes no liability of any kind whatsoever on the County and the Landowner agrees to hold the County harmless from any liability in the event the stormwater management facilities fail to operate properly. 
9.  This Agreement shall be recorded among the deed records of Henry County, Georgia, and shall constitute a covenant running with the land, and shall be binding on the Landowner, its administrators, executors, assigns, heirs and any other successors in interests, including any homeowners association. 
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the parties hereto acting through their duly authorized agents have caused this Agreement to be signed, sealed and delivered: 
(Insert Company/Corporation/Partnership Name) [SEAL] 
___________ 
By: (Type Name and Title) 
The foregoing Agreement was acknowledged before me this day of ________, 20___, by 
___________  Unofficial Witness 
___________  NOTARY PUBLIC 
My Commission Expires: ________ 
COUNTY OF ________, GEORGIA 
Sec. 8.05.00. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-05, adopted June 1, 2010, deleted § 8.05.00 which pertained to erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. No. 09-05, adopted Sept. 15, 2009. User is directed to Code section 3-5 for provisions pertaining to this subject. 
Sec. 8.06.00. - Development impact fees. 
8.06.01.  Generally. 
A.  Authority. 
1.  This section has been prepared and adopted by the board of commissioners of the county in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 36-71-1 et seq., as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
2.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the power of the county to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
3.  This section shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Henry County and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
B.  Findings. The board of commissioners of the county finds and declares: 
1.  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Henry County; and 
2.  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
3.  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
C.  Purpose. The purpose of the regulations set forth in this section of the ULDC is to: 
1.  Impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined; 
2.  Ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Henry County and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
D.  Intent. The intent of section 8.06.00 of the ULDC is to implement and be consistent with Henry County Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 50-8-1 et seq.); and the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning; and the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements, both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
E.  Provision. The provisions of this section shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the county. 
F.  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this section, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this section: 
1.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this section and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Henry County, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this section. 
2.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this section and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
3.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
4.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
5.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
6.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
7.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
8.  The use of "either or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
9.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
10.  The section and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this section are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this section. 
8.06.02.  Imposition of development impact fees. 
A.  Any person who after the effective date of ordinance [No. 03-08, October 7, 2003,] engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this section of the ULDC. 
1.  Construction not subject to impact fees. The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this section, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
a.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this article that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
b.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
c.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
d.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home on an established lot or prepared manufactured home pad in a manufactured home park or subdivision in operation prior to the effective date of ordinance [No. 03-089, October 7, 2003]. 
e.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
f.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
g.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
B.  Grandfathered projects. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section of the ULDC, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance [No. 03-08, October 7, 2003,] shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
C.  Method of calculation. 
1.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this section of the ULDC shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of the present value of ad valorem tax or other revenues. Such revenues shall be as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and are those which: 
a.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new development; and 
b.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
3.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this section shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of the county, and may be amended from time-to-time by official act. 
4.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee shall also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities. 
5.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
8.06.03.  Fee assessment and payment. 
A.  Fee schedule. 
1.  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule in Table 8.06.03(A) of the ULDC for a property located inside of Henry County, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
2.  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two (2) or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two (2) or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
3.  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
b.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in the fee schedule, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the county's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the board of commissioners. 
d.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners within thirty (30) days of the administrator's decision. 
Table 8.06.03(A) Impact Fee Schedule 

 
B.  Timing of assessment and payment. 
1.  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. 
2.  Impact fees may be collected any time a building permit is active, but shall be collected no later than the final building permit inspection phase of the development. Impact fees collected as part of the final building permit inspection shall be paid in the form of cash or certified check or other certified funds prior to the release of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion, as applicable. 
3.  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
4.  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the fee payer or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
5.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
C.  Individual assessment determinations. Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
1.  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project. 
2.  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Henry County or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and, 
c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
3.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this article. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the board of commissioners within thirty (30) days for a final decision. 
4.  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
D.  Fee certification. Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certified schedule of development impact fees for categories of development or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
8.06.04.  Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
A.  Maintenance of funds. 
1.  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this section of the ULDC shall be maintained in one (1) or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
2.  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
3.  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
B.  Expenditures; restrictions. 
1.  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
2.  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
3.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the following shall be considered general revenue of the system, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the county for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and 
c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three (3) percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
C.  Annual report. 
1.  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the board of commissioners as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
2.  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
8.06.05.  Credits. When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
A.  Credits; restrictions. 
1.  Except as provided in subsection 2. below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this ordinance [No. 03-08, October 7, 2003]. 
2.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of Henry County Comprehensive Plan, prior to the effective date of this ordinance [No. 03-08, October 7, 2003], is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of this county, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
3.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Granting of credits. 
1.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
a.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the county's comprehensive plan; 
b.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and 
c.  The board of commissioners shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
2.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section of the ULDC shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is allowed under a private agreement executed under the provisions of this section. In the event that a developer enters into such a private agreement with the county to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created is in excess of the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the development project, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction, funding, or contribution from impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefited by such improvements. 
C.  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
1.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
2.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
3.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the county would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
4.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the county, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
5.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the board of commissioners in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
D.  Credits; application. 
1.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
2.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
3.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
E.  Credits; abandoned building permits. In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the county, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
8.06.06.  Refunds. 
A.  Eligibility for a refund. 
1.  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six (6) years after the date the fee was collected. 
2.  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
B.  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in Henry County within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of said publication. 
C.  Filing a request for a refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one (1) year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one (1) year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. Such funds together with the accrued interest thereon shall be transferred to the general revenue account of the county. 
D.  Payment of refunds. 
1.  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within sixty (60) days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than thirty (30) days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
2.  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
3.  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
8.06.07.  Private contractual agreements. 
A.  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the county and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one (1) development project, provided that: 
1.  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the county's comprehensive plan; and 
2.  The amount of any credit granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
B.  Private agreements; provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
1.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the county to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in appendix C. 
2.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
3.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this section of the ULDC, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the state, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
C.  Private agreements; procedure. 
1.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the board of commissioners. 
2.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the board of commissioners of the county prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
3.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
8.06.08.  Periodic review and amendments. 
A.  Amendments. 
1.  This section of the ULDC may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. Any such amendment to this section of the ULDC, including an amendment to the development impact fee schedule, shall follow the procedures for adoption of an ordinance imposing a development impact fee as set out following the ULDC and required under the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq., as amended). 
2.  At least once each calendar year, as part of its annual capital improvement program process or as part of any other planning process, the board of commissioners may review the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, and may amend the capital improvements element, fee calculation methodology, or development impact fee schedule as deemed appropriate and necessary. 
3.  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under subsection 8.06.03.A.3.c. are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the board of commissioners when this article is subsequently amended. 
B.  Capital improvements element update. 
1.  Update. At least once each year, the board of commissioners may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five (5) years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional development center for their review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the board of community affairs of the state. 
2.  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the board of commissioners may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
b.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
d.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up-to-date. 
C.  Continuation of validity. Failure of the board of commissioners to undertake a periodic review shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this section of the ULDC. 
8.06.09.  Administrative appeals. 
A.  Eligibility to file an appeal. Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the county or who have already received a written determination of refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
B.  Appeals process. 
1.  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor must file a written appeal with the administrator within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of written determination of the amount of the development impact fee due, or entitlement to an amount of a refund or credit, such written appeal to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought. 
2.  Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
3.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners within thirty (30) days of the administrator's decision. The board of commissioners shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give written notice thereof to the applicant or feepayor, and decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
C.  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
1.  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
2.  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be stopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
8.06.10.  Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Enforcement authority. 
1.  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time-to-time. 
2.  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this section of the ULDC and shall have the right to issue cease and desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this section shall constitute legal notice of service. 
3.  The administrator may suspend any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals if the provisions of this section of the ULDC have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
4.  For any violation, the administrator shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within thirty (30) days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the administrator may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
B.  Violations. 
1.  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute an actionable violation. 
2.  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
3.  A violation of this section of the ULDC shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the board of commissioners shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this section of the ULDC, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section of the ULDC, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this section of the ULDC and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
8.06.11.  Incorporation by reference of Georgia law. It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the development impact fee ordinance of the county complies with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq., as amended). Therefore, O.C.G.A. Ch. 36-71 is incorporated by reference into this section of the ULDC. To the extent that any provision of this section of the ULDC is inconsistent with the provisions of said Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this section of the ULDC is silent as to any provision of said Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise deemed mandatory by law, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the county. 
Sec. 8.07.00. - Illustrations of Design Concepts and Requirements: 
Figure 8.1 Reserved. 
Figure 8.2 Reserved. 

Figure 8.3 

Figure 8.4 

Figure 8.5 

Figure 8.6 

Figure 8.7 
CHAPTER 10. - BOARDS AND COMMITTEES 

Sec. 10.00.00. - Generally. 
The departments, boards, and commissions described in chapter 10 are established for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the ULDC. The departments, boards, and commissions described in this chapter shall have the powers and duties described necessary to achieve the purpose. 
Sec. 10.01.00. - Henry County zoning advisory board. 
10.01.01.  Creation. The Henry County Zoning Advisory Board (ZAB) is hereby established, and shall be referred to as the zoning advisory board. 
10.01.02.  Membership. 
A.  Composition. 
1.  The ZAB shall be composed of seven (7) qualified members. 
2.  One (1) member shall be appointed by the Henry County Board of Commissioners (BOC) from each of the five (5) commission districts; 
3.  One (1) member shall be appointed by the chairman of the BOC; and 
4.  One (1) member shall be appointed by the city council of Hampton. 
B.  Term of office. 
1.  The term of each member appointed pursuant to subsection 10.01.02.B. above shall expire upon the earlier of: 
a.  Two (2) years from the date of appointment; 
b.  The date upon which the term of the member of the BOC from such member's commission district, in office at the time of the member's appointment, expires; or 
c.  The date upon which the member of the BOC from such member's commission district, in office at the time of the member's appointment, vacates or resigns the position as member of the BOC. 
2.  The term of the member appointed pursuant to subsection 10.01.02.C. above shall expire upon the earlier of: 
a.  Two (2) years from the date of appointment; 
b.  The date upon which the term of the chairman of the BOC, in office at the time of the member's appointment, expires; or 
c.  The date upon which the chairman of the BOC, in office at the time of the member's appointment, vacates or resigns the position as a member of the BOC. 
3.  All other members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. Each appointing entity shall have the authority to fill any vacancy occurring in its designated appointment. An appointment to fill any vacancy shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
C.  Removal/reappointment. 
1.  Any member appointed pursuant to subsection 10.01.02.A.2. above may be removed, with or without cause, by the BOC at any time. The BOC may, with or without cause, refuse to reappoint any member of the ZAB at the expiration of the term of office. A member may be reappointed only upon majority approval of the BOC. 
2.  The member appointed pursuant to subsection 10.01.02.A.3. above may be removed, with or without cause, by the chairman of the BOC at any time. The chairman of the BOC may, with or without cause, refuse to reappoint any member of the ZAB at the expiration of the term of office. The member may be reappointed only upon majority approval of the BOC. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  The member appointed pursuant to subsection 10.01.02.A.4. above may be removed, with or without cause, by the city council of Hampton at any time. The city council of Hampton may, with or without cause, refuse to reappoint any member of the ZAB at the expiration of the term of office. A member may be reappointed only upon majority approval of the city council of Hampton. 
D.  Qualifications/compensation. 
1.  In order to be qualified, all members shall complete training for ZAB members and shall receive a certificate of completion from an agency or organization competent to train appointed planning officials within one (1) year of appointment. 
2.  Each member shall be compensated in a manner prescribed by the BOC. No member shall be covered by Henry County's group health insurance. 
E.  Conduct. 
1.  No member may: 
a.  Make defamatory, slanderous, or discriminatory remarks toward or about any other board member, employee of Henry County, applicant or applicant's representatives, or audience member during the course of public hearings or meetings, workshop sessions, and official duties; 
b.  Use profanity in any public hearing or meeting, nor generally in interaction with any of those persons listed in subparagraph a. above; 
c.  Directly or indirectly threaten, harass, or intimidate any of those persons listed in subparagraph a. above; 
d.  Violate any rules of procedure or supplemental rules of conduct established through ordinance or resolution by the BOC. 
10.01.03.  Quorum. 
A.  Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All rules, policies, and procedures governing the ZAB shall be hereinafter governed by this requirement. 
10.01.04.  Officers. 
A.  The ZAB shall elect one (1) of its appointive members as chairman. The chairman shall serve for one (1) year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. 
B.  A second appointive member shall be elected as vice chairman, and he shall serve for one (1) year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. 
C.  The ZAB shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or an employee of the governing authority or of the ZAB. 
10.01.05.  Meetings. 
A.  The ZAB shall meet once each month at a date and time established by the ZAB. This requirement can be reduced at the discretion of the ZAB due to unforeseen circumstances. 
B.  Additional meetings shall be called, according to the procedures in Robert's Rules of Order. 
10.01.06.  Rules and operating procedures. 
A.  The ZAB shall follow any by-laws and rules for the transaction of business adopted by the BOC. Any conduct of business or meetings not specified by rule of the ZAB shall be according to Robert's Rules of Order. 
B.  The ZAB shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
C.  The chairman shall have no voting privileges except as provided in subsections 10.01.06.D., and E. 
D.  In the event a zoning matter is within the chairman's appointed district, the chairman shall vote and the vice chair shall serve as chairman for that zoning action. The vice chair shall have no voting privileges on said zoning action. 
E.  The chairman shall only vote in the event of a tie. 
10.01.07.  Duties and responsibilities. 
A.  It shall be the function and duty of the ZAB to make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the county. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the ZAB to make a master plan or comprehensive plan of its political jurisdiction and to update it from time to time. Such master plan may show, among other things: existing and proposed streets, highways, expressways, bridges, tunnels, viaducts, and approaches thereto; routes of railroads and transit lines; terminals, ports, airports; parks, playgrounds, forests, reservations, and other public open spaces; sites for public buildings and structures; districts for residence, business, industry, recreation, agriculture, forestry; special districts for other purposes; limited development districts for purposes of conservation, water supply, sanitation, drainage, protection against floods, and the like; areas for housing developments, slum clearance, and urban renewal and redevelopment; location of public utilities whether publicly or privately owned including, but not limited to, sewerage and water-supply systems; zoning districts, and other planning features, together with time and priority schedules and cost estimates for the accomplishment of the proposals. The master plan shall be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data. Such plan may be added to, and changed from time to time, by a majority vote of the ZAB. It shall be a public record, but its purpose and effect shall be solely to aid the ZAB in the performance of its duties. Such plan shall be recommended to the BOC for adoption. 
C.  In particular, the ZAB shall have the power and duty to: 
1.  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authority or authorities a zoning ordinance or resolution and map for the county. The zoning ordinance may be contained within a unified land development code. 
2.  In exercising the powers granted to it by this section, the ZAB shall prepare and recommend to the BOC for adoption regulations governing the subdivision of land within the county. Such regulations may provide for the harmonious development of the county; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets for the size of blocks and lots; for the dedication or reservation of land for streets, school sites, and recreation areas and of easements for utilities and other public services and facilities; and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. Such regulations may include requirements as to how streets shall be graded, surfaced, and improved, and water, sewers, septic tanks, and other utility mains, piping, connections, or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The BOC may adopt and amend such land subdivision regulations according to the procedures set forth in chapter 12. 
3.  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authority or authorities regulations for the subdivisions of land within the county and to administer the regulations that may be adopted. The subdivision regulations may be contained within a unified land development code. 
4.  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the BOC a plat or plats or a future infrastructure map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within the county or a specified portion thereof. These regulations may be contained within a unified land development code. 
5.  The ZAB may make, publish, and distribute maps, plans, reports, and recommendations relating to the comprehensive plan and development of the county to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and citizens. It may recommend to the BOC programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. 
D.  All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the ZAB, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
E.  The ZAB, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon; provided, however, that Henry County shall be liable for any injury or damage to property resulting therefrom. 
F.  The BOC may refer any matter to the ZAB for study, review and recommendation before the BOC takes final action on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 16-07, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 10.02.00. - Compatibility standards review committee. 
For the purpose of reviewing the location of manufactured homes or mobile homes, as contemplated in sections 4.01.07 and 12.02.08 of this ULDC, a compatibility standards review committee is established. 
A.  The committee shall consist of the county zoning administrator, the county building official, and the county tax assessor or their designees. 
B.  A quorum shall consist of any two (2) of the three (3) members, and the decision of any two (2) of the three (3) members shall be binding on the committee and this county. 
C.  The committee shall adhere to the provisions of the ULDC with regard to the appearance and location of manufactured homes and mobile homes. 
Sec. 10.03.00. - Architectural review committee. 
The architectural review committee shall consist of the planning and zoning department, the building department and the development plan review department. 
Sec. 10.04.00. - Historic preservation board.(Reserved) 
CHAPTER 11. - VARIATIONS 

Sec. 11.00.00. - Generally. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this ULDC where hardship would otherwise occur. Two (2) forms of hardship are addressed. Section 11.01.00 addresses hardships that would be caused if nonconforming development were required to immediately come into compliance with this ULDC. Sections 11.02.00 and 11.03.00 address hardships that occur in a particular situation due to the characteristics of the land to be developed based on the required site design standards. 
Sec. 11.01.00. - Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses. 
11.01.01.  Generally. 
A.  Within the zoning and overlay districts established by this ULDC or amendments that may later be adopted there may exist lots, structures, or uses of land which were lawfully established before this ULDC was adopted, but which do not comply with the requirements set forth in this ULDC. 
B.  It is the intent of section 11.01.00 to allow these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or discontinued. It is further the intent of this section that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
C.  Nonconforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the district where the nonconforming use is located. 
D.  Nothing in section 11.01.01 shall be construed to prevent the ordinary and routine maintenance and repair of nonconforming structures or structures which contain nonconforming uses provided that: 
1.  Repairs do not exceed ten (10) percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming portion of the structure, during any period of twelve (12) consecutive months; and 
2.  The cubic content of the structure is not increased. 
E.  A structure damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this ULDC. 
F.  Fair market value, where required, shall be determined by reference to current statutory provisions pertaining to real estate assessment and the records of the county assessor. 
G.  A structure that is damaged to an extent less than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value may be restored and occupied as before the damage, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  Restoration shall be commenced within six (6) calendar months from the date damages were incurred. 
2.  If reconstruction is not commenced within six (6) months, the reconstruction and use of the land or structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this ULDC. 
H.  A nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use that is declared by the administrator to be physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
11.01.02.  Nonconforming lots of record. 
A.  A single-family dwelling and permissible accessory structures may be constructed on a single lot of record in any zoning district where single-family dwellings are permissible, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The lot of record was established at or before the time of adoption of this ULDC; 
2.  The lot of record is in separate ownership from adjacent lots with continuous frontage on the same street; 
3.  The lot is nonconforming due to failure to meet standards for the zoning district for minimum lot area and/or minimum lot width; and 
4.  The lot is developed in compliance with standards for front, side, and rear yard setbacks and building height for the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  Lots of record with continuous frontage, which became nonconforming at the time of adoption of this ULDC, shall meet the following requirements in order to be developed: 
1.  The lots of record consist of two (2) or more lots, combinations of lots, and portions of lots which are in single ownership and have continuous frontage; 
2.  A lot or a portion of a lot cannot meet the standards of the zoning district for lot area and lot width; 
3.  The combination of lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of developing according to the site design standards of the zoning district; and 
4.  No portion of the undivided parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which does not comply with minimum lot area and minimum lot width requirements established by this ULDC. 
11.01.03.  Nonconforming structures. A lawfully established structure that becomes nonconforming at the time of adoption of this ULDC may continue subject to the following requirements: 
A.  The structure is nonconforming with only the following site design standards: 
1.  Minimum lot area; 
2.  Maximum lot coverage or impervious surface ratio; 
3.  Maximum building height; 
4.  Minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks; and 
5.  Other requirements regarding building location on the lot. 
B.  The structure shall be in compliance with all other standards and requirements of this ULDC. 
C.  The nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged. 
D.  The structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its degree of nonconformity. 
E.  If a nonconforming structure is moved for any reason for any distance, it shall be brought into conformance with the site design standards of the zoning district to which it is moved. 
11.01.04.  Nonconforming uses. A lawfully established use that becomes nonconforming at the time of adoption of this ULDC may continue subject to the following requirements: 
A.  A structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except to change the use to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  A nonconforming use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the existing structure devoted to the use. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ULDC. 
C.  A nonconforming use which is superseded by a permitted use in a structure or structure and land in combination shall not be resumed. 
D.  A nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land in combination that is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months (except when government action impedes access to the premises) shall not be resumed. The structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
11.01.05.  Termination of detrimental nonconforming structures and uses. 
A.  There are found to be certain uses of land, buildings, and structures which have an adverse effect on the carrying out of the comprehensive plan. Such uses shall be discontinued after the time periods set out in subsection 11.01.05.B. below, irrespective of the requirements for nonconforming uses set forth in sections 11.01.00 through 11.01.04 above. 
B.  The following uses shall be removed or made conforming within the specified amortization period. Said amortization period shall commence upon the effective date of this ULDC. 
1.  Fences, walls, and vegetation which constitute a hazard by virtue of impairing sight distances at a curve or intersection shall be made conforming within sixty (60) days. 
2.  All site design requirements for fencing, screening, or buffering of commercial or industrial uses, as set forth in chapters 4 or 5 of this ULDC, shall be met within sixty (60) days. 
3.  Nonconforming open storage operations, such as truck parking, automobile wrecking, salvage material storage, and similar uses, shall be made conforming within sixty (60) days. 
11.01.06.  Regulation of specific nonconforming structures. 
A.  Nonconforming signs. (See section 7.04.00 regarding signs). 
1.  The following provisions shall apply to signs which were approved and legally erected pursuant to sign standards in effect prior to the adoption of this ULDC, and which became nonconforming at the time of adoption of this ULDC. 
2.  Nonconforming signs may stay in place until one (1) of the following conditions occurs: 
a.  The sign deteriorates or is damaged to the extent that it becomes a hazard; or 
b.  The sign has been damaged to such an extent that structural repairs are required to restore the sign. A structural repair is any repair necessary only to maintain the stability and safety of the sign. 
3.  The owner of the sign shall obtain a permit for the continuation of the sign, subject to the restrictions of this section. Application for such permit shall be filed within ten (10) days of the notice of nonconformance. There shall be no charge for this permit. Failure to apply for such permit within ten (10) days shall result in waiver of the protections afforded nonconforming signs by this section and the display of such sign shall be thereafter unlawful. 
4.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this section. 
5.  A nonconforming sign damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its assessed value shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in compliance with the standards for the type and location of sign. 
6.  A nonconforming sign damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its assessed value which is not repaired or rebuilt in compliance with this section shall be removed from the lot, along with all associated debris, and disposed of appropriately. 
7.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
B.  Nonconforming signs along interstate highways. A legally erected interstate sign which became nonconforming on May 6, 2002, pursuant to the adoption of Ordinance 02-05, may be allowed to remain until purchased by the Georgia DOT, provided that the sign meets the requirements of state laws, rules and regulations governing such signs. Sign regulations are set forth in section 7.04.00 of this ULDC. 
C.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
1.  All mobile homes located in a mobile home development shall provide documentation of compliance with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act or compliance with specifications presented by the American National Standards Institute. Existing mobile homes within mobile home developments not in compliance with either of these standards are nonconforming. 
2.  An existing, nonconforming mobile home which was lawfully permitted may be replaced with another mobile home of the same size meeting the requirement set forth in paragraph C.1. above and with the requirements of this chapter within sixty (60) days from the date of removal of the original mobile home. 
D.  Nonconforming WCFs. WCFs in existence on the date of the adoption of this article which do not comply with the requirements of this article are nonconforming WCFs and are subject to the following provisions: 
A.  The owner of any nonconforming WCFs may request an administrative approval for a minor modification from the administrator. 
B.  Nonconforming WCFs may add additional antennas (belonging to the same carrier or other carriers) subject to administrative approval in section 7.05.04. 
C.  Nonconforming WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed by less than fifty (50) percent of the replacement value due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to their former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit, without otherwise complying with this article. A nonconforming WCF that is damaged or destroyed by more than fifty (50) percent of the estimated replacement value shall be made conforming to this article. 
D.  Major modifications to nonconforming WCFs may be allowed only upon the granting of a conditional use by the zoning advisory board; provided, however, that an existing nonconforming WCF may be replaced by a support structure replacement administratively approved according to the provisions of section 7.05.03, in which event, after administrative approval and replacement, the support structure replacement shall be legally conforming. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 11-17-09; Ord. No. 14-06, § I(exh. A), 11-4-14 ) 
Sec. 11.02.00. - Variances. 
11.02.01.  Generally. 
A.  A variance may be granted where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ULDC will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. 
B.  A variance shall observe the spirit of this ULDC, secure public safety and welfare, and deliver substantial justice. 
C.  The existence of a nonconforming use on adjacent land, buildings, or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for a variance. 
D.  The zoning advisory board shall be responsible for consideration and a decision regarding requests for variances, pursuant to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in chapter 12. 
E.  A variance may not be granted for actions specifically prohibited by this ordinance. A variance is to compensate for a dimensional standard in a real property which would prevent the property from complying with a zoning development regulation. Variances are only granted after a review process against specified approval criteria. 
11.02.02.  Types of variances. A request for a variance shall be limited to the following dimensional standards: Maximum building height; minimum lot width; minimum lot area, required spacing for driveways; minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks; or dimensional standards for parking or loading spaces or no curb and gutter for subdivisions in the RA zoning district. Requests other than those stated will constitute a request to amend this section of the ULDC through procedures set forth by subsection 12.02.11. 
11.02.03.  Requirements for variances. A variance may be granted upon a finding by the zoning advisory board that all the following conditions have been met: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same zoning district; 
B.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ULDC would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the zoning district in which the property is located; 
C.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the zoning district in which the applicant's property is located; 
D.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ULDC and will not be incompatible with the neighborhood or to the general public welfare; 
E.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
F.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure; and 
G.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which are not permitted by right in the zoning district involved. 
11.02.04.  Specific requirements for a variance in a floodplain protection area. The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the Henry County Development Plan Review Department or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
A.  Requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance shall be submitted to the Henry County Planning and Zoning Department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Henry County Planning and Zoning Department. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
B.  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Henry County Planning and Zoning Department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the zoning advisory board as established by Henry County in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Henry County Zoning Advisory Board. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Henry County Zoning Advisory Board may appeal such decision to the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the Henry County Stormwater Management Department and the Henry County Zoning Advisory Board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
H.  Conditions for variances: 
1.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
2.  The provisions of this ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
3.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
4.  The building and development division director or designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
I.  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Henry County Planning and Zoning Department shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
J.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the Henry County Planning and Zoning Department and the Henry County Zoning Advisory Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
K.  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact". 
11.02.05.  Specific requirements for a variance to the aggregate signable area standard. 
A.  A variance may be granted to allow more than five hundred (500) square feet of signable area where the following conditions are met: 
1.  The property shall be zoned OI, MU, C-1, C-2, C-3, IAC, M-1, or M-2; 
2.  The minimum land area for the project shall be ten (10) acres; 
3.  The property shall be under unified control and management; 
4.  All existing signs and structures within the property are in full conformance with the requirements of this ULDC; 
5.  The granting of a variance shall not create negative impacts to adjacent properties, to the general public, or the purposes and intents of the sign standards in this ULDC; and 
6.  Circumstances or conditions resulting from actions of the current or former owners shall not be grounds for a grant of a variance. 
B.  The zoning advisory board shall consider the following additional factors to section 11.02.03 in determining whether to grant a variance: 
1.  Size of buildings on the property; 
2.  Potential to subdivide the property; 
3.  Number of different businesses occupying the property. 
C.  Granting a variance shall include the condition that the variance shall terminate upon any subdividing of the property. 
11.02.06.  Requirement for a variance to the buffer. 
A.  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance, and its shapes, topography or other existing physical conditions prevent land development consistent with this ordinance, and Henry County Development Plan Review Department finds and determines that the requirements of this ordinance prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Administrator or Designee of Henry County may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirement hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
B.  No more than one hundred (100) square feet. 
1.  The following land-disturbing activities are examples of projects not specifically listed in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(3) that would be considered minor land-disturbing activities and therefore, exempt from the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act and the applicable buffer requirements for the state waters: 
2.  Elevated structures such as decks, gazebos, patios, walkways, viewing platforms and/or open picnic shelters, provided: 
a.  No more than one hundred (100) square feet of footprint of the elevated structure extends into or over the [buffer], with an exception for structures compliant with the Americans with Disabilities [Act]; 
b.  No grading, cutting, filling or similar land-disturbing activities occurring as a part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development; 
c.  The structure is built on posts, concrete blocks and/or similar supports; 
d.  Permanent protective vegetative cover remains or protective measures (e.g., mulch, gravel) are installed within the footprint of the elevated structure to prevent post construction soil erosion; 
e.  A natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; 
f.  No concrete and/or asphalt slabs, pads or foundations constructed or placed as a part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development. 
3.  A pervious ground level walkway approach to a dock and/or similar structure, provided: 
a.  No more than one hundred (100) square feet of the constructed walkway extends into the buffer, with an exception for structures compliant with ADA; 
b.  No grading, cutting, filling or similar land-disturbing activities occurring as a part of the preparation, construction or subsequent development; 
c.  No concrete and/or asphalt slabs, pads, supports or foundations constructed or placed as a part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development; 
d.  All ground preparation and walkway material placement is completed with use of hand held equipment. 
4.  Restoration of buffer area after the removal of an existing structure, provided; 
a.  No more than one hundred (100) square feet of the structure footprint is in the buffer; and 
b.  The buffer area must be replanted with native vegetation. 
5.  Maintenance or repair of existing structures, the failure of which would result in a threat to human health or state waters, such as sewer lines, water lines, dams, or gas lines. Total disturbance must be less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
6.  Placement of rock riprap within the buffer not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet on any one (1) property, provided: 
a.  The placement of the riprap does not result in soil disturbance outside the placement area; and 
b.  No grading, cutting, filling or similar land-disturbing activities occurring as part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development. 
C.  The following land-disturbing activities are examples of projects that are NOT considered minor land-disturbing activities and therefore, NOT exempt from the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act and the applicable buffer requirements for state waters: 
1.  Any land-disturbing activity utilizing wheeled or tracked machinery and equipment resulting in soil erosion within the buffer; 
2.  Paving with poured or prefab concrete and/or asphalt; 
3.  Any project or combination or projects occurring within the same calendar year on the same property resulting in more than one hundred (100) square feet of any elevated structures and/or pervious ground level walkways within or extending into the buffer; 
4.  Construction of a barbeque pit on a concrete and/or asphalt slab or pad within the buffer; 
5.  Construction of a ground level patio within the buffer; 
6.  Construction of a swimming pool within the buffer; 
7.  Construction of a structural or decorative retaining wall within the buffer; 
8.  Construction of a new seawall with land-disturbing activities occurring within the buffer; and 
9.  Backfilling any new seawall construction within the buffer. 
11.02.07.  Appeal of zoning advisory board actions. An appeal of a decision of the zoning advisory board shall be processed as set forth in section 12.05.00. 
(Ord. No. 12-18, § I, 11-6-12) 
Sec. 11.03.00. - Administrative waiver. 
The administrator shall have the power to reduce specific site design and development standards of this ULDC where the intent of the ULDC can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a waiver of standards. The authority to grant a waiver shall be limited to the following: 
A.  A reduction in the minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks for a single lot, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  The reduction is necessary because of any one (1) of the following: geologic conditions, topography, the inability to adhere to tree protection standards set forth in section 5.03.00, or the zoning conditions set forth by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
2.  The reduction is limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the minimum standard. 
B.  A reduction in the parking requirements provided the following standards are met: 
1.  The reduction is necessary because of geologic conditions, topography, or the inability to adhere to tree protection standards set forth in section 5.03.00. 
2.  The reduction is five (5) spaces or five (5) percent, whichever is greater. 
3.  The reduction does not limit the availability or location of required handicapped parking. 
C.  Side yard requirements may be waived by the administrator, where a joint fall-out shelter is proposed, provided that permanent easements are recorded to ensure access to both parties (see section 7.02.03). 
D.  The forty-foot buffer requirement can be reduced to a twenty-foot buffer with a decorative fence by the administrator pending an administrative review of the development plans. 
E.  A waiver may be issued by the administrator from section 8.02.07 requiring a dust free parking surface, as long as the parking area consists of a pervious or semi-pervious material meeting the following conditions: 
1.  There shall be a paved primary lot that serves the parking needs of customers and employees on a regular basis. Unpaved parking spaces may not count towards the parking requirements outlined in section 8.02.00 with the exception of spaces dedicated to employees of the business. 
2.  Materials used for unpaved parking shall be approved by the Henry County Fire Department prior to installation. 
3.  Unpaved parking areas shall be enclosed by a fence that restricts access to the area by the general public. All gates and locks shall be approved by the Henry County Fire Department prior to installation. 
4.  The unpaved parking area shall meet the design standards for parking lots, with the exception of paving requirements, and including size of spaces, drive aisles, maneuvering areas, and stormwater management. 
5.  There must be a paved driveway leading to the unpaved parking area that is a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in length. 
6.  Unpaved parking areas are subject to the landscaping provisions in section 5.01.00 and all landscaping is to be maintained on a permanent basis. Surfaces must remain grass and weed free. 
Sec. 11.04.00. - Vested rights. 
The purpose of section 11.04.00 is to provide a method to recognize vested rights and works-in-progress that were authorized prior to the adoption of this ULDC. 
11.04.01.  Applicability. 
A.  Any property zoned PD (planned development) prior to the adoption of this ULDC shall be subject to all development agreements and approved master plans until such time the property is rezoned. 
B.  Any property that has been rezoned prior to the adoption of this ULDC shall meet all zoning conditions imposed regardless of any zoning change caused by the ULDC until such time the property is rezoned. 
C.  Applicant shall be vested in any permit approved prior to the adoption of the ULDC until such time as permit expires. 
D.  All flag lots platted and recorded prior to the adoption of this ULDC shall be considered legal conforming lots of record. 
Sec. 11.05.00. - Conditional uses. 
11.05.01.  Generally. Several of the zoning districts contained herein permit certain uses subject to an approved conditional use. The evaluation of conditional use request and determination of compliance shall be the responsibility of the zoning advisory board. See chapter 4 for uses requiring a conditional use. 
11.05.02.  Requirements for conditional uses. The zoning advisory board shall consider all of the following prior to making decisions on conditional uses: 
A.  The proposed use shall not cause traffic congestion or conditions that will adversely affect other nearby properties in the area. 
B.  The physical conditions of the site, including topography, drainage and size and shape, are suitable for the proposed development. 
C.  There are adequate public facilities to serve the proposed use. 
D.  The applicant has made a binding agreement for any specific limitations or conditions necessary to protect the public interest and assure the continued beneficial use and enjoyment of nearby properties or that no special limitations are necessary to protect the public. 
E.  The conditional use with specific limitations and design features as may have been required will further the aims of the county land use plan and will not be unduly detrimental to nearby properties. 
11.05.03.  Appeal of zoning advisory board actions. An appeal of a decision of the zoning advisory board shall be processed as set forth in section 12.05.00. 
CHAPTER 12. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 12.00.00. - Generally. 
12.00.01.  Purpose. This ULDC sets forth the procedures for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for subdivisions, multifamily and nonresidential development, mixed use development, planned developments, rezoning, and all permits. This ULDC also sets forth the requirements for appealing decisions, and for enforcement. It is the county's intent that the procedures and requirements set forth in this ULDC shall be followed in order to seek approval for any development. 
12.00.02.  Approvals required. 
A.  No person shall conduct any development activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Henry County without first obtaining an approved subdivision plat, development plan, construction plans, and permits to perform such activities. The division of a parcel, as shown on the most recent Henry County Tax Map, may be split into three (3) lots within a five-year period and shall not require a development plan. 
B.  Permits shall be issued only for development on platted and recorded lots. 
1.  No permits shall be issued on lots described by metes and bounds. 
2.  All development activities or site work conducted after approval of a subdivision plat or development plan shall conform to the specifications of the approved plans. 
C.  Major changes to an approved plan, as defined below, shall require specific approval of an amended plan. 
1.  Altering the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site; 
2.  Increasing the amount of impervious surface within the development; 
3.  Altering the overall density of development; 
4.  Substantially increasing the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of vegetation during construction; or 
5.  Otherwise altering the overall appearance of the development as proposed as determined by the administrator. 
D.  The following situations are exempt from the requirement to obtain an approved development plan prior to the issuance of required permits: 
1.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
2.  Accessory structures, provided applicable permits are obtained. 
12.00.03.  Expiration of approvals. 
A.  Amendment of the official zoning map (rezoning). 
1.  After an approval has been granted for an amendment to the official zoning map to create or extend any zoning district, the applicant, agent or property owner has eighteen (18) months in which to make substantial progress in developing the property. 
2.  Substantial progress shall mean the point of construction at which time the first inspection is carried out. 
3.  If no substantial construction or alteration of the property or other affirmative action to develop the property has occurred within eighteen (18) months of the granting of an application for rezoning, the zoning advisory board may review the situation and report its findings with recommendations to the board of commissioners who may, at a public hearing, change the zoning category to its prior or other appropriate zoning district classification. 
B.  Development permits. 
1.  If construction described in a development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. However, the permit may be extended for an additional twelve (12) months, upon payment of the permit fee for such extension. 
2.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended after work has commenced, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months after the date the work ceased. In cases of permit expiration due to abandonment or suspension of work, the landowner shall be required to restore topography to its original contours and restore vegetation as determined by the administrator. 
12.00.04.  Fees required. All fee amounts are determined and adjusted periodically by the board of commissioners. All applications shall be accompanied by payment of application fees, as set forth in each department's fee schedule. 
12.00.05.  Procedures for conducting public hearings. In compliance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5 the following rules of procedure shall govern public hearings before the zoning advisory board and the board of commissioners: 
A.  Each person speaking before the board or commissioners, shall identify himself/herself by name, address, and whether or not applicant is owner or agent for owner. 
B.  Each applicant or other interested party who submits documents at the hearing shall have each document numbered and shall identify each document. Each document submitted shall be made a part of the official record of the hearing. 
C.  Time periods for testimony: 
1.  Each applicant shall have ten (10) minutes to present data, evidence, and opinions pertinent to the application. A portion of this time period may be saved for rebuttal. 
2.  Persons in opposition to rezoning of property and amendment to the zoning ordinance shall have a total of ten (10) minutes to address the board. Each person shall provide the administrator with his/her name and address. 
3.  Additional time may be granted equally to the applicant and opponents at the discretion of the chairman of the board. 
D.  At the conclusion of a hearing by the zoning advisory board, the board shall announce its decision or recommendation, as required, and direct the administrator to notify the applicant in writing of such decision or recommendation. The notification shall be made a part of the record on the date that the written notification is given to the applicant. 
E.  At the conclusion of a hearing by the board of commissioners, the board may: 
1.  Approve the application. 
2.  Approve the application with conditions. 
3.  Disapprove the application. 
4.  The board of commissioners may continue or postpone their deliberations to a date certain to render their decision. 
5.  The board may remand to the zoning advisory board for additional review and consideration in a duly advertised public hearing. 
The board shall announce its decision and direct the administrator to notify the applicant in writing of the board's decision. The written notification shall immediately be entered on the minutes and made a part of the record on the date that written notification is given to the applicant. 
12.00.06.  Requirements for developments of regional impact. 
A.  A proposed development that meets or exceeds the thresholds established by the Georgia DCA, ARC, and GRTA for a Development of Regional Impact (DRI) shall be reviewed according to the procedures in Chapter 110-12-3, Rules of the Department of Community Affairs (DCA). 
B.  When a development meeting the threshold standards established by the DCA, ARC, and GRTA is proposed, the county shall not take action (including actions by the administrator, zoning advisory board, or board of commissioners) on the development until the DRI review process is completed. 
C.  Upon receipt of a request for action related to a project that meets or exceeds the thresholds established for that development category, the local government may request that the applicant submit additional information about the project, using forms available from DCA. 
D.  Upon determination that the proposed development is not a DRI, the county may continue with review and decision-making procedures set forth in this ULDC. 
E.  Upon conclusion of the DRI review, the county may continue with review and decision-making procedures as set forth in this ULDC. 
1.  The county is encouraged to include the public finding and comments regarding the proposed DRI project in considering actions on the application for project approval. 
2.  Where the project received a negative public finding and the county approves the project, the county shall notify the DCA, indicating any conditions that have been placed on the project to mitigate the negative finding. 
3.  The planning and zoning department shall submit applications for DRI review to the DCA. 
Sec. 12.01.00. - Application requirements. 
12.01.01.  Pre-application conference. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to provide an opportunity for the applicant to consult with county staff for advice and assistance prior to preparation of a preliminary plat, development plan, and zoning application. This will enable the applicant to become familiar with the approval process, required documents, inspections, the comprehensive plan, infrastructure and improvement standards adopted by Henry County and the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority, the health department, the county DOT, and development factors which may impact the proposed development. 
It is the county's intent that all procedural and development requirements be identified during the pre-application conference. However, no person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed development, or any expression of any nature about the proposal, made by a participant at the pre-application conference, as a representation or implication that the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. Additionally, the failure to identify an applicable requirement or condition shall not preclude the county from requiring an applicant to comply with such requirement or condition. 
The following information shall be provided by the applicant: 
a.  A Henry County application for zoning. 
b.  Proof of ownership. 
c.  When the applicant is a representative of the property owner, a notarized statement authorizing the representative to act as an agent of the property owner with regard to the application and associated procedures. 
d.  Applicant campaign disclosure form (for applicant/owner, agent and/or attorney). 
e.  A property survey conducted no more than five (5) years prior to the filing of the application, containing the legal description, boundaries, land area, notation whether any portion of the property is within a floodplain as regulated in section 3.01.00, and existing improvements located on the site. Where two (2) or more parcels are included within a proposed development, the survey shall include all parcels that are part of the proposed development, including all phases. The survey shall be prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. If the survey is older than five (5) years, the survey must be certified by a surveyor registered in the State of Georgia as to whether changes have or have not been made to the property. 
f.  A vicinity map indicating the location of the site proposed for development. 
g.  Proof of payment of fees. 
h.  Other information as may be required by the administrator. 
12.01.02.  Determination of completeness. 
A.  All applications shall be complete before acceptance for review and decision-making. A determination of completeness is a determination that all required documents and plans have been submitted in sufficient number, and that all fees have been paid. A determination of completeness is not a determination of compliance with substantive standards and criteria. 
B.  The administrator shall determine, within five (5) days of receipt of an application, whether the application is complete. 
C.  If the administrator determines that the application is not complete, the administrator shall send notice to the applicant identifying the deficiencies. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notice to correct the deficiencies. Until the applicant corrects the deficiencies, no further action shall be taken for processing the application. If the applicant fails to correct the deficiencies within the thirty-day period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn, and fees shall be forfeited. 
D.  If the administrator determines that the application is complete, the application shall be processed for review and action in accordance with the procedural requirements set forth in section 12.02.00. 
12.01.03.  Applications subject to administrative action. 
A.  The following applications shall be reviewed and decisions rendered by the administrator: 
1.  Development plans and subdivision plats for multifamily residential, manufactured home developments, and all nonresidential development, pursuant to the requirements for base zoning districts, overlay zoning districts, subdivision plats for conventional subdivisions, conservation subdivision developments, and residential fly-in neighborhoods. 
2.  Administrative waivers (see section 11.03.00). 
3.  Development permits (see section 12.02.06). 
4.  Applications for minor modifications to zoning conditions and development conditions related solely to dimensional or site design standards required by the board of commissioners. 
B.  Applications for permits pursuant to the building and technical codes shall be reviewed and decisions rendered by the building official, pursuant to the requirements set forth in appendix B. 
12.01.04.  Applications subject to zoning advisory board action. 
A.  The following applications shall be reviewed and decisions rendered by the zoning advisory board: 
1.  Variances (see section 11.02.00). 
2.  Conditional uses (see section 11.05.00). 
3.  Modifications to conditions placed on conditional uses and/or variances. 
B.  The following applications shall be reviewed by the zoning advisory board and recommendations provided to the board of commissioners. 
1.  Rezoning of property and amendments to the official zoning map. 
2.  Amendments to the ULDC. 
3.  Amendments to the comprehensive plan and associated future land use map. 
12.01.05.  Reserved. 
12.01.06.  Applications subject to board of commissioners action. The following applications shall be reviewed and decisions rendered by the board of commissioners: 
1.  Rezoning (amendment of the official zoning map) of property. 
2.  Amendment of the future infrastructure map. 
3.  Amendments to the ULDC. 
4.  Amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
5.  Appeals of administrative and zoning advisory board decisions (see section 12.04.00.) 
6.  Modifications to conditions placed on rezonings. 
7.  Major modifications to master development plans. 
12.01.07.  Specifications for digital files. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Final plats required in digital format showing address and lot number inside each lot; all lots must be closed polygons. 
2.  All drawings shall be geo-referenced to the US State Plane coordinate system, NAD 83, GA West Zone, US Survey Feet. All drawings shall contain a reference survey marker (pin) tied to the Henry County GIS GPS monument network. 
3.  All features depicted in the drawings shall be surveyed after construction. Henry County, may, from time to time spot check coordinates to ensure accuracy. The table in subsection 12.01.06.C. specifies the features that shall be surveyed. Water system features shall be surveyed at a horizontal accuracy of ≤ 0.3 foot and vertical accuracy of ≤ 0.5 foot. Sewer system features shall be surveyed at a horizontal accuracy of ≤ 0.5 foot and a vertical accuracy of ≤ 0.1 foot. 
4.  The following feature geometry types shall be shot directly using the survey instrument and tied to the Henry County GIS monument network: 
a.  All point features (hydrants, valves, sewer manholes, etc.); 
b.  All line features at all endpoints, bends, and turns (pipes, etc.); and 
c.  All polygon features at all corners and bends (project boundaries, lots, rights-of-way, etc.). 
5.  The following feature types are acceptable: Line, polyline, text, and insert. Any other features such as leaders, blocks, etc., shall not be present on the standard Henry County GIS CAD layers. 
6.  Henry County GIS will provide template (or seed) drawing files upon request. 
B.  Layering. 
1.  All required layers listed in Henry County GIS CAD layers shall contain only the features that are described for that layer. For example, the BOUNDARY_LINE layer shall only contain the boundary line and not such features as north arrows or parcels. 
2.  All required layers shall be present in the drawing except for features that do not pertain to a particular project. For example, some commercial projects may not contain sewer taps as part of the construction and should not be included in the drawing. 
3.  All layers shall be clearly differentiated from each other. 
a.  Two (2) layers having the names "WATER_LINE" and "WATER_LINES" shall not exist in the same drawing. 
b.  "SEWER_LINE_TEXT" and "SEWER_TEXT" shall not exist in the same drawing. 
4.  All text shall appear on separate layers from the layers they annotate. For example, text describing a sewer line shall be on the SEWER_LINE_TEXT layer not the SEWER_LINE layer. 
5.  Text leaders shall be placed on the text layer, not the feature layer. For example, the leader for the diameter of a water pipe shall be on the WATER_LINE_TEXT layer, not the WATER_LINE layer. Leaders shall be drawn using line features not leaders. 
C.  Drawing. 
1.  All layers shall conform to the proper geometry type (line, polygon, text) as indicated in the table below. 

 
2.  All polygon type features shall be completely closed. Lines may need to be duplicated on more than one (1) layer. 
a.  Subdivision parcels shall be closed figures on their layer (not closed with the subdivision boundary). 
b.  Road edge-of-pavement shall be drawn as closed polygons. 
c.  Where a polygon feature extends beyond the edge of the plan, the property boundary (repeated on the polygon feature's layer) shall be used to close the polygon. 
d.  All edges on polygon features shall be snapped together at the vertices. Gaps in polygon boundaries shall not be accepted. 
3.  Sewer features. 
a.  Sewer lines and sewer taps shall be digitized with proper directionality: lines shall be drawn from the uphill node to the downhill node or flipped after the lines have been digitized. 
b.  All tangents between sewer manholes shall be drawn with a single line. 
c.  All tangents shall be snapped at endpoints intersecting at the exact center of the manhole. No gaps shall exist between tangents. 
d.  Manholes shall be symbolized consistently with a circle centered exactly on the tangent endpoints. 
e.  Water features. 
f.  Water lines shall be digitized with all straight-line pipes consisting of only two (2) points. Straight-line pipes shall begin and end at the following features (nodes): Hydrants, valves, meters, pumps, tees, crosses, and valves. 
g.  Curves may be digitized with enough vertices to capture the curve geometry. Curves or arcs may also be used to designate curved pipe. 
h.  All water lines shall be continuous, with pipe endpoints snapped to each other at endpoints (nodes). 
i.  End-of-line caps shall be drawn to differentiate end-of-lines from lines that extend beyond the extent of the drawing. Caps shall be drawn for lines that are to be permanently capped when the project is complete, not for lines that are temporarily capped pending inspection. 
4.  Stormwater features. 
a.  Storm sewers shall be digitized with proper directionality: lines shall be drawn from the uphill node to the downhill node or flipped after the lines have been digitized. 
b.  All tangents between stormwater structures shall be drawn with a single line. 
c.  All tangents shall be snapped at endpoints intersecting at the exact center of the structure. No gaps shall exist between tangents. 
d.  Stormwater structures shall be symbolized consistently with a designated symbol centered exactly on the tangent endpoints. 
D.  Symbolization. Symbols shall be standardized according to examples provided in the Henry County GIS template file. The following "point" features shall be symbolized using standard Henry County GIS CAD symbols and drawn as inserts: 

E.  Annotations. 
1.  Any nonstandard water and sewer lines shall be annotated as such. Line diameter, material, ownership, etc., that does not conform to standard practice shall be noted in the corresponding annotation layer. For example, standard subdivision sewer lines are eight (8) inches in diameter. Any other diameter shall be annotated on the SEWER_LINE_TEXT layer. 
2.  All addresses and lot numbers shall be number data type (that is, no text or symbols (#, -, ft, _, ", ', etc.)). If the lot does not have a number, this layer shall be blank. 
F.  File naming and revisions. 
1.  File names shall correspond exactly to the subdivision name and shall be consistent from one (1) version to the next. The file name shall contain the drawing finalized date (in YYMMDD format) as part of the name. There shall be no blank spaces in the name, only underscores. An example file name for the November 10, 2003, final plat for the third phase of the Monarch Village subdivision is: "Monarch_Village_3_031110." 
2.  File finalized dates shall only be updated by the contractor/developer and not by Henry County GIS. 
G.  Deliverable format. All files shall be delivered on single disk media in MicroStation or AutoCAD (release 14 or higher) DWG format and DXF software. CDs, four and one-half-inch floppies, and zip disks are all acceptable media. Files shall not be spanned over more than one (1) disk. 
H.  Fee for nonelectronic submittal. An additional charge of twenty (20) percent of the final plat fee or ten dollars ($10.00) per lot, whichever is greater, will be required if a copy of the final revision is not submitted in electronic format. This fee must be paid prior to final plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(21), 6-15-10) 
Sec. 12.02.00. - Procedural requirements. 
12.02.01.  Submittal requirements for all applications. 
A.  All maps, concept plans, development plans, and preliminary and final subdivision plats, though not building plans, shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Drawings, except final plats and as-built plats, may be submitted either on paper or in digital files. 
2.  All final plats, as-built plats, and drawings submitted in digital format shall comply with the specifications set forth in section 12.01.06. 
3.  All drawings shall contain the dates of preparation and any revisions. 
4.  All drawings shall be at the same scale, and shall be a minimum of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Drawing sheets shall be not larger than twenty-four (24) inches × thirty-six (36) inches and shall be uniform in size for a submittal. 
6.  All drawings shall contain a graphic and written scale and a north arrow. 
7.  All drawings shall contain the name, address, and telephone number of the preparer(s), property owner(s) and developer(s). 
8.  Drawings for development proposed in phases shall contain all required information for the total site, for each phase, and shall depict phase lines on the drawings. 
9.  All drawings shall contain the seal and signature of the licensed professional preparing the drawings and computations. 
10.  All plats shall conform to the following specifications: 
a.  Dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) of a foot. 
b.  Bearings and angles: radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest second. 
c.  The error of closure shall be not less than one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet. 
B.  Required support data and plans. 
1.  Where a site contains, or borders, a cemetery or gravesite, the applicant shall clearly delineate the area on all development plans and construction drawings. The drawings shall indicate that the site shall be enclosed or fenced with a temporary fence or equivalent which allows access but clearly marks the site for protection during construction. In addition, a permanent, ten-foot, natural or landscaped buffer shall be maintained around the site and shown on the final plat. The site shall also be visibly marked before grading is to begin. 
2.  All preliminary plats and development plans shall be accompanied by a stormwater management plan meeting the requirements of section 8.04.00. 
3.  Whenever a development proposes to disturb the regulatory floodplain, an engineering study shall be provided, in compliance with the requirements set forth in section 3.01.00. 
4.  A landscape plan shall include sufficient information to determine whether the proposed landscape improvements are in conformity with the requirements of chapter 5, including the following: 
a.  Identification of all trees, natural features, and manmade structures that will be retained upon the site; 
b.  A description of proposed landscaping improvements and plantings, including the species, size, quantity, and location of trees, shrubs, and other landscaping materials. 
5.  Whenever a development contains protected open space, a management plan shall be provided, demonstrating compliance with the standards for resource and open space protection set forth in chapter 3 and in section 6.02.01. 
6.  Whenever a development contains a floodplain or floodway, a floodplain management plan shall be provided, demonstrating compliance with the requirements of section 3.01.00. 
7.  Applications for new or expanded mines or quarries shall provide information necessary to demonstrate compliance with state and federal laws and regulations. 
8.  Erosion and sediment control plans shall comply with the requirements of section 8.05.00 and shall contain the following additional information: 
a.  Name and phone number of a twenty-four-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
b.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters that "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
c.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
d.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan shall show options for year-round seeding. 
e.  Include the statement: "Mulch, temporary vegetation, or permanent vegetation shall be completed on all exposed areas within fourteen (14) days after disturbance ceases." 
f.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
g.  Detailed drawings and narrative notes to demonstrate compliance with the erosion and sediment control standards set forth in section 8.05.00 and the requirements in the current edition of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
h.  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection." 
i.  Existing and planned contours, with ground slope contour intervals of two (2) feet. Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
C.  Requirements regarding permanent reference monuments. Materials, size, and location shall conform to the following: 
1.  Steel pins not less than one-half-inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches long, with a survey marker cap showing the land surveyors registration number shall be set at all lot corners. 
2.  Resetting monuments. Any monuments disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset by the applicant and approved by the administrator. 
12.02.02.  Requirements for development plans. 
A.  A subdivision plat may be submitted along with a rezoning request. However, the administrator shall not approve the plat until the rezoning request has been granted by the board of commissioners. 
B.  The applicant shall submit the number of copies of development plans and supporting data and supporting plans as specified by the county. 
C.  The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of construction improvement plans to the HCWSA. 
D.  All development plans shall provide the information specified in section 12.02.01 and the following information: 
1.  All information needed to demonstrate compliance with the site design and development standards in this ULDC. 
2.  Copies of all state and federal permits, including state and jurisdictional waters identification (delineation) and mapping, must be submitted to the stormwater quality and pollution prevention department for inclusion in the site development/disturbance plan review. Digital copies are encouraged. Proposed development plans will not receive approval without documentation of all necessary state and federal coordination, as required by law; 
3.  Proposed site developments that include multi-parcel layouts must include a master drainage plan for the complete proposed project site disturbance. Future alteration to site drainage for individual parcels as part of a larger site development plan is not allowed without approval from the stormwater quality and pollution prevention department director or designee. See subchapter 3.03.05(3) for stream buffer requirements regarding master grading project plans; 
4.  Flood limit identification and mapping must be submitted to the stormwater quality and pollution prevention department for any proposed development site which receives runoff from a drainage basin ten (10) acres in size or larger. As such, no structures or septic system components will be allowed within the ten-acre drainage area, unless the stormwater quality and pollution prevention department director or designee determines that the structure will have no adverse effect to water quality. 
5.  Depiction of existing uses in adjacent areas. 
6.  In the case of a resubdivision, a copy of existing plat shall be provided with the proposed resubdivision imposed thereon. 
7.  Proposed name of subdivision, including unit, phase, and lines separating phases and/or units. 
8.  Draft of proposed deed restrictions to be imposed. 
9.  Zoning district of the property, including any special conditions of zoning imposed by the board of commissioners. 
10.  Deed, record names, and addresses of adjoining property owners or subdivisions, along with zoning of the adjacent parcels. 
11.  Total area in acres and square feet. 
12.  Any project proposed to be developed in phases shall provide all information for the total site and for each phase. 
13.  Topographic contours and vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet when a new street is proposed. 
14.  Soil conditions according to U.S. Soil Conservation Service Classifications Manual. 
15.  Proposed density (both gross and net) and lot layout, consistent with the requirements of the future land use map of the comprehensive plan, including lot and block numbers and/or letters. Layout of all lots shall indicate building setback lines, lot dimensions, and lot area. Lots with detention ponds shall meet minimum zoning area requirements outside the area of the detention pond. 
16.  For mixed use projects, including development in the OI, MU, and IAC zoning districts, drawing notes shall include a table summarizing the total amount of development in each use, the percentage of the total site, net density of proposed residential development. 
17.  Location of existing and platted property lines, location, width, and names of all platted roads, railroads, utility rights-of-way, public areas, existing buildings or structures. 
18.  Show all existing and proposed easements. Show drainage easements for storm drainage pipes which cross individual lots. 
19.  Protected open space. 
20.  Depiction of natural features on the site and adjacent areas, including streams, lakes, other water bodies, wetlands, designated groundwater recharge areas, land subject to a 100-year flood hazard, including contour elevations, and geologic features, and other protected environmental features, as set forth in chapter 3, including an outline of wooded areas, vegetation, and surface drainage, together with information on methods for protection of natural features as required in this ULDC. State if elevations are taken from a surveyed stream on a FEMA map or if the elevations are from an independent study (HEC-2, QUICK-2, etc.). Flood elevations on any lots within a 100-year flood hazard area shall be shown. In addition, the foundation elevation that is a minimum of three (3) feet above the established 100-year flood evaluation shall be shown. This data may be shown either on the layout or in tabular form. 
21.  Wetland areas shall be field located. Notation whether live streams and/or wetlands lie within this subdivision, or unit and phase. Provide a copy of wetlands delineation report from a qualified professional with training and experience in wetland delineation following the guidelines of the latest version of the Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual. 
22.  Proposed buffers, landscaping, and tree protection as required by chapter 5. This shall include the location, size, and type of proposed plant materials. 
23.  Location of proposed buildings to be used for commercial, industrial, recreational or public facility uses, consistent with the requirements of chapter 4. 
24.  Details regarding other proposed structures or additions to existing structures, including accessory structures and signs. 
25.  Layout and names of proposed roads, alleys, public walkways/bikeways (i.e., sidewalks, trails, paths, bicycle facilities), with width of pavement and rights-of-way. Total lineal feet of proposed roads (per phase and total) shall be indicated. The proposed road system shall conform to the future infrastructure map and the requirements of section 8.01.00. 
26.  Construction plans of streets including typical cross section and grade profiles. Show percent of each grade and length of each vertical curve. 
27.  Show the centerline stopping distance for all points of access onto county roads. Show posted speed limit of existing county roads. 
28.  Existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of boundary roads with sizes, grades, and invert elevations from field surveys or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. Location of proposed public facilities such as sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drainage facilities, culverts, bridges, and other underground or aboveground facilities within the parcel to be developed, or within the rights-of-way of roads bordering the parcel, with sizes, grades and invert elevations from field surveys or other sources, consistent with the requirements of chapter 8. 
29.  Construction plans of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size, and points of discharge and connection to other trunk or lateral sewers. 
30.  Construction plans of storm drainage systems with pipe sizes, length, grade, location of outlets, runoff and velocity calculations, etc. All storm drainage systems carrying off-site runoff shall be designed for the 100-year storm event. All storm pipe within the county right-of-way shall be approved by the county. 
31.  Construction plans of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves, and all appurtenances. 
32.  Final contours. In some cases, the street profiles will suffice in showing the amount of cut and fill; however, in many cases, final contours need to be shown on the plans. 
33.  Any structural practice used shall be explained and illustrated with detail drawings. 
34.  Show the following notes on all plans: 
a.  A twenty-foot storm sewer and sanitary sewer easement exists along each property line and along each lot line, centered on lot lines, for future drainage and sanitary sewer lines. 
b.  All storm drains shall be extended to the rear setback line. 
c.  Grade stakes shall be set on all streets prior to any street grading. An as-built subgrade centerline profile shall be submitted and approved by county prior to the installation of curb and gutter or waterlines. 
d.  An as-built detention pond detail and revised hydro study shall be submitted to the county prior to the final approval. 
e.  All undisturbed buffers shall be field located; staked and flagged or marked with "tenzar" (or similar type fencing); and shall be submitted to the county for approval prior to grading. 
E.  Applications for development plans within each watershed protection area identified and regulated in section 3.02.00 shall provide the following additional information: 
1.  The distance of each impervious structure and surface to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream and reservoir. 
2.  The location of each perennial stream that crosses or abuts the site. 
3.  The location of each public reservoir that abuts the site. 
4.  The location, elevation and orientation of the 100-year floodplain on the site. 
5.  A certification issued by a registered land surveyor or registered engineer verifying the location of the site as being located either within the water quality critical area, the limited development area or outside of the both areas. 
6.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purposes of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
F.  Administrative action. 
1.  The administrator shall make a determination of completeness as set forth in section 12.01.02. 
2.  When an application for development plan has been determined to be complete, the application and all accompanying information shall be distributed to all required reviewers. 
3.  The plan review process shall include a determination of compliance with the regulations of this ULDC by the administrator and recommendations for any changes necessary to improve the subdivision. 
4.  If the development plan is determined to be deficient by the administrator or the HCWSA, it shall be returned to the applicant for changes and corrections. 
5.  A development plan may be approved with conditions. If the development plan is approved with modifications, the conditions shall be indicated on the plat. A copy of the plat with changes indicated shall be returned to the applicant, who shall have the revisions made by the engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared the plat before the final plat is submitted for approval. 
6.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, when in compliance with the standards for erosion and sedimentation control as set forth in section 8.05.00, shall be approved prior to issuance of a building or development permit to begin construction. 
12.02.03.  Requirements regarding improvements. 
A.  Pre-construction review and approval. 
1.  Prior to grading, the applicant shall arrange a pre-construction conference. The pre-construction meeting shall include a review of the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, street cross sections and profiles, construction specifications, procedures for inspections and testing, stormwater drainage and detention facilities, and any other matters concerning the development. The applicant shall provide a list of names, telephone numbers, addresses, and business license numbers of all contractors and subcontractors employed on a job. A separate pre-construction meeting is required with the HCWSA prior to any water or sanitary sewer installation. 
2.  A development permit shall be issued only after the approval of the construction improvements plans and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. Site grading shall be limited only to those areas clearly defined on the approved plans. Any site grading which is done without an approved soil erosion control plan and development permit is a violation of this ULDC and shall result in enforcement penalties as provided by sections 12.06.00 and 12.07.00. In instances where grading has occurred prior to issuance of a development permit, or when grading has exceeded the area approved according to the approved plans and development permit, the permit fee amount shall be doubled. Any violations of the conditions or limitations imposed by the development permit shall also be subject to penalties provided by section 12.07.00. 
B.  Inspections. 
1.  [Requests for inspections.] The applicant is responsible for making requests for inspections before beginning any of the stages indicated below. No grading shall commence without an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and a development permit. Soil erosion prevention measures shall be installed prior to grading. 
2.  Inspection notification. The applicant shall notify the development inspection department at least twenty-four (24) hours before any stage of construction begins. If construction during any phase is stopped or delayed due to inclement weather or other reasons, the applicant shall notify the development inspection department twenty-four (24) hours before commencing construction activity again. 
3.  Clearing and grubbing. After providing the notice in paragraph B.2. above, clearing of the right-of-way may begin. 
4.  Street grading. Following inspection and approval of the street clearing and grubbing, and street grade stakes have been set by the project's engineer, the contractor may proceed with the grading of the streets. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the county to determine that the required ninety-five (95) percent maximum dry density is being achieved. At least one (1) test shall be made over each storm drainpipe when it has been covered with eighteen (18) inches of back fill material. 
5.  Curb and gutter. Following the installation of all proposed sanitary sewer lines, if required, and acceptance of the street grading the contractor may proceed with the construction of the curb and gutter. 
6.  Subgrade compaction. Following the completion and approval of the street grading and installation of curb and gutter the contractor may proceed with the preparation of the subgrade. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the county to determine that the required one hundred (100) percent maximum dry density is being achieved. 
7.  Base preparation. After the street subgrade has been inspected and approved, the contractor may proceed with the construction of the street pavement base. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the county to assure that the required one hundred (100) percent maximum dry density has been achieved. Cores shall be taken as directed by the county to determine the constructed thickness of the base course. 
8.  Paving. After the road base has been approved and accepted by the county, and the HCWSA has approved the video of the sanitary sewer (if the property has sewer lines), the contractor may proceed with the construction of the asphaltic concrete binder and/or surface courses. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the county to assure that the required ninety-eight (98) percent maximum has been achieved. 
9.  Street core tests. Street core test results shall be submitted and approved prior to the recording of a final subdivision plat. These cores shall be taken as directed by the county immediately upon completion of the surface course. 
10.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control. During all of the stages of inspection, soil erosion, and sedimentation control measures shall be inspected. The subdivision shall be subject to soil erosion and sedimentation control inspection at any other times determined necessary to assure compliance with the approved plan. The applicant is responsible for continued maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
11.  Work stoppage. A stop work order may be issued at anytime if it is determined to be necessary due to failure of the applicant to comply with any of the requirements of this ULDC. A stop work notice shall be posted on the site and the applicant shall be notified in writing concerning the reasons for the stop work order. Any work which proceeds in violation of a stop order shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in section 12.07.00. 
12.  Work delays. If construction during any phase of development is delayed due to inclement weather or for other reasons, the applicant shall notify the county prior to resuming construction activity. 
13.  [Street improvements.] Street improvements shall be inspected by the county as follows: 
a.  Check results of subgrade, base, and embankment compaction tests and depth. 
b.  Inspect for compaction around all drainage pipes and drainage structures. 
c.  Inspect and document the alignment and condition of curb and gutter equipment. 
d.  Check fill material before authorizing use. 
e.  Inspect and document concrete pours for curbs and headwalls. 
f.  Inspect and document paving machine adjustments. 
g.  Inspect and document the placement of asphalt pavement for compliance with material and weight specifications. Check core testing results. 
h.  Obtain from the applicant all records of asphalt mix and materials quantities. 
i.  Require as-graded street profiles and review for compliance to the approved construction plans prior to installing any curb and gutter or base material. 
14.  [Storm drainage improvement inspections.] Storm drainage improvements shall be inspected by the county as follows: 
a.  Inspect cross drainpipes to assure that metal pipe is properly coated and sized according to plans. 
b.  Reject any defective pipe and assure that it is not used on the job. 
c.  Observe pipe-laying operation to assure that pipes are true to line and grade, properly located, and bedding and back fill is compacted according to specifications. Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, and back filling operations. 
d.  Inspect riprap or concrete head walls for proper installation; ensure that drainage catch basins and manholes are installed properly. 
e.  Inspect drainage ditches within the street right-of-way and drainage easements within the subdivision to assure proper embankment slope and grade according to specifications. 
f.  For enclosed storm drainage systems, inspect to ensure that pipes are true to line and grade. Storm drain sewer pipes on steep slopes, greater than twelve (12) percent, shall be checked to see that they are properly anchored. Inspect pipe materials and document pipe manufacturer, class and size. Pipe materials for storm sewers shall be approved by the county. Inspect to ensure that sewers are laid with uniform slope between structures and have straight alignments between structures. 
g.  Inspect stormwater detention facilities to assure compliance with approved plans capacity volumes and county construction standards. 
15.  [Sanitary sewer and water main inspections.] Sanitary sewer and water main improvements shall be inspected by the HCWSA. 
C.  Action following completion of improvements. Once the proposed improvements are substantially in place, and the applicant is seeking final approval from the county, the applicant shall submit six (6) copies of the final plat for review and comment. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. The final plat may include only that portion of the land area depicted on the preliminary plat which has been developed and is to be recorded, provided that it complies with all requirements of this ULDC. 
1.  The final plat shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect, at a scale of one hundred (100) feet or less to the inch and shall provide the following information: 
a.  Name of the subdivision, including unit and/or phase of development (if applicable). 
b.  North point, scale, and date. 
c.  Names and addresses of the owners of record of the property to be subdivided. 
d.  Developer name, address, and phone number(s). 
e.  Name, addresses, phone number(s), and registration seal of the engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared the final plat. 
f.  Certification by surveyor that all monuments exist and their sizes, locations, and materials are correctly shown on the plat. 
g.  Legal description of the property including reference to land lot and district lines, street right-of-way lines, easements and other rights-of-way, property lines of lots and other sites with accurate dimensions to nearest one-hundredth (0.01) of a foot; bearings and angles on all lines, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest minute. 
h.  Blocks designated by letter and lots by numerical order. 
i.  Current zoning, including setbacks and any special conditions placed on the rezoning of the property, or, stipulated in deed restrictions or restrictive covenants (i.e., minimum house size, type of construction). 
j.  The layout of the subdivision, including the following information: 
i.  All street right-of-way boundaries, street names, addresses, tax identification numbers, bearings, angles of intersection, and right-of-way and easement widths. 
ii.  The lengths of all arcs, including radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings, and the length and bearing of the long cord of every arc. 
iii.  Drainage, sanitary sewer, and utility easements along all side and rear lot lines and watercourses as required. 
iv.  Detention pond maintenance and access easement to be shown, minimum twenty (20) feet to a public right-of-way. 
v.  Location of all storm drains including pipe sizes. 
vi.  Any buffer areas required in the ULDC, including statements whether or not the buffer areas are to be landscaped, undisturbed, fenced, or a combination-type buffer. 
vii.  All lot lines measured to hundredths (0.01) of a foot. The bearings shall be indicated for all lot lines to the nearest second. The error of closure should not be less than one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet. 
viii.  Individual lot sizes measured in square feet. This figure may be placed on the lot or in a table with addresses and tax parcel identification numbers. All lots with detention ponds must meet the minimum zoning area requirements outside the area of the detention pond. 
k.  The outline of all property to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or to be reserved for common use of all property owners in the subdivision with the purpose of the dedication or reservation indicated. This shall include cemeteries or grave sites. 
l.  Location of sidewalks and pedestrian and/or bicycle ways. 
m.  Location and elevation of any 100-year flood hazard area, including the foundation elevation which is one (1) foot above the established 100-year flood elevation for each lot located within the flood hazard area. 
n.  Notation that live streams and/or wetlands lie (do not lie) within this subdivision, or unit and phase. If wetlands do lie within this subdivision, or unit and phase, the plat must include the following notation: "Wetlands shown on this plat are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Lot owners may be subject to penalty by law for disturbance to these wetland areas without proper authorization." 
o.  Copies of all materials test results for base and asphalt paving. 
p.  Verification by the county that all required inspections have been made and approved and the improvements to the subdivision, including street construction, sidewalks, drainage systems, right-of-way seeding, are in compliance with approved plans, all underground utilities have been installed, and street and traffic signs installed by the county. 
q.  Verification from the county that the soil erosion and sedimentation control for the subdivision is in compliance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
r.  Verification by the HCWSA that all requirements have been met, including submission of required documents and inspections. 
s.  Notation that Henry County assumes no responsibility for the overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the points shown on the plat, and as required by Henry County. 
t.  Notation that all storm drains shall be extended a minimum of thirty (30) feet behind any future residence or building. 
u.  Notation listing all utilities to be provided. 
2.  As-built drawings shall be submitted as follows: 
a.  The as-built drawing(s) shall be prepared by a professional engineer or surveyor, registered in the State of Georgia, at a minimum of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. As-built drawings shall also be submitted in digital format, in compliance with the specifications in section 12.01.06. 
b.  As-built construction plans for all water and sewerage facilities submitted to and approved by the HCWSA. 
c.  As-built construction plans for storm drainage system with grade, pipe sizes, and location of outlets and other drainage structures, street profiles, and stormwater management facilities. 
d.  As-built drawings of streets, storm drainage systems, and stormwater detention. The minimum required as-built information to be submitted with the final plat application includes the following: 
i.  The existing center line profile of all newly constructed streets. 
ii.  The size, material, length, slope, invert elevations, and accurate location of all storm drain pipes (this information can be shown on the plan view). 
iii.  The top and invert elevations of all drainage structures. 
iv.  An as-built topographical survey of all detention basins and details of existing outlet structures. Calculations showing volumes and outflow rates. 
3.  When the final plat has been reviewed and approved by the administrator, the applicant shall supply one (1) original drawing of the final plat on mylar or sepia in black ink, as well as five (5) copies of the final plat to the administrator. The minimum size shall be eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) inches and the maximum size shall be seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches. In addition, all other necessary documentation for recording shall be submitted at this time. 
4.  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, shall be attached in a form for recording. 
5.  After completion of the physical development of the subdivision, the applicant shall contact the administrator for a checklist specifying the procedure in obtaining the various approvals from county departments which will release the subdivision for final [approval]. 
6.  The applicant shall provide a letter of credit or maintenance bond meeting the requirements of section 12.02.13, to guarantee the maintenance of infrastructure and improvements. 
7.  For developments with multiple phases of construction, the administrator shall require that portions of a previously approved phase be placed under an extended letter of credit or maintenance bond if the previously approved phase is used as access for construction traffic for the development of future phases. A plan showing the various streets that will be used as access for the construction traffic through the previously approved phase shall also be provided. The duration of such an extended letter of credit or maintenance bond shall not exceed three (3) years from the date of approval of the final [plat] for the final phase of the development. 
8.  A letter of credit or maintenance bond shall be released at the end of the three-year period. Ninety (90) days prior to expiration, a final inspection of all subdivision improvements shall be performed by the county to determine the need for any repairs. If repairs are necessary, the administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant. 
9.  If the applicant fails to take the necessary action to make repairs within thirty (30) days of notification by the county, the administrator shall authorize the surety or bank issuing the letter of credit or maintenance bond to release to the county all funds. 
10.  The administrator may require the letter of credit or maintenance bond to be extended to ensure the completion of repairs started but not completed by the application for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
11.  When the final plat has been reviewed and approved by the administrator, the applicant shall submit the final plat in digital form, complying with the specifications in section 12.01.06. 
12.  Both the director of environmental compliance and plan review department and the director of the planning and zoning services division shall approve the final plat with a signature. The following notation shall be included on the final plat: 
"This plat is hereby approved for recording: 
By: ___________, Director, Henry County Planning and Zoning Services Division 
Date: ________ 
"This plat is hereby approved for recording: 
By: ___________, Director, Henry County Department of Environmental Compliance and Plan Review 
Date: ________ 
* Within the jurisdiction of a city for which the county, by agreement, has the responsibility to review the final plats, the notation shall be changed to reference the mayor of that respective city in lieu of the director of planning and zoning services division. 
13.  Once the final plat has been signed, the applicant shall be notified to pick up the mylar and prepare twenty-two (22) required copies for distribution. Three (3) original copies will be returned to the applicant for recording. Copies shall be distributed as necessary to county departments and utility companies. For projects located within the jurisdiction of a city, for which Henry County has an agreement to handle the final platting requirements, county staff will reference the applicable code section for that particular jurisdiction and adhere to their noted requirements. 
14.  The applicant shall be responsible for properly recording final plat at the clerk of the superior court of Henry County. 
12.02.04.  Requirements regarding dedication of public improvements or public sites. 
A.  A plat is required for the dedication to the county of right-of-way, public improvements, and sites for public purposes. Public improvements may include streets, sewer lines, or water lines, outside of an area to be subdivided or developed, and which will provide access or service to development, or which will serve future development in an area. Sites for public purposes may include parks and recreation sites, school sites, site for public safety facilities, sites for water treatment facilities, sites for sewer treatment facilities, or sites for other public buildings. 
B.  Land dedicated for public purposes to the Henry County Board of Commissioners or the HCWSA shall be eligible for credits toward any development impact fees adopted by the county. 
C.  When a site is dedicated for public purposes to the appropriate county authority (board of commissioners, board of education, HCWSA), the land shall be transferred by a deed and dedication plat and recorded by the clerk of superior court, following acceptance by Henry County. 
1.  Park and recreation sites shall be first recommended by the zoning advisory board and recreation board prior to action for acceptance of dedication of the site by the board of commissioners. 
2.  The board of education shall review the location and need for the school sites, and decide whether or not to accept dedication of a site within ninety (90) days of receipt of a preliminary plan, or preliminary plat and construction improvements plans. The board of education shall consult with the zoning advisory board for recommendation on school sites. If the board of education decides to accept dedication of the site for a school, it shall notify the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall then direct the administrator to have the deed and dedication plat recorded by the clerk of superior court. 
3.  Land dedication for fire or police stations, public buildings, and other public works that are non-rights-of-way related, shall be transferred to the county by a deed and dedication plat and recorded by the clerk of superior court, following acceptance by the board of commissioners. Right-of-way deeds and dedication plats associated with subdivisions shall be transferred to the county through the final plat process, in accordance with the provisions detailed in section 12.02.03, and shall only require the signatures of the environmental compliance and plan review director, and the planning and zoning services division director, or in the case where the subdivision is located within the jurisdiction of a city for which the county has an agreement to review the final plats, the signature of the mayor of that respective city shall be referenced in lieu of the signature of the planning and zoning services division director. 
4.  Land dedicated for water and sewage treatment facilities and other facilities under jurisdiction of the HCWSA shall be recorded following approval of the HCWSA. 
D.  The review of a dedication plat may include approval of a preliminary plat, construction improvement plans, a final plat, and as-built construction plans. The approval process for dedication plats shall be the same as for a final subdivision plat. A letter of credit shall be required for all public improvements as required for final plats (see section 12.02.13). 
E.  When a site is determined necessary for public purposes by the county, and the applicant elects to reserve rather than dedicate the site, then it shall be reserved for public purposes. The applicant shall allow a period of one (1) year from the date of preliminary plat and construction improvements plan approval, during which time the county may authorize and complete the purchase of the site. During the one-year period for acquisition, the applicant may proceed with the necessary approvals for subdivision of the remainder of the development of the reserved tract. 
12.02.05.  Requirements for development plans for a manufactured home development. 
A.  The application shall be accompanied by eight (8) copies of a development plan and a narrative report summarizing the development concept and time schedule. 
B.  The development plan shall comply with the submittal requirements in section 12.02.02 and shall include the following additional information: 
1.  Details demonstrating compliance with the requirements of section 4.03.16 regarding manufactured home parks and developments, including the proposed location of all lots or pads, buffers, required recreation areas, structures, and appurtenant facilities. 
2.  If the manufactured home development is proposed as a subdivision, all information required for a subdivision plat. 
3.  Detailed information regarding placement of all improvements, in compliance with the requirements set forth in chapter 8. 
C.  The narrative report shall include the following information: 
1.  A summary of acres, dwelling units, and net density, as well as a statement of the number of acres devoted to buffer areas, recreation acres, and green belts, or other amenities, such as lakes, etc. 
2.  A description of the phases under which construction shall be programmed, depicting the geographical limits of each phase of construction. 
3.  A draft of the proposed rules and regulations which shall be established and enforced by management if the development is a mobile home park. 
4.  A draft of the text of covenants running with the land which shall be binding on the applicant and/or any future owner of the property so long as the property is used as a mobile home development, which shall provide for perpetual upkeep and maintenance in a clean and healthy state, all grass, lawns, shrubbery, trees, recreation areas, and other natural amenities of the property including buffer zones. Said covenants shall be drawn to the satisfaction of, and subject to approval of Henry County, and Henry County shall be made a party thereto having full powers of enforcement at law or equity or otherwise. Upon approval by the county attorney, said covenants shall be recorded in the superior court of Henry County and the recording of said covenants shall be a condition precedent to any development, defoliation, or other construction on the property. 
5.  In addition, typical elevation drawings, including general architectural style and buildings exterior materials, if possible, of all permanent buildings and structures to be constructed on the premises shall be submitted. 
12.02.06.  Requirements for permits. (Note: Permits required by the International Building, Gas, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, the National Electrical Code and the International Residential Code shall also comply with the requirements set forth in Appendix B, Administration of Building and Technical Codes.) 
A.  Generally. 
1.  Applications for permits shall be submitted on forms provided by the county. 
2.  Applications shall be accompanied by payment of fees as required by each department's most recently approved fee schedule. 
3.  Applications shall be accompanied by plans, drawings, or other documents as required by the county. 
4.  All permit applications shall be complete prior to processing. 
B.  Sign permits generally. 
1.  In addition to the general submittal requirements, an applicant for a sign permit shall provide the following information: 
a.  Address of building, structure, or lot to where the sign is to be attached or erected; 
b.  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, property lines and other signs located on the lot showing compliance with all setback lines required by the county; 
c.  Three (3) sets of accurately scaled color drawings of the plans, contents, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground for the sign as well as a scaled drawing of the site showing drives, structures, and any other limiting site features; 
d.  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign (i.e., contractor or builder); 
e.  Written consent of the owner of the building or lot upon which the sign is to be erected; and 
f.  A written list describing all other signs located on the lot indicating the sign type, size and placement. 
2.  Sign permits shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the administrator and the building official. Approval or denial shall be based upon the conformance of the plans and specifications with the requirements in the ULDC and with the applicable building code requirements. 
3.  All permits shall either be issued or denied within thirty (30) days of the submission date. 
4.  If the application is denied because it does not contain the required information or the information is inaccurate or false, a new application shall be submitted with all of the required information and such application shall be assigned a new submission date. When the application is denied, the administrator shall notify the applicant and state the reason(s) for the denial. 
5.  Every sign constructed, erected, or maintained for which a permit is required by this ULDC shall be plainly marked with the identification number issued by the building department for the structure firmly affixed to the sign in such manner that the identification number shall be readily visible, accessible for inspection and durable. 
6.  Displaying an identification number that has been tampered with, altered, or mutilated, or displaying a sign without an identification number shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable in magistrate court. 
C.  Temporary sign permits. 
1.  Permits may be issued for temporary signs in compliance with the standards set forth in subsection 7.04.07.D. 
2.  Permits for banners in county parks shall be valid for seventy-two (72) hours. Banners shall be removed at the end of this time period. 
3.  Permits for other temporary signs shall be valid for thirty (30) days from the date of permit issuance. 
4.  Permits for temporary signs, other than banners, may be renewed up to three (3) times, without additional application or fees. 
5.  A temporary sign permit shall not be issued for any lot for more than a twelve-month period. 
D.  Application requirements. 
1.  Copy of lease or letter of authorization from the property owner evidencing applicant's authority to pursue the WCF application; 
2.  The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the report; 
3.  The name, address, and phone number of the property owner, operator, and applicant; 
4.  The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
5.  The zoning district of the subject property and all adjacent properties; 
6.  A written legal description of the property; 
7.  Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines; 
8.  Topography of the property utilizing two-foot contour intervals; 
9.  The location of adjacent residential structures within one-hundred (100) feet of the property boundary; 
10.  The location, size and height of all structures on the property which is the subject of the application; 
11.  All required zoning and support structure setbacks; 
12.  Number and type of proposed antennas and their height above ground level, including the proposed placement of antennas on the support structure; 
13.  Certification that demonstrates the need for the WCF. Such documentation shall include all adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites owned by the applicant or others and propagation studies of the proposed site; 
14.  When requesting a permit for a WCF greater than one hundred (100) feet within a residential area, a written certification and technical analysis of why a similar structure at a height of less than one hundred (100) feet cannot be used. Documentation shall include a propagation study of the proposed site with a monopole or tower less than one hundred (100) feet. 
15.  Existing or proposed public rights-of-way, private roads and/or access easements through, on, or adjacent to the subject property. The proposed access driveway or roadway and parking area at the WCF site shall be shown, to include grading, drainage and traveled width, and type of surface materials proposed. A turn-around space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion. 
16.  A landscaping plan that conforms to the requirements of the ULDC. The method of irrigation and any proposed removal of vegetation shall be identified. 
17.  The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related facilities and structures of the proposed WCFs. 
18.  Both the WCF and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. May include the utilization of concealment design as required by the county. 
19.  WCF plan. For all WCFs, a plan (no larger than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches with an eleven-inch by seventeen-inch reduced copy) shall include a diagram of the proposed facility and antenna(s), including: 
A.  Elevations to include the following proposed dimensions: height, width and breadth. 
B.  Elevation views of the security barrier or equipment compound, indicating architectural design, exterior appearance and materials, including color. The security barrier shall not be less than six (6) feet in height with anti-climbing devices, as deemed appropriate by the administrator. 
C.  Mounting location on support structure, including height (AGL). 
D.  If a collocation on existing WCF or a concealed attached or nonconcealed attached WCF is proposed, identification of all mounting frames, arms, brackets or other devices or equipment used to hold antennas and other equipment in place. 
E.  Certification that the WCF, the foundation and all attachments are designed and will be constructed to meet all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable county, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations, including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. 
F.  If a freestanding WCF is proposed, it shall be demonstrated that the structure will be able to accommodate additional antenna, as required by section 7.05.09. 
Where a certification is called for in this section, such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. 
E.  Residential land disturbance (outside of a watershed protection area). 
1.  Applicants for the residential land disturbance permit shall provide a proposed site plan, drawn to scale by a registered surveyor or engineer, showing the lot, rights-of-way, easements, buffers, all preserved areas of trees, direction of drainage and proposed placement of the septic system, if any. Such plan shall also show the proposed location of all erosion control devices, setback lines, building size, location of the building on the lot, driveway, and the location of all other structures on the site. 
2.  A permit shall be issued upon submittal of the application and the required permit fee; however, land disturbance is not to proceed until an inspector has visited and approved an initial inspection verifying that the application complies with the ULDC. 
3.  Additional inspections may be made, as necessary at the discretion of the administration, in order to verify compliance with the requirements for erosion control in section 8.05.00 and tree protection in section 5.03.00. 
F.  Other land disturbance (outside of a watershed protection area). Applications for permits for any land-disturbing activity for any development shall meet the general requirements for all applications, shall include an erosion and sedimentation control plan as required in subsection 12.02.01.B.8., and the following additional information: 
1.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees shall also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
2.  Approval by the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation District (district). Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the county shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the county. Such review shall not be required if the county and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the county to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
3.  Identification of any violations of previous permits, the requirements of section 8.05.00, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration. 
4.  Proof of irrevocable letter of credit. 
5.  Proof of payment of all ad valorem taxes levied against the property. 
6.  No permit shall be issued by the administrator unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the administrator has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with the requirements of section 8.05.00. If a letter of credit is required, the permit shall not be issued until the requirements regarding the letter of credit have been satisfied. 
7.  If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
8.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
9.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the administrator, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ULDC. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
G.  Permits for land disturbing activity within a watershed protection area. 
1.  Within a watershed protection area, established as set forth in section 3.02.00, no land disturbing activity, construction, or other development, other than specifically exempted activities, may be conducted without a permit. 
2.  The following land use activities are exempted from the development review and permit requirements of this section: 
a.  Agriculture and forestry. Normal agricultural and forestry activities involving planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. Silvicultural activities shall conform to best management practices by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
b.  Mining activities. All mining activities that are permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the Georgia Surface Mining Act, as amended, are exempted. 
H.  Permits for timber removal. Applications for permits for timber removal shall follow the requirements below: 
1.  § 12-6-24. Notice of timber harvesting operations. 
(a)  (1)  A county governing authority may by ordinance or resolution require all persons or farms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of such county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside this state to provide notice of such harvesting operations to the county governing authority or the designated agent thereof prior to entering onto the property if possible, but in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after entering onto the property. Further, such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within twenty-four (24) hours after the job is completed. 
(2)  A municipal governing authority may by ordinance or resolution require all persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any incorporated area of such municipality for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside this state to provide notice of such harvesting operations to the municipal governing authority or the designated agent thereof prior to entering onto the property if possible, but in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after entering onto the property. Further, such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within twenty-four (24) hours after the job is completed. 
(b)  Any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to subsection (a) of this Code section shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Prior written notice shall be required of any person or firm harvesting such timber for each separate tract to be harvested thereby, shall be made only in such form as prescribed by rule or regulation of the director, and shall be limited to the following: 
(A)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(B)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under Code Section 48-5-7.5; 
(C)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(D)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber; 
(2)  Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via tele facsimile, e-mail, or such other means as approved by the governing authority, or by mail; 
(3)  The governing authority may require persons or firms subject to such notice requirement to deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided by this paragraph, in which case notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the governing authority or its designated agent a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county or municipality, as applicable, against any damage caused by such person or firm in an amount specified by the governing authority not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in Code Section 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. Each county or municipality shall require no more than one (1) bond from each person or firm harvesting timber regardless of the number of tracts harvested in such county or municipality by each such person or firm so long as the bond remains in effect. Otherwise, a valid replacement bond must be obtained and delivered to the governing authority of such county or municipality or its designated agent no later than the close of business on the fifth business day following the day that such governing authority filed a claim to recover damages against the then-existing bond. Upon filing such claim, such governing authority shall immediately provide notice thereof, including the date such claim was filed, to the person or firm causing the damage. Such notice may be given in person, by transmission of an electronic record via tele facsimile, or by e-mail. For purposes of this paragraph, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered; 
(4)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within such unincorporated area of the county or incorporated area of the municipality upon receipt of the same by the applicable governing authority or its designated agent and, if applicable, compliance with the requirements of paragraph (3) of this subsection and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the governing authority or its designated agent within three (3) business days after such change; 
(5)  Notice requirements shall be applicable to any such timber harvested on or after the effective date of the ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this Code section; and 
(6)  Violation of the notice requirements of any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this Code section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  The director shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary for purposes of the standard form required by paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(d)  Any municipal governing authority or designated agent thereof which receives a notice required by ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this Code section regarding timber harvesting operations to be conducted in whole or in part within the corporate limits of such municipality shall transmit a copy of such notice to the governing authority of the county or the designated agent thereof. 
(e)  (1)  No county, municipality, or other political subdivision in this state shall require any person or firm harvesting standing timber therein for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside this state to provide any notice of or plan or security for such harvesting or hauling of forest products except as provided by this Code section. 
(2)  No county, municipality, or other political subdivision in this state shall require any person or firm harvesting standing timber therein for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside this state to obtain any permit for such harvesting or hauling of forest products, including without limitation any permit for any new driveway in connection with timber harvesting operations; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not otherwise limit the authority of a county or municipality to regulate roads or streets under its jurisdiction in accordance with Title 32. 
(3)  The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall not preclude counties, municipalities, and other political subdivisions from enacting and enforcing tree ordinances, landscape ordinances, or streamside buffer ordinances; provided, however, such ordinances shall not apply to timber harvesting as described in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (4) of this subsection or in unzone tracts as described in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (4) of this subsection. 
(4)  (A)  The limitations on the regulatory authority of counties, municipalities, or other political subdivisions provided by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection shall apply only to timber harvesting operations which qualify as forestry land management practices or agricultural operations under Code Section 12-7-17, not incidental to development, on tracts which are zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purposes. 
(B)  The limitations on the regulatory authority of counties, municipalities, or other political subdivisions provided by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection shall also apply to tracts which are unzone. 
(5)  No county or municipality shall require a fee of any kind for receiving a notification of a timber harvest. 
I.  Temporary permits for special events. 
1.  In addition to the general submittal requirements, an applicant for a temporary permit for a special event shall provide the following information: 
a.  Address of building, structure, or lot to where the special event is to be located; 
b.  A site plan depicting the layout of the proposed special event; 
c.  Written consent of the owner of the building or lot upon which the special event will be located; and 
2.  Temporary permits for special events shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the administrator. Approval or denial shall be based upon the conformance of the plans and specifications with the requirements in the ULDC. 
3.  All permits shall either be issued or denied within thirty (30) days of the submission date. 
4.  If the application is denied because it does not contain the required information or the information is inaccurate or false, a new application shall be submitted with all of the required information and such application shall be assigned a new submission date. When the application is denied, the administrator shall notify the applicant and state the reason(s) for the denial. 
5.  The number of special events related to event facility uses shall be limited to five (5) per year, having no more than one (1) event facility related special event per month. This limitation is per calendar year and shall be effective the date of the official adoption of this ordinance [Ord. No. 17-06 ] and shall apply to both the applicant and subject property. Those properties that are zoned RA (Residential-Agricultural) must have an approved conditional use and special event permit, for event facility related uses. 
J.  Permit to disturb a cemetery. No known cemetery, burial ground, human remains, or burial object shall be knowingly disturbed by the owner or occupier of the land on which said subject is located for the purpose of developing or changing the use of any part of such land unless a permit is first obtained from the board of commissioners. 
12.02.07.  Requirements regarding ownership and management of open space. 
A.  Where open space is required in a proposed development, the open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. If the entity accepting an easement is not Henry County, then a right of enforcement favoring Henry County shall be included in the easement. The instrument shall be one (1) of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either paragraph a. or b. below: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence. The conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity that will ensure perpetual management of the open space. 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant, recorded on the final plat in favor of Henry County. 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
B.  The legal instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. The restrictions shall include all required by this ULDC. 
C.  Open space may be owned by a homeowners' or property owners' association. Where such association is established and authorized to own the protected open space, membership in the association shall be mandatory for all owners and their successors within the development containing the protected open space. The association shall be responsible for managing and maintaining the open space and any structures located within the open space. 
D.  A plan setting forth the requirements and procedures to be followed in order to manage the land and the vegetation on the land. Such management shall be consistent with the protection of natural resources on the land, consistent with the requirements of chapter 3. 
12.02.08.  Specific requirements regarding placement of manufactured homes in single-family residential districts. 
A.  Applications for approval of placement of manufactured homes shall meet the general submittal requirements set forth in section 12.02.05. In addition the application shall provide photographs or renderings of the front and side of the manufactured home or mobile home exterior finish and other information reasonably necessary to make determinations required by this ULDC. 
B.  The administrator shall make a determination of completeness as set forth in section 12.01.02. 
C.  The completed application shall be submitted to the compatibility standards review committee for review and approval or denial. 
D.  Approval or denial of the application shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the application and all required supporting materials. 
1.  The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application within two (2) working days after such decision is made. 
2.  Conditional approval shall require that the specific conditions and the reasons therefore be stated in writing and be agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant upon agreement. 
3.  In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be specifically stated in writing by designating each specific provision of this ULDC which is not met and an explanation as to the reason or reasons why each such provision is not met. 
E.  Approved manufactured homes and their placements shall be taxed in the same manner as comparable site-built homes within the area where the manufactured home is located. 
12.02.09.  Requirements for amending the official zoning map (rezoning). 
A.  [Requirements.] The official zoning map may be amended by the board of commissioners on its own motion, on recommendation from the zoning advisory board, or by approval by the board of commissioners of an application from a property owner. An adopted zoning resolution shall be an amendment to the official zoning map. 
B.  [Concept plans.] Concept plans shall be submitted with rezoning applications. Any concept plan shall contain the information required for all applications and the information set forth below: 
1.  Project name. 
2.  Vicinity map showing zoning districts and existing land use within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of the site. 
3.  Total area in acres and square feet. 
4.  Current and proposed zoning classification, together with a summary of the applicable development standards for the proposed zoning district. 
5.  Natural features, including topography at ten-foot intervals, surface drainage, surface waters, floodplains, watershed areas, groundwater recharge areas, general location of wetlands, and the general location of wooded areas. 
6.  General location of existing and proposed roads and utility rights-of-way or easements. 
7.  Location of existing property lines within the development site. 
8.  General location of existing and proposed development by type of use. 
9.  Proposed residential density and dwelling unit types, if applicable. 
10.  Location of proposed open spaces, recreational areas, and public buildings and uses, indicating those areas reserved or dedicated for public use. 
11.  General plan for the provision of utilities and infrastructure. 
A report or letter from HCWSA indicating the availability of water and sewer and a report or letter from the Henry County Environmental Health Department indicating septic suitability if sewer is not available. 
C.  Action by the administrator. 
1.  The administrator shall make a determination of completeness as set forth in section 12.01.02. 
2.  The administrator shall prepare a staff report addressing the following issues, in priority: 
a.  Consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
b.  The relation that the proposed amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of this ULDC. 
c.  Potential positive effects of the amendment on the character of the proposed zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community. 
d.  The physical conditions of the site relative to its capability to be developed as requested, including topography, drainage, access, and size and shape of the property. 
e.  The impact upon adjacent property owners shall the request be approved. 
f.  The potential impact of the proposed amendment on county infrastructure including water and sewerage systems. 
g.  The impact of the proposed amendment on adjacent thoroughfares and pedestrian and vehicular circulation and traffic volumes. 
h.  The merits of the requested change in zoning relative to any other guidelines and policies for development which the zoning advisory board and board of commissioners may use in furthering the objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
i.  The ability of the subject land to be developed as it is presently zoned. 
D.  Zoning advisory board recommendation. 
1.  The application shall be submitted to the zoning advisory board for review at a public hearing, conducted as set forth in section 12.00.05. 
2.  The zoning advisory board shall review the application according to the published schedule. 
3.  The zoning advisory board shall submit its report with comments and recommendations according to the published schedule. The recommendations of the zoning advisory board shall be submitted to the board of commissioners. The recommendations of the zoning advisory board shall be of an advisory nature and shall not be binding on the board of commissioners. 
4.  In making its recommendation, the zoning advisory board may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial. Findings shall be set forth in official minutes of the zoning advisory board. 
E.  Board of commissioners action. 
1.  The board of commissioners shall consider the application for rezoning at a public hearing conducted as set forth in section 12.00.05. 
2.  The board of commissioners shall consider the information set forth in the staff report and the findings and recommendations of the zoning advisory board. 
3.  In deciding upon any application for an amendment to the official zoning map, the board of commissioners may, on their own motion or upon the suggestion of the applicant, or on consideration of the recommendations of the zoning advisory board, grant the application subject to certain conditions necessary to promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare. 
4.  The board of commissioners may include conditions as follows: 
a.  Such conditions as deemed necessary to protect neighboring properties and to lessen any potentially adverse effects of the zoning change; 
b.  Setback requirements from any lot line; 
c.  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas; 
d.  Restrictions on land use activities to be permitted; 
e.  Maximum building dimensions and height; 
f.  Landscaping or planted area which shall include the location, type, and maintenance of plant materials within a designated buffer area; 
g.  Fences, walls, earth berms, or other landscape buffer provisions or protective measures; 
h.  Preservation of existing trees and vegetation; 
i.  Special conditions to eliminate or reduce undesirable views, light, glare, dust, or odor; 
j.  Hours of operation; and 
k.  Architectural details to be compatible with existing buildings in the area. 
5.  A rezoning approved with conditions shall list in writing those conditions agreed to and shall include a requirement for adherence to concept plan, if any, submitted to accompany the application. The applicant or any successor in title shall construct only those uses and only in such a manner as identified in writing or upon the concept plan. 
6.  Prior to a final vote being taken upon any application for an amendment to the official zoning map for which such conditions shall be imposed, such conditions shall be announced at the public hearing and made a part of the motion to approve. If such conditions are found to be unacceptable, the applicant may, withdraw or request postponement. Such withdrawal shall not enable the applicant to re-file the same zoning map amendment for the same property until one (1) year has elapsed from the date of withdrawal. 
7.  If the zoning decision of the board of commissioners is for the rezoning of property and the amendment to accomplish the rezoning is defeated by the board of commissioners, then the same property shall not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least twelve (12) months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the board of commissioners. 
12.02.10.  Requirements for modifications to approved zoning conditions, concept plans, and development plans. 
A.  Major modifications to zoning conditions include any changes to allowable uses, maximum density, maximum intensity, or compatibility requirements attached to the zoning approval as conditions of approval. The following procedure shall be followed: 
1.  An application shall be submitted containing details of the amendment requested, the situation giving rise to the need for an amendment, and accompanied by plans fully describing the nature and extent of the amendment. 
2.  A staff report shall be prepared to address the issues listed in subsection 12.02.09.C. for the amended concept plan and/or zoning conditions. 
3.  The zoning advisory board shall review the application for an amended concept plan. The zoning advisory board shall consider the application for amended conditions placed on conditional uses and/or variances according to the procedure in subsection 12.02.09.D. 
4.  The board of commissioners shall consider the application for amended zoning conditions and/or concept plan at a public hearing according to the procedures in subsection 12.02.09.E. 
B.  Minor modifications include changes to dimensional design features as depicted on a concept plan. Such dimensional design features as provided on a development plan shall generally conform to the conditions depicted on the concept plan, but shall be allowed to vary so long as the administrator determines that the development plan is generally consistent with the concept plan conditions. The following information shall be provided: 
1.  The development plan shall be accompanied by a detailed description of the site design features depicted on the development plan that differ from the concept plan. 
2.  The description of the modifications shall also include an explanation of the need for the modification. 
3.  The development plan application will be processed as set forth in section 12.02.02. 
C.  Requests to modify approved development plans may be approved by the administrator as set forth below: 
1.  An application shall be submitted containing details of the amendment requested, the situation giving rise to the need for an amendment, and accompanied by plans fully describing the nature and extent of the amendment. 
2.  Review by the administrator shall follow the same procedures and address the same issues as for the original application. 
12.02.11.  Requirements for amendments to the ULDC. This ULDC may be amended by the board of commissioners on its own motion or by the initiation of planning and zoning staff. Otherwise, a complete application packet shall be required as described below: 
1.  An application to amend the text of the ULDC shall be submitted on forms provided by the county. 
2.  The application shall include the following information: 
A.  Identification of the specific provision proposed for amendment; 
B.  The proposed modifications in a strikethrough and underline format; 
C.  A detailed explanation of the rationale and justification for the requested amendment; 
D.  A detailed explanation of the potential impacts of the modification on the development of Henry County; 
3.  The administrator shall prepare a staff report analyzing the proposed amendment and recommending approval, denial, or approval with modifications. The staff report shall address the following issues: 
A.  Consistency of the amendment with the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Potential impacts on the character and quality of development in Henry County and any affected zoning districts. 
C.  Potential impacts on the provision of infrastructure and improvements. 
D.  The merits of the proposed amendments relative to any guidelines, policies, or programs adopted in furtherance of the comprehensive plan. 
4.  The zoning advisory board shall consider the proposed amendment to the ULDC at a public hearing, according to the procedures set forth in section 12.00.05. 
A.  The zoning advisory board shall evaluate the proposed amendment, considering the issues and recommendations contained in the staff report. 
B.  The zoning advisory board shall make a recommendation to the board of commissioners for approval, approval with further modifications, or denial. 
5.  The board of commissioners shall consider the proposed amendment at a public hearing conducted as set forth in section 12.00.05. 
A.  The board of commissioners shall consider the information set forth in the staff report and the recommendations of the zoning advisory board. 
B.  The board of commissioners may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed amendment to the ULDC. 
12.02.12.  Requirements for amendment to the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan may be amended by the board of commissioners on its own motion. Otherwise, a complete application packet shall be required as described below. 
A.  An application to amend the text or maps of the comprehensive plan shall be submitted on forms provided by the county. 
B.  The application shall include the following information: 
1.  Identification of the specific provision proposed for amendment. 
2.  The proposed modifications in a strikethrough and underline format. 
3.  A detailed explanation of the rationale and justification for the requested amendment. 
4.  A detailed explanation of the potential impacts of the modification on the development of Henry County. 
C.  The administrator shall prepare a staff report analyzing the proposed amendment and recommending approval, denial, or approval with modifications. 
D.  The zoning advisory board shall consider the proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan at a public hearing, according to the procedures set forth in section 12.00.05. 
1.  The zoning advisory board shall evaluate the proposed amendment, considering the issues and recommendations contained in the staff report. 
2.  The zoning advisory board shall make a recommendation to the board of commissioners for approval, approval with further modifications, or denial. 
E.  The board of commissioners shall consider the proposed amendment at a public hearing conducted as set forth in section 12.00.05. 
1.  The board of commissioners shall consider the information set forth in the staff report and the recommendations of the zoning advisory board. 
2.  The board of commissioners may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan. 
12.02.13.  Requirements for irrevocable letters of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond. 
A.  Standards for an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond: 
1.  The letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond shall be issued from a bank having Atlanta area offices. Include local contact name, phone number, and physical address of the bank. No post office boxes allowed. 
2.  A letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond from other institutions shall be subject to approval by the administrator, or designee who shall be authorized to reject a letter of credit escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond if he reasonably determines the obligor or surety is unreliable or there would be practical difficulties in enforcing the obligation of the letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond for other reasons. 
3.  The letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond shall name the Henry County Board of Commissioners as obligee. 
4.  The amount of the letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond shall be determined by the department's most recently adopted fee schedule. 
B.  A letter of credit for a permit for a land disturbing activity shall be required. See the building department's most recently adopted fee schedule for amount. 
C.  A letter of credit or a removal bond for wireless communications facility shall be required. See the building department's most recently adopted fee schedule for amount. 
D.  Time period for a letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond. 
1.  A letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond for infrastructure and other public improvements shall remain in effect for three (3) years from the date of final plat approval. During the three (3) year period, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to repair any defects that occur in the streets, drainage systems, and stormwater detention systems. Extensions of a letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond may be required as set for in the procedures for approval of improvements (see section 12.02.04). 
2.  A letter of credit for a wireless communication facility shall be for the length of the lease, including potential extensions, or twenty (20) years. The letter of credit shall be renewable for periods not to exceed five (5) years. 
3.  A letter or credit or escrow letter of surety for a move in structure shall be for one (1) year. 
4.  The Henry County Board of Commissioners may draw upon this letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond to the amount set forth above upon presentation to the surety company of the following: A letter from the Henry County Building Department Director stating that the principal has failed to comply with section 12.02.13 of this ULDC with regard to making all of the required repairs and that the cost of the repairs equals or exceeds the amount of the letter of credit, escrow letter of surety or maintenance bond. 
12.02.14.  Requirements for development agreements. 
A.  [Purpose.] The purpose of a development agreement is to authorize the use and development of a large tract of land where development will be carried out in phases over a long period of time. The development agreement may provide vested rights to the property owner during the term of the agreement to ensure that the development proceeds in compliance with the land use regulations in effect on the date of the agreement. 
B.  Minimum land area. 
1.  Land that is eligible for a development agreement shall exclude land designated for resource protection pursuant to chapter 3 of the ULDC. 
2.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) acres of eligible land shall be required in order to execute a development agreement. 
C.  [Required information.] A development agreement shall contain the following information: 
1.  All information required in subsection 12.02.01.A. 
2.  The time period and specific expiration date of the agreement, and a time period and specific expiration date for development of phases. 
3.  Description of compliance with the comprehensive plan. 
4.  Specification of land uses, including population, density of development, and dimensions of buildings, lots, and site features. 
5.  Description of public facilities and infrastructure to serve the development, including an identification of the service provider, and the time of service availability. 
6.  Description of easements that are necessary for public facilities and infrastructure. 
7.  Identification of land to be reserved or dedicated for public purposes. 
8.  Identification of land that is required to be protected as set forth in chapter 3. 
9.  Identification of development and building periods that are required. The agreement shall include a statement that failure to list a required permit does not relieve the property owner from compliance with all permitting requirements. 
10.  Identification of any conditions, terms, restrictions, or other requirements that may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. 
11.  Identification of all parties to the agreement. 
12.  An express commitment to annual review as set forth in paragraph F. below. 
D.  Adoption of the agreement. 
1.  Notice shall be provided as set forth in section 12.03.00. 
2.  The zoning advisory board shall conduct a hearing, pursuant to the requirements set forth in section 12.00.05, and shall provide a recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
3.  The board of commissioners shall conduct a hearing, pursuant to the requirements set forth in section 12.00.05. The board of commissioners shall approve or deny the development agreement. 
E.  Breach of agreement. 
1.  Where the review reveals a material breach of the agreement, a notice of breach shall be provided to the property owner and all parties to the development agreement. 
2.  The notice shall set forth in detail the nature of the breach, the evidence that supports the determination that a breach has occurred, and shall provide a reasonable time period to correct the breach. 
3.  Upon failure of the property owner to correct the breach within the specified time period, the board of commissioners may terminate or modify the agreement. Termination or modification shall occur in the same manner as the initial adoption of the agreement. 
4.  The property owner shall have an opportunity to rebut the determination that a breach has occurred or to consent to a modification of the agreement as necessary to correct the breach. 
F.  Modification of agreements. 
1.  A modification to an existing agreement may be initiated by the board of commissioners. 
2.  Modification to an agreement shall occur in the same manner as the initial adoption of the agreement. 
G.  Recording required. The property owner shall record the development agreement with the clerk of the superior court of Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 11-17-09; Ord. No. 10-20, § I(22—24), 6-15-10; Res. No. 13-02, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 14-06, § I(exh. A), 11-4-14 ; Ord. No. 15-02, § I, 2-17-15 ; Ord. No. 16-06, 10-18-16 ; Ord. No. 17-06 , 4-18-17; Ord. No. 17-17, § I, 12-5-17 ) 
Sec. 12.03.00. - Notice requirements. 
12.03.01.  Public notice required. 
A.  Notice shall be provided by the county for public meetings and hearings regarding the following actions: 
1.  Amendment of the official zoning map; 
2.  Amendment of the future infrastructure map; 
3.  Amendment of ULDC; 
4.  Major modification of zoning conditions and/or concept plans; 
5.  Variance; 
6.  Conditional use; 
7.  Permit to disturb a cemetery; 
8.  Designation of historic districts and historic properties; and 
9.  Certificate of appropriateness. 
B.  Notice shall include the following information: 
1.  Time of the public meeting or public hearing; 
2.  Place of the public meeting or public hearing; 
3.  Purpose of the requested action; 
4.  For requests to amend the official zoning map, the notice shall include the current and proposed zoning district. 
12.03.02.  Legal advertisements. 
A.  The public notice shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of Henry County, at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
B.  If a rezoning is initiated by a party other than the county then the notice shall include the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
12.03.3.  Requirements for posting signs. 
A.  The county shall provide standardized signs for posting to provide public notice of meetings and hearings. 
B.  The county shall be responsible for posting the sign as follows: 
1.  The sign shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property. 
2.  The sign shall be posted not less than fifteen (15) and not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
3.  If the property proposed for rezoning does not have frontage on a public street, then the sign may be posted on the right-of-way of the nearest public street which provides access to the site. 
C.  The county shall be responsible for timely removal of the sign following the hearing. 
12.03.04.  Mailed notice. Mailed notice shall be provided at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the hearing for all variances, conditional uses, modifications, and amendments to the official zoning map (rezoning). The county shall provide the mailed notice to all adjacent property owners. 
Sec. 12.04.00. - Appeal of zoning advisory board or administrative actions. 
a.  The board of commissioners shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any approval, denial, written interpretation, or decision made by the zoning advisory board (ZAB) or the planning and zoning, building or environmental compliance/plan review departments, based on the interpretation or enforcement of the ULDC. 
b.  Only persons or entities that have legal standing in the challenged action shall be permitted to file an appeal under this code section. 
c.  Appeals under this code section shall be filed with the planning and zoning services division secretary or such other designee. The appeals will be forwarded to the appropriate department within two (2) days of receipt of the appeal application. The P & Z services division secretary or such other designee shall immediately notify the appropriate department that an appeal application and the requisite fees have been filed and shall immediately forward those documents to the appropriate department head and/or his or her designee for handling. Upon receipt of the appeal documents, the department head or his/her designee shall be responsible for notifying the county clerk via email that an appeal application has been filed and shall thereafter, be responsible for ensuring that all appeal documentation is provided to the county clerk for inclusion of the matter on a scheduled public meeting to be heard by the board of commissioners not later than thirty (30) days from the date of filing. The notifying department, except in the case of zoning advisory board decisions, shall, where required be responsible for submitting any required legal advertisements and posting the appropriate signage. The department head or his/her designee shall be responsible for notifying all affected parties that an appeal has been filed and the date in which the appeal will be heard by the board of commissioners. All appeals pertaining to zoning advisory board decisions shall be handled by the planning and zoning department head, which will include the legal advertisement, posting of signage, notification of all parties and postcard notification. The department head or his/her designee shall be responsible for providing an executive summary detailing the rationale for the decision in question and shall present the findings and all relevant documents pertaining to the appeal to the county clerk for presentation at the board of commissioner's meeting in which the appeal will be heard. 
Should the board of commissioners overturn the decision of staff and/or the zoning advisory board the applicant shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the decision to request a refund of no more than seventy-five (75) percent of the appeal fee paid. 
d.  A scheduled appeal may be temporarily postponed at the request of the appellant or staff; however, the party requesting such postponement shall be responsible for the cost of any legal advertisement fees prior to the matter being rescheduled for a new hearing date. 
12.04.01.  Applicability. 
A.  Appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved by any written approval, denial, interpretation, decision or enforcement action of the administrator, based on or made in the enforcement of the ULDC. 
B.  A person shall be considered aggrieved if: 
1.  Said person or said person's property was the subject of the action appealed from; or 
2.  Said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from and is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
12.04.02.  Time for applications and hearings. 
A.  An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days following the written approval, denial, interpretation, or decision of the zoning advisory board or the administrator. 
B.  A hearing before the board of commissioners shall be held according to the published schedule. 
12.04.03.  Application requirements. An appeal request, along with the advertising and review fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be filed with the Henry County Planning and Zoning Services Division Secretary, indicating on the application in which the administrative decision originated and include a letter of intent addressing the following: 
1.  Completed application form, provided by the county; 
2.  Written documentation specifying the alleged errors in the approval, denial, interpretation, or decision of the zoning advisory board or the administrator; 
3.  Citation of the section(s) of the ULDC pertaining to the action of the administrator; and 
4.  A statement of the specific relief requested by the party appealing. 
12.04.04.  Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrator certifies to the board of commissioners, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court of Henry County on notice to the administrator and on due cause shown. 
12.04.05.  Action on appeals. 
A.  The hearing of the appeal shall be quasi-judicial and shall be conducted at a regular meeting, according to the published schedule, or at a special meeting of the board of commissioners. 
B.  Notice shall be provided pursuant to the requirements of sections 12.03.01 and 12.03.02 as well as due notice to the parties in interest. 
C.  Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an authorized agent, or by an attorney. 
D.  Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the board of commissioners shall make a determination on the appeal. An appeal shall be sustained only upon an expressed finding by the board of commissioners that the zoning advisory board's or the administrator's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the administrator acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrator from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I(25), 6-15-10; Ord. No. 13-01, § I, 1-15-13) 
Sec. 12.05.00. - Appeals of board of commissioners actions. 
All appeals of final decisions of the board of commissioners shall be as follows: 
A.  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the board of commissioners may appeal such decision by filing a petition in writing with the superior court of Henry County setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. 
B.  An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the disputed final decision is rendered. 
Sec. 12.06.00. - Enforcement. 
A.  The administrator, the building official, and their authorized designees shall have the authority under the guidance of the board of commissioners to enforce the provisions of this ULDC. 
B.  The administrator, the building official, and their authorized designees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this ULDC and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the county deems necessary. 
C.  Agents and employees of the county and the authority and law enforcement officials of the county and other law enforcement officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the enforcer in enforcement of this section. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The administrator or the building official shall, at any time, order the cessation of all work on a site if any aspects of this ULDC are violated. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be conditioned on compliance with this ULDC at the time a final inspection is requested. 
F.  The administrator or the building official shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any development or building permit or to withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy until the requirements hereof are met. 
G.  If any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ULDC, the board of commissioners, the administrator, or the building official, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land use. 
H.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this ULDC, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
I.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this ULDC, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, in compliance with the erosion and sedimentation control standards of this ULDC. 
J.  Enforcement regarding land disturbing activities: 
1.  The administrator shall periodically inspect sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ULDC, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ULDC. 
2.  The administrator shall have the following authority: 
a.  To address violations and to refer violations for code enforcement action by the County; 
b.  To issue citations for violation of this section; 
c.  To issue administrative orders; 
d.  To commence civil and criminal actions; 
e.  To issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation. 
3.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ULDC, the administrator shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the administrator shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the administrator shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
4.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the administrator shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
5.  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
K.  Nothing herein shall prevent Henry County from taking other legal action as determined necessary to enforce this ULDC, or to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Sec. 12.07.00. - Penalties. 
A.  Violations of the provisions of this ULDC or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards in connection with grants of variances shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment of not more than sixty (60) days, or both, except as set forth in subsection B., below. 
B.  Any person violating any provision of this ULDC, permitting conditions, or a stop work order, when such violation involves the construction of a single-family dwelling which is under contract with an owner for occupancy, shall be liable for a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each violation, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days in jail, or both. 
C.  The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
D.  All costs, attorney's fees, expert witness fees and other expenses incurred by the county in connection with the enforcement of this ULDC shall be recovered from the violator. 
Sec. 12.08.00. - Reasonable accommodation. 
12.08.01.  Purpose. It is the policy of the jurisdiction, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (hereafter "fair housing laws"), to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This section establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with the intent and purpose of fair housing laws. 
12.08.02.  Findings. The Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 imposes an affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodation in their land use and zoning regulations and practices when such accommodation may be necessary to afford individuals with disabilities an equal opportunity to housing. 
A.  The housing element of the jurisdiction must identify and develop a plan for removing governmental constraints to housing for individuals with disabilities including local land use and zoning constraints or providing reasonable accommodation. 
B.  A fair housing reasonable accommodation procedure for individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for individuals with disabilities to seek relief in the application of land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures will further the jurisdiction's compliance with federal and state fair housing laws and provide greater opportunities for the development of critically needed housing for individuals with disabilities. 
12.08.03.  Applicability. Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. 
An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one (1) or more life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of such impairment. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
12.08.04  Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process. Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at public information counters in the planning, zoning and building departments, advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public in the planning and building and safety departments. 
12.08.05.  Requesting reasonable accommodation. 
A.  In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability, any eligible person as defined in subsection 12.08.03 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures. 
B.  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation; 
(2)  Name and address of the property owner(s); 
(3)  Address of the property for which accommodation is requested; 
(4)  Description of the requested accommodation and the regulation(s), policy or procedure for which accommodation is sought; and 
(5)  Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling. 
C.  Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection to the extent allowed by law. 
D.  A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
E.  If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the jurisdiction will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. 
12.08.04.  Reviewing authority. The reviewing authority shall consist of representatives from planning and zoning, building, and fire and code enforcement departments. 
A.  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the "reviewing authority" using the criteria set forth in subsection 12.08.07. 
B.  The reviewing authority shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within sixty (60) days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in subsection 12.08.07. 
C.  If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the sixty-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. 
12.08.07.  Required findings. The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following factors: 
A.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing laws; 
B.  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws; 
C.  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the jurisdiction; and 
D.  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the jurisdiction's land use and zoning or building program. 
12.08.08.  Written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation. 
A.  The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the reviewing authority's findings on the criteria set forth in subsection 12.08.07. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail. 
B.  The written decision of the reviewing authority shall be final unless an applicant appeals it to the jurisdiction's planning commission. 
C.  If the reviewing authority fails to render a written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation within the sixty-day time period allotted by subsection 12.08.06, the request shall be deemed granted. 
D.  While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
12.08.09.  Appeals. 
A.  Within sixty (60) days of the date of the reviewing authority's written decision, an applicant may appeal an adverse decision. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing. 
B.  If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the jurisdiction will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible. 
C.  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
D.  Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other state or federal remedy available. 
( Ord. No. 14-04, § I, 1-9-14 ) 
APPENDICES 

Appendix A. - Master list of acronyms and definitions. 
Acronyms 
BMP — Best management practices (BMP plan) 
BTL — Build-to line 
CLOMA — Conditional letter map of amendment 
CLOMR — Conditional letter of map revision 
CSD — Conservation subdivision development 
DBH — Diameter at breast height 
DCA — Department of community affairs 
DHR — Department of human resources 
DNR — Department of natural resources 
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration 
FCC — Federal Communications Commission 
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency 
FHBM — Flood hazard boundary map 
FIRM — Flood insurance rate map 
FIS — Flood insurance study 
GSMM — Georgia Stormwater Management Manual 
HCWSA — Henry County Water and Sewer Authority 
HPB — Historic preservation board 
HVAC — Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
ICWPA — Indian Creek Watershed Protection Area 
LBCS — Land based classification standards 
LBWPA — Long Branch Creek Watershed Protection Area 
MNGWPD — Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District 
NGVD — National Geodetic Vertical Datum 
NWI — National Wetland Inventory 
OCGA — Official Code of Georgia Annotated 
PD — Planned development 
RFN — Residential fly-in neighborhood 
RNC — Rural neighborhood commercial 
ROW — Right-of-way 
RPZ — Runway protection zone 
RV — Recreational vehicle 
SCWPA — Shoal Creek Watershed Protection Area 
TCWPA — Tussahaw Creek Watershed Protection Area 
TND — Traditional neighborhood development 
TRWPA — Towaliga River Watershed Protection Area 
ULDC — Unified land development code 
WCF — Wireless communication facility 
WCWPA — Walnut Creek Watershed Protection Area 
WPA — Watershed protection area 
ZAB — Zoning advisory board 
Definitions: For the purposes of this ULDC in addition to their common meanings certain words and terms used herein, unless the context otherwise requires, shall be defined and interpreted as follows. The use of the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the present tense includes the future; the use of "shall" means the action is mandatory, the use of "may" or "should" means the action is optional. Any masculine pronoun shall be deemed to refer to a person, whether male or female. 
All terms not defined herein shall be defined as elsewhere in the Henry County Code. Terms not found in the Henry County Code shall be defined as in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
A 
Abandoned cemetery means a cemetery which shows signs of neglect including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
Accessory apartment (garage apartment). See accessory dwelling. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this ordinance which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Activity center means an area that includes office, retail, service, residential or civic uses that create a central focus for a larger area. An activity center also has generally recognizable boundaries. 
Crossroads. A small node at a major intersection or crossroad in rural or estate residential community that provides local needs along with a sense of place. The crossroads activity center includes a nucleus comprised of one (1) or more of the following elements: a church, community center, cemetery or other civic/historic landmark, recreation center, restaurant, gas station, or small store with convenient commercial services used on a daily basis for local residents that frequently pass by. The design of the crossroads community center should take into consideration how it could be expanded as the population grows in the surrounding area. The node may be served by septic tanks. 
School node. For many county residents, the local school and in particular the local school cluster where one (1) or more schools are co-located, serves as a major center and focus of activity. This type of center is designed to compliment this type of lifestyle. Being predominately residential in its composition, it will also include neighborhood oriented commercial areas as well as recreational areas ideally linked by a network of multiuse trails and sidewalks. The center should extend a reasonable walking or cycling distance from the schools or approximately a mile from the core. 
Specialty use center. This type activity center is truly unique and unlike the other centers is usually dominated by one (1) major large-scale use. The best example in the county is the Atlanta International Motor Speedway. A specialty use center often has its own unique transportation needs, and in many ways serves a showcase for the community. Special attention should be given to preserving and enhancing the function of the focal point of this type of center. 
Suburban employment center. An activity center located around one (1) or more of the county's interstate interchanges. The core of the center would be largely commercial and included a wide range of retail, commercial and service uses. This type of center would include such uses as office buildings, major commercial centers, large civic facilities, and a wide variety of housing types. Large-scale mixed-use developments are also appropriate here. The center should extend a half mile or more on one (1) or both sides of the interstate. Being located close to the interstate, the most prominent gateway to the county, the design of the center and the buildings within it should pay special attention to the viewshed from the interstate. 
Village node. This type of center would have at its core a compact and well-organized commercial and civic core built along a formal gridded, interconnected street network. The center will include a full array of "life-cycle" housing choices and provide cultural and passive recreational opportunities. The village center will have its own unique identity, enforced by common design themes used for public facilities and spaces. The village center should also be relatively self-contained providing most of everyday services needed by village residents. 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Addition to an existing building means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Adjacent means an area located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at, or lower, in elevation than either three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Administrative waiver means a grant of relief by the administrator from specified standards of the ULDC and where such a waiver will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Administrator means the person, officer, official, or his authorized representative designated by the board of commissioners, Henry County, as its agent for the administration of the provisions of the ULDC. 
Adult day care means a facility that provides support for elderly individuals (and their families, if present), who do not function fully independently, but who do not need twenty-four-hour nursing care. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any establishment featuring live performances, films, still pictures, electronic reproductions, or video with graphic or other visual images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct or sexual explicit nudity. Adult entertainment establishments include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, adult dance establishments, adult motion picture arcades, adult movie theaters, and adult video stores. 
Agriculture means cultivating the soil, producing crops and raising of livestock (farming, and associated activities) upon one (1) or more tracts of land containing not less than three (3) acres. Selling of products raised on the premises shall be considered a permissible activity; provided, that space for the off-county right-of-way parking is available to customers. 
Aircraft means any vehicle used or designed for flight in the air. 
Airport means any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft. The term may include facilities for refueling, repair, handling, and storage of aircraft or facilities for passengers and freight. 
Amusement park (outdoor or indoor) means land designed to be used by the public for a fee that contains amusement facilities, such as merry-go-rounds, race car and bike tracks, outdoor motion picture theaters, paint ball courses, driving ranges, miniature golf courses, skateboard rinks, and similar uses for entertainment. 
Antenna means any structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves for the provision of services including, but not limited to, cellular, paging, personal communications services (PCS) and microwave communications. Such structures and devices include, but are not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whips. This definition does not apply to broadcast antennas, antennas designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes designed for residential or household purposes. 
Applicant means for the purposes of section 8.04.00, a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the (article administrator)'s interpretation of any provision of this ULDC. 
Approach surface means the area longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope. 
Arcade means a roofed passageway, lane, or area supported by columns, piers, or pillars, either freestanding or attached to a wall to form a gallery contiguous to a street or plaza that is open provides public access to building entrances, retail space and/or public space and is accessible to the public. An arcade may be especially one with shops on one (1) or both sides or a commercial establishment featuring rows of coin-operated games. 
Arch means a structure forming the curved, pointed, or flat upper edge of an open space and supporting the weight above it, as in a bridge or doorway. 
Archeologist means any person who is: 
(1)  A member of or who meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologists and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves; or 
(2)  Employed on July 1, 1991, by the state or by any county or municipal governing authority as an archeologist. 
Archery range means a public or privately owned facility designed and operated for the purpose of archery practice at targets within a controlled setting. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
As-built plans means detailed construction plans showing completed improvements as constructed. 
Assisted living facility means a state-licensed use in which domiciliary care is provided to adults who are provided with food, shelter and personal services within independent living units which could include kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals. This use shall not include hospitals, convalescent centers, nursing homes, hospices, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Athletic field means open land used for outdoor games such as baseball, football, soccer and other field sports. 
Attached wireless communication facility (attached WCF). See wireless communication facility. 
Automotive service, major means repair services to motor vehicles which require substantial replacement and/or repair of major components. Examples of major automotive repair services include, but are not limited to, transmission repairs/replacement, engine overhaul and radiator repair. Any repair services to construction equipment, agricultural equipment, commercial highway tractors, or dump trucks shall be considered major automotive services. 
Automotive services, minor means repair and maintenance services which require only very brief adjustment and replacement of minor components. Examples of minor automotive services include, but are not limited to, tune-up, oil change, lubrication, brake repair, air conditioning system servicing, muffler replacement and alignment. 
Automobile service station means a building or premises where products necessary for automobile service or maintenance are sold; provided, there is no storage or dismantling of automobiles and only minor services are rendered. An automobile service station is neither a repair nor a body shop. 
Authority. The use of the word "authority" shall mean the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority or the Clayton County Water Authority. 
B 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the "100-year flood." 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Bed and breakfast facility means a private residence that offers sleeping accommodations to lodgers in six (6) or fewer rooms for rent, in the owner or operator's principal residence while renting rooms to lodgers, and serves breakfasts at no extra cost to its lodgers. For the purpose of this definition, a lodger means a person who rents a room in a bed-and-breakfast establishment for fewer than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Bedroom means a room that has a closet. 
Berm means an earthen mound or embankment, usually two (2) to six (6) feet in height, designed to provide visual interest, screen views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. 
Best management practices means a collection of structural practices and measures written by a state agency or other known authority which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will prove effective in the areas of erosion and sedimentation control, silviculture, stormwater, etc. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Best management practices plan (BMP plan) means a plan consisting of a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by streets, public lands, rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well-defined and fixed boundaries. (Blocks are illustrated in figure A.1.) 
Boarding and/or rooming house means a building dedicated to and used for the lodging and/or feeding, for compensation, of up to six (6) nontransient persons, unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner or operator of the house, and where renting individuals are also served with meals prepared in one (1) kitchen by the owner or operator of the house, as defined herein. Foster children placed in a family home, a community residential home with six (6) or fewer residents, a nursing home, or a personal care home shall not be established as a boarding and/or rooming house. 
Board of commissioners means the board of commissioners of Henry County, Georgia. 
Body shop means a building or location where motor vehicle repair and/or replacement are performed, including, but not limited to, painting and metal fabrication of motor vehicles bodies or structures. A body shop is a major automotive service. 
Breezeway means a roofed, often open, passageway connecting two (2) buildings or halves of buildings. In residential zoning districts the maximum length of a breezeway that is used to incorporate a new structure as part of the principal building is not to exceed twenty (20) feet and the minimum width is to be four (4) feet. The breezeway is to connect each building at an exterior door. 
Buffer means a natural and/or enhanced vegetated landscaped area of a lot located and/or established. A buffer is maintained and created with the intention to visibly separate different and possible incompatible types of uses, measured from the common property line of the different uses, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or other nuisances, or the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat within a water supply watershed adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams. 
Buffer strip means land area located within the boundary of a lot required to be set aside and used for landscaping and upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Build-to line means the line at which construction of a building facade is to occur on a lot. A build-to line runs parallel to the front property line and is established to create an even (or more or less even) building facade line on a street. 
Buildable area means the portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a building or structure may be located. 
Building has the same meaning as "Structure". 
Building addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building which is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. 
Building frontage means the linear feet of the exterior wall of a building that faces any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
Building permit means the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
Building envelope means the area formed by the front, side, and rear building restriction or setback lines of a lot within which the principal buildings must be located. 
Building official means the official designated by the board of commissioners of Henry County as being responsible for issuing construction permits and certificates of occupancy. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from average elevation of the proposed finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof on a building. When referring to a tower, sign or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower, sign or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. When a building faces on more than one (1) street, the height shall be measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street front. 
Built environment means the elements of the environment that are generally built or made by people as contrasted with natural processes. 
Burial ground means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The term shall include privately owned burial plots, individually and collectively, once human remains have been buried therein. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker, or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term also means any inscribed or un-inscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
Business subdivision. See subdivision. 
C 
Caliper means the diameter or thickness of the trunk of a nursery-grown tree as measured at four (4) inches above the top of the root mass. 
Canopy roofed structure means a roofed structure that covers an area, or especially one that shelters a passageway between two (2) buildings. 
Canopy tree (large tree or shade tree) means any tree, evergreen or deciduous, whose mature height can be expected to exceed thirty-five (35) feet and whose crown spread can be expected to exceed thirty (30) feet. Shade trees for landscaping industrial, commercial, office-institutional, multifamily residential and mobile home zoning developments, existing or planted, shall be at least eight (8) feet in height and two (2) inches in diameter, measured at six (6) inches above grade for new trees and measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above grade for existing trees. Examples include Red Maple, Sycamore, English Oak, Willow Oak, Loblolly Pine, or trees of similar stature. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the Henry County Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the board of commissioners. 
Care home means a care facility where personal care services are provided to more than six (6) nonfamily adults. See "personal care home" definition for permitted services and other requirements. 
Carport means any parking space(s) having a covered roof but not enclosed by walls and is an accessory structure to a dwelling unit. Carports shall not include any parking structures. 
Cemetery or cemeteries means any land or structure in Henry County dedicated to and used, or intended to be used for interment of the dead. It may be either a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium or a combination of one (1) or more thereof, and including chapels or churches when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
Central sanitary sewer system. See wastewater system. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation board of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property located within a designated historic district. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building official indicating the use of a particular building or land which conforms to the requirements of this ULDC. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Channel bank means the sloping land bordering a channel. The bank has a steeper slope than the bottom of the channel and is normally steeper than upland areas adjacent to the channel. 
Character means the image and perception of a community as defined by its built environment, landscaping, natural features and open space, types and style of housing, and number and size of roads and sidewalks. 
Charette means public design workshop in which designers, property owners, developers, public officials, environmentalists, citizens, and other persons or group of people work in harmony to achieve an agreeable master plan. 
Church or other place of worship means a building used for public worship including temples, synagogues and related Sunday school or church facilities. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clinic means an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one (1) physician or dentist or a group of physicians or dentists practicing medicine. 
Club means a building or facilities owned or operated by and for special educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for a profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for a gain. 
Cluster housing means a residential development which provides for the grouping of attached and/or detached single-family dwellings on lots that may be smaller than normally permitted in a certain zoning district for purposes of preserving open space and natural features of the terrain thereby allowing public facilities and services to be provided for more economically. Development shall be limited to not more than four (4) units occupying one (1) building. 
Collector. See street: collector street. 
Collocation/site sharing means collocation/site sharing shall mean use of: 
(a)  A common WCF by two (2) or more wireless license holders or by one (1) wireless license holder for more than one (1) type of communications technology; 
(b)  A common WCF-site by two (2) or more wireless license holders or by one (1) wireless license holder for more than one (1) type of communications technology; or 
(c)  The placement of a WCF on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity (i.e., water tower, billboard, etc.). 
Commencement of construction, for private development means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle whose gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) is over twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds, or a trailer with a gross vehicle weight rating of over ten thousand (10,000) pounds, including commercial tractor-trailers, dump trucks, wreckers, and earth-moving equipment. Agricultural vehicles and equipment and school buses shall be excluded from this definition. 
Common area means land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. Common area may include complementary structures and improvements. 
Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses, activities or design which allow them to be located near or adjacent to each other in harmony. Some elements affecting compatibility include the following: height, scale, mass and bulk of structures, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, circulation, access and parking impacts, landscaping, lighting, noise, odor and architecture. 
Completion of construction means the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. The date of completion is the date on which such certificate is issued. 
Comprehensive plan means the Henry County Plan or planning elements as adopted or amended in accord with the State of Georgia Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning. 
Comprehensive Planning Act means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 50-8-1 et seq. and the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
Concealed telecommunications facility means any telecommunications facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure or any new support structure designed so that the purpose of the facility or support structure for providing wireless services is not readily apparent to a casual observer. Examples may include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements, antenna structures designed to look like light poles and structures designed to resemble natural features such as trees and rock outcroppings. Concealed facilities are also sometimes known as alternative or stealth facilities. 
Conditional use means a use within a certain zoning districts of this chapter which is not permitted as a matter of right, but may be permitted within these districts by the Henry County Zoning Advisory Board. A conditional use is permanent in nature. 
Condemnation means the taking of private property by a government unit for public use, when the owner will not relinquish it through sale or other means; the owner is compensated by payment of market value. The power to take the property is based on the concept of eminent domain. 
Condominium means the ownership in fee simple title of a single unit in a multi-unit structure and an undivided ownership interest, in common with other owners of the common elements of the structure, including the common areas of land and its appurtenances. 
Confined animal feeding operation means a building or fenced enclosure designed and used for holding or fattening of animals in preparation for market. It does not include the pasturing of animals at densities recommended by the best management practices of the Georgia Department of Agriculture as follows: Horses—one (1) per forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet (one (1) acre); cows—one (1) per forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet; sheep or goats—one (1) per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; fowl—twenty (20) per forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
Conical surface means the surface that extends outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and Henry County or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owners land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Construction means any site, preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action but excluding demolition, for or of public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Construction standard drawing means the Henry County Construction Standards Manual and related drawings for public improvements. 
Consumer goods sales and service. There are three (3) types of consumer goods sales and service; they are other, durable and heavy. These types group establishments by product, characteristic and intensity. The following outlines permitted uses/businesses within each consumer goods sales and service type: 
Consumer goods sales and service, other. 
(1)  Apparel stores. 
(2)  Antique and art shops, provided there is no outdoor display area. 
(3)  Banks, including drive-in banks, provided that both the teller's cage and vehicles awaiting service are located completely off the public right-of-way and provision is made to accommodate a minimum of five (5) waiting vehicles per service window. 
(4)  Bakeries, whose entire products are sold at retail on the premises. 
(5)  Books, stationery and card shops. 
(6)  Clothes cleaning agencies, pressing establishment, laundry pickup stations. 
(7)  Confectionery (candy) stores. 
(8)  Custom dress making or millinery shops. 
(9)  Drug stores and apothecary shops. 
(10)  Electrical appliance repair shops. 
(11)  Florist and gift shops. 
(12)  Gift and card shops. 
(13)  Hardware and appliance stores selling predominantly at retail. 
(14)  Jewelry stores. 
(15)  Laundromats. 
(16)  Loan offices. 
(17)  Music stores. 
(18)  Neighborhood shopping centers. 
(19)  News and tobacco shops. 
(20)  Package (beer and wine) stores. 
(21)  Paint and decorating stores. 
(22)  Photographers (including the sale of supplies and equipment). 
(23)  Quick copy print shops when employing not more than five (5) employees. 
(24)  Radio/television repair (including the sale of supplies and equipment). 
(25)  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
(26)  Tailors and clothing shops. 
(27)  Automotive service, minor. 
(28)  Other retail and service uses as may be determined by the planning staff to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
Durable consumer goods sales and service. 
(1)  Auction gallery. 
(2)  Automobile wash. 
(3)  Community and regional shopping centers. 
(4)  Department stores. 
(5)  Furniture stores. 
(6)  Professional type assembly and repair of such items as eyeglasses, custom jewelry, prosthetic devices and other similar services and manufacture. 
(7)  Parking lots and structures. 
(8)  Printing, job, when mechanical operation is not visible from a street, and employing not more than four (4) persons. 
(9)  Stationery and office machines sales and service. 
(10)  Upholstery shops. 
(11)  Other uses as may be determined by the planning staff to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
Heavy consumer goods sales and services. 
(1)  Boat sales. 
(2)  Automotive service, major. 
(3)  Feed and seed stores. 
(4)  Heavy equipment sales and service. 
(5)  Recreational vehicle sales and service. 
(6)  Tire retreading. 
(7)  Trade shops, including electrical, plumbing, gutter, machines, and HVAC contractors. 
(8)  Other uses as may be determined by the planning staff to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
Cooking facilities means any device used in the preparation of food, including range, ovens, cook-top surface units, refrigerators, electric warming irons or hot plates, microwave ovens, coffee makers, toaster ovens, and other similar small electric appliances, freezers separate from or not included within a refrigeration unit are not included in this definition. 
Cornice means the uppermost horizontal molded projection or other uppermost horizontal element located at the top of a building or portion of a building. 
Corridor means a street, roadway, river or other linear element connecting major sources of trips that may contain a number of streets, highways, and transit route alignments. A corridor is also defined as all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
County. The use of the word "county" shall mean the board of commissioners of Henry County. 
County street means a street which is owned and/or maintained by Henry County. 
Covenant, protective means a contract entered into between private parties which constitute a restriction on the use of a particular parcel of property. 
Covenant, restrictive means private contracts entered into between the developer and purchaser(s) which constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a development for the benefit of property owners, and provide a mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values. 
Critical root zone means an area on the ground around a tree that is equal to the reach of the farthest branches, containing sufficient root mass for survival. 
Cross access easement means a limited right to make use of a property owned by another to gain access to another property; a right-of-way across the property. 
Crosswalk means a public right-of-way used primarily for pedestrians' travel through or across any portion of a block. 
Culvert means a pipe, conduit, or similar enclosed structure with appurtenant works which carries surface or stormwater under or through an embankment or fill, roadway, or pedestrian walk, or other structure. 
Curb cut means the providing of vehicular ingress or egress between a property and an abutting public street. 
Cupola means a roof or ceiling in the form of a dome or a small structure on a roof, sometimes made of glass and providing natural light inside. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Cutting (pertaining to tree protection) means the detaching or separating of any limb, branch, or root from a tree. 
D 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Day care facility/center for children, day care center for youth, nursery schools and kindergarten schools; and a day care center for adults means a firm, partnership, corporation, individual, or other business entity providing care for more than six (6) children or adults, not related by blood or marriage, or not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult or adults when conducted in a principal structure or within a church or school. Child care centers must provide at least two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor play area and thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play space is provided for each child. The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a security chain link fence, at least four (4) feet in height. A state license and a county business license are required. 
DBH—Diameter at breast height means a forestry term that takes the thickness measurement of a tree at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. 
Dead storage means the storage of goods not in use and not associated with any commercial or manufacturing business. 
Dead tree means a tree that does not contain any live tissue, i.e., green leaves or live limbs. 
Deciduous tree means any tree which naturally loses its leaves in the fall. 
Decision date means the date upon which the director of the department or his designated representative makes the final decision on the approval or denial of a permit. 
Density, gross means the total number of dwelling units divided by the total project area, expressed as gross dwelling units per acre. 
Density, net means the number of dwelling units per acre of land when the average involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses and excludes such areas as street rights-of-way, parks, common open space, flood hazard areas, steep slopes (grater than twenty-five (25) percent) and public land. For mixed use and interchange activity center zoning districts net density can include open space in the calculation as long as open space is used for passive recreation. 
Department of Community Affairs (DCA). The Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) was created in 1977 to serve as an advocate for local governments. DCA operates a host of state and federal grant programs; serves as the state's lead agency in housing finance and development; promulgates building codes to be adopted by local governments; provides comprehensive planning, technical and research assistance to local governments; and serves as the lead agency for the state's solid waste reduction efforts. 
Descendant means a person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with Title 19 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for purposes of controlling the peak discharge. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person or legal entity who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Development of regional impact (DRI) means a development project, regardless of the mix of land uses, which is likely to have impacts to the transportation network and environment beyond the limits of the jurisdiction in which it is being constructed. 
Development or single development means any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, clearing, digging, filling, dredging, excavating, grading, grubbing, mining, paving, removal of vegetation, stripping, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, transportation and filling of land, and any other installation of impervious cover; land development or land development project. 
New development. A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Post-development. The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development. The time period, or the conditions that exist on a site, prior to the commencement of land alteration, clearing, construction, or other activity that constitutes development. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.) the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Development rights. A governmentally recognized entitlement to use or develop land at a certain density, or intensity, or for a particular purpose, which may be severed from the realty and placed on some other property. 
Receiving area. The region or district where development rights may be affixed to property. 
Receiving property. The lot or parcel where development rights are affixed, thereby increasing the permissible density or intensity of use on the property. 
Sending area. The region or district where development rights may be removed for purposes of transfer to another location. 
Sending property. The lot or parcel where development rights are removed, thereby eliminating permissible uses on the property. 
Transfer of development rights. The process by which development rights from a sending property are affixed to one (1) or more receiving properties. 
Diameter at breast height means a forestry term that takes the thickness measurement of a tree at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled way consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Drive-in means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the customer on the outside of the principal building. 
Drive-in restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or servicing of food, refreshment or beverages in automobiles or other vehicles, including those establishments where customers may consume same on the premises. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family dwellings, rooming and boarding houses, fraternities, sororities and modular dwellings, but not including hotels or motels. 
Accessory dwelling. A dwelling unit established within the principal building or in a separate structure, and on the same lot as the principal structure. It is an independent dwelling unit, but it may share an entrance, yard and parking with the principal unit. 
Duplex or two-family. A building containing two (2) dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families living independent of each other. 
Multifamily. Three (3) or more dwelling units in one (1) building with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
Single-family. One (1) dwelling unit in one (1) building, other than a mobile home, hotel or motel, designed for and occupied by one (1) family, containing rooms for living, sleeping, toilet facilities and one (1) kitchen, that meets the standards set forth in section 4.01.07. 
Townhouse. One (1) of a series of three (3) or more attached dwelling units on separate lots which are separated from each other by a coincidental property line and party wall partitions. The structure must meet all front, rear and side yard setback requirements in the zoning district in which it is located, except for the coincidental property line and wall. Each dwelling unit must be separately metered for all utilities, have access to a public street and the coincidental property line and wall must be fire-rated and extend from the foundation or ground (whichever is lower) to the roof decking of the structure. Each dwelling unit shall contain rooms for living, sleeping, toilet facilities and one (1) kitchen. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, for rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent living, sleeping, toilet and a single kitchen with cooking facilities. 
E 
Easement means a grant of one (1) or more property rights by a property owner to the general public, a public utility, a governmental unit, or a private individual or corporation for the use of a portion of the owner's land for a specific purpose, or use as a means of access to other property. Easements shall be designated "public" or "private" depending upon the nature of the usage. 
Conservation easement. An agreement between a land owner and a governmental agency or land trust that permanently protects the land by limiting the amount and type of development that is permissible, while leaving the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Drainage easement. An agreement allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Eave means the projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Henry County, Georgia. 
Enforcer means the enforcer is defined as the administrator or his designee. The person, officer, official, or his authorized representative designated by the Board of Commissioners, Henry County, as its agent for the administration of the provisions of the ULDC. 
Equipment facility means an equipment facility is any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a WCF which included cabinets, shelters, a buildout of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar structures. 
Erect means to build, paint, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, assemble or affix. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize and control the accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation runoff resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan". 
Essential public services means the components of potable water systems, sanitary sewer systems, drainage systems, gas, electricity, cable, television, telephone, and other utilities and services that deliver the service to individual properties. Included are cables, utility poles, pipes, mains, lift stations, switch boxes, culverts, and the like. Specifically excluded are high voltage towers, wireless communication towers, and electrical substations. 
Evergreen tree means any tree that retains green leaves throughout the year. This includes magnolias and tree-type hollies, as well as pines and cedars. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Exempt means a project which has been determined to have negligible impacts to emissions and air quality and, therefore, is not typically incorporated into travel demand modeling and emissions analyses. Typical exempt projects include bicycle and pedestrian facilities, facilities to support transit services (but not the services themselves), studies, minor intersection improvements and safety upgrades. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 15, 2009. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 15, 2009. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
F 
Facade. 
Primary (front) facade. The exterior wall surface(s) across the building front, extending from grade to top of the parapet, wall, gable, or eaves and from side corner to side corner that are visible from any location on the street or main parking area and includes the primary entrance into the building. If the building faces more than one (1) parking area or street, the largest exterior wall of the building with a primary entrance which is most nearly parallel to the widest street or largest parking area to which the building faces. 
Secondary facade. Any exterior wall of a building, other than the primary facade. 
Family means one (1) or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, fraternity or sorority house. 
Farm means a farm includes all places of three (3) or more acres devoted to the raising of agricultural products regardless of the quantity or value of production. 
Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees required has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Feedlot means land devoted to confinement feeding of livestock. A lot or building or combination lots and buildings intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising or holding of livestock while being fattened for slaughter and where animal waste may accumulate, but not including barns, pens or similar structures not intended for the fattening of animals for slaughter. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade. See grade. 
Firing range means a public or privately owned facility designed and operated for the purpose of discharge of rifles, shotguns and handguns at targets within a controlled setting. 
Flag lot. See "lot" definition. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard area means the area possibly threatened by periodic flooding as determined by various data, e.g., maps provided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, United States Soil Conservation Service, Army Corps of Engineers, or hydrological studies utilizing generally accepted engineering practices. Flood hazard areas shall include all lands underneath a permanent body of water, e.g., a lake, pond, river, and stream, and all land within the limits of a flood hazard area having a one-hundred-year return frequency. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding with at least a one-percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or egulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Floor area means the total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of the outside walls, but excluding any attic, unfinished basement area, breezeway, cellar, porch, or verandah. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Floor area means the total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of the outside walls, but excluding any attic, unfinished basement area, breezeway, cellar, porch, or verandah. 
Frontage or road frontage means the distance measured along a public street right-of-way, or the main street property line of a lot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Functional street classification. Streets provide two (2) distinct functions: Mobility (through movement) and access to land. Functional classification is a hierarchical ranking based on the degree of mobility and access that a street provides. Streets are generally classified as arterials, collectors and local streets. See streets. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
G 
Garage, parking means a structure, lot or any portion thereof which is open to the public in which one (1) or more vehicles are housed or kept, not including exhibition, show rooms, storage of cars or cars for sale. 
Garage, repair means a building or structure used to house, cover or protect automobiles or other vehicles from the elements while repairs are being made thereto. 
Genealogist means a person who traces or studies the descent of persons or families and prepares a probative record of such descent. 
Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground immediately surrounding the building or structure. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface adjacent to the proposed foundation walls of a structure prior to construction. 
Grade (roadway) means the slope (ratio of change in elevation to change in distance) or a roadway typically given in percent. For example, a two-percent grade represents two (2) feet of elevation change over a one hundred-foot distance. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenspace (or open space) means any area protected as permanently vegetated land. 
Ground coverage means the area of a lot occupied by all buildings expressed as a percentage of the gross area of the lot. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Group home means a residence where two (2) or more unrelated persons live that is under the supervision of a resident manager. Group homes are established to assist persons who have left highly structured institutions such as a hospital or prison, to adjust to and reenter society and live within its accepted norms. The purpose of a group home is to allow people to begin the process of reintegration with society, while still providing monitoring and support. Group homes shall not provide treatment of drug or alcohol dependency, or provide an alternative to incarceration. 
H 
Hardship means the presence of some unique or rare condition of land, different in type and extent from other land in the same location or in the same zoning district. 
Hazardous material means any substance defined as "hazardous waste" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. as hereafter amended. 
Hazard to air navigation means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as "hazardous waste" in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Act which are in force and effect on February 1, 1991, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3 as hereafter amended and any designated hazardous waste. Also any substance defined as "hazardous waste" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. as hereafter amended. 
Health and personal services means establishments providing nonmedically related services, including beauty and barber shops; clothing rental; dry cleaning pick-up stores; laundromats (self-service laundries); psychic readers; shoe repair shops; tanning salons. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from average elevation of the proposed finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof on a building. When referring to a tower, sign or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower, sign or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. When a building faces on more than one (1) street, the height shall be measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street front. 
Height of building. See building height. 
Heliport means a designated area for landing and takeoff of rotorcraft. 
Henry County's separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, Henry County streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(a)  Owned or maintained by unincorporated Henry County; 
(b)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(c)  Not a part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the board of commissioners as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 10.05.04 of this ULDC. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Home occupation means an occupation for gain or support conducted on the premises or within a dwelling unit by a person or family residing thereon. The term "home occupation" shall not be deemed to include a tourist home. 
Hospice care facility. Hospice care provides humane and compassionate care for people in the last phases of incurable disease so that they may live as fully and comfortably as possible. Hospice is to enable patients to continue an alert, pain-free life and to manage other symptoms so that their last days may be spent with dignity and quality, surrounded by their loved ones. Hospice affirms life and does not hasten or postpone death. Hospice care treats the person rather than the disease; it focuses on quality rather than length of life. It provides family-centered care; care is provided for the patient and family twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. Hospice care can be given in the patient's home, a hospital, nursing home, or private hospice facility. 
Hospital means an institution receiving in-patients, or a public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of mental patients, alcoholics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging, generally without in-room cooking facilities, is provided for guests. However, for hotels in C-3 or IAC zoning districts, cooking facilities are allowed within each room used for lodging. The term "hotel" includes the terms "motel", "extended stay" hotel or motel and "tourist court". 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Human remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any state of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
I 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to Henry County's separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 3-6-118 of this ULDC. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to Henry County's separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Impervious surface (or impervious cover) means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water or stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Improvements means physical changes to the land which are necessary to create useable lots including (but not limited to) grading and paving streets, sewer and water facilities, hydrants, sidewalks, monuments, changes to existing utilities, and stormwater drainage and detention systems. 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this article or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Indoor play space means play space required inside the principal structure of child care centers set aside for children's recreation and play. The area provided must be at least thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play space for each child. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Buildings Act", Georgia Law 1981 pp 1637—1643 (O.C.G.A., § 8-2-2(1)). 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Inert construction waste means waste building materials and other waste resulting from the construction, remodeling or repair of houses, buildings and other structures which will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such waste is limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes all waste not specifically listed above. (See Section 3-5-109(f) of the Henry County Code of Ordinances.) 
Infill means development of vacant or remnant lands passed over by previous development in the area. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Infrastructure means manmade structures and systems which serve the common needs of the population, such as: sewage disposal systems; potable water systems; potable water wells serving a system; solid waste disposal sites or retention areas; stormwater systems; utilities; piers; docks; wharves; breakwaters; bulkheads; seawalls; bulwarks; revetments; causeways; marinas; navigation channels; bridges; and roadways. 
Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle incapable of immediately being driven. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Institutional use means activities for civic, cultural, educational, social, or governmental purposes. 
Interparcel connection means a vehicular and pedestrian road, street or lane connecting segment and or sidewalk access for public use to gain access to adjacent residential subdivisions, commercial, industrial and mixed use subdivisions and establishments where access to contiguous properties would otherwise require vehicle trips on frontage roads for access. 
Interior landscape area means an area to be landscaped which is located in the interior area of a development or building site where vehicular parking spaces are to be provided or which is otherwise to be covered with impervious surface. 
J 
Junk/salvage yard means any use on public streets or private property involving the parking, storage or disassembly of vehicles and/or machinery; the storage, sale or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal; used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and other old household appliances; used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. These uses shall be considered junk yards whether or not all or part of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, or accessory to other uses of the premises. 
Junked vehicle means any wrecked nonoperable, dismantled automobile, truck or other vehicle which does not bear a current state license plate. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for a life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
K 
Kennel. The following shall constitute a kennel: 
(1)  Commercial kennel: Any location which provides boarding and care for dogs, cats, or other small animals for pecuniary gain. 
(2)  Noncommercial kennel: Any single-family residence in the RA zoning district where no more than ten (10) adult dogs and/or cats are kept as pets for the noncommercial purpose of hunting, exhibition in shows, field trials or breeding. Surplus offspring bred at such kennels to enhance or perpetuate any given breed, recognized by the American Kennel Club, may be sold at such kennels and shall not be considered a commercial activity. All animals kept or maintained in said kennel must be owned by the individual or family residing upon the lot upon which the kennel is located. 
Kindergarten means a state-approved institution for the education of pre-school aged children. 
Kitchen means a room or interior area equipped for preparing and cooking food. 
L 
L dn noise contour means a line linking together a series of points of equal cumulative noise exposure, based upon airport flight patterns, number of daily operations by type of aircraft, and typical runway utilization patterns. 
Land development. See development. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
Landscape plan means a detailed plan depicting proposed landscaping which will accompany all site plans submitted for development approval when required by the ULDC. 
Large quantity generator of hazardous waste means any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity that is defined as a "large quantity generator" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. as hereafter amended and that is regulated by the State of Georgia under that section. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor marking, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Henry County, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such terms defined on O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51(6). 
Loading space, off-street means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to the size of delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-7-8(a). 
Lodge means a membership organization that holds regular meetings and that may, subject to other regulations controlling such uses, maintain dining facilities, serve alcohol, or engage professional entertainment for the enjoyment of dues-paying members and their guests. There are no sleeping facilities. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, such as on a subdivision plat, survey map, or metes and bounds. 
Corner lot. A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or bounded on two (2) or more adjacent sides by street right-of-way lines. 
Double frontage lot (through lot). A lot, other than a corner lot, that has frontage upon two (2) or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
Flag lot. A lot with uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure. 
Interior. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. 
Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. (Lot definitions are illustrated in figure A.1.) 
Lot line (property line) means the property boundary, abutting a right-of-way line, or any line defining the exact location of a lot. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way lines. 
Lot of record means an individual lot or a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of Henry County, Georgia, or a parcel of land the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of Henry County. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this ULDC. 
M 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Major recreational equipment means boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwelling, motor coaches, tent trailers, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. 
Master development plan means a written and graphic submission for a mixed-use development which represents a tract of land, proposed subdivision, the location and bulk of buildings and other structures, density of development, public and private streets, parking facilities, common open space, public facilities and all covenants relating to use thereof. The master development plan is submitted in conjunction with a rezoning application for the MU zoning district. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(a)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(b)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(c)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(d)  A change in signage visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(e)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this ULDC the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Mini-warehouse means a building or portion thereof used for dead storage, mainly of the excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses or individuals. Mini-warehouses shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
Mixed use (development) means a development project that incorporates two (2) or more different types of land uses or activities, such as residential, commercial, office, and/or industrial. A mixed-use development has the different types of land uses in proximity, vertically or horizontally, planned as a unified complementary whole, and functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas. 
Mobile food services, portable restaurants, temporary outdoor and sales, and sidewalk sales means any temporary business selling goods or merchandise from a tent, truck, vending cart or other areas outside of a permanent structure on property owned or leased by the business. Temporary outdoor sales do not include sales conducted by charitable organizations incidental to the principal or permitted use or structure on the property. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. Documentation of compliance with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standard Act (United States Department of Housing and Urban Development certification) shall be required. 
Mobile home community means a mobile home development with continuing local general management and with special facilities for common use by the occupants, including such items as common recreational building and areas, common open space, laundries and the like. 
Mobile home development means a mobile home development included mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and mobile home condominiums. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces or lots are set aside and offered for rent for use by mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building or structure or facility used by occupants of mobile homes on such premises. A mobile home park does not include an automobile or mobile home sales lot on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for inspection or sale. 
Mobile home or manufactured home subdivision means a tract of land that is used, designated, maintained or held out for sale of lots to accommodate mobile homes or manufactured housing. A mobile home or manufactured home subdivision shall meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Monopole means a single, freestanding pole-type structure supporting one (1) or more antenna. For purposes of this ordinance, a monopole is not a tower. 
Motel means an establishment where lodging without separate cooking facilities are provided to the public for compensation, in which ingress or egress to and from all rooms are made primarily directly from an exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby. Includes a building or group of buildings intended for short-term use by transients or the travelers, and containing sleeping accommodations with sanitary facilities. Other synonymous terms include hotel, tourist court, motor court, motor inn, or motor lodge. 
Extended stay motel or hotel means a motel providing sleeping accommodations, sanitary facilities, and kitchen facilities, intended for overnight or weekly use. 
Move in house or structure means a pre-existing dwelling or structure relocated to another lot or on the same lot. 
N 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum, as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Natural area means an area of natural vegetation that is generally undisturbed, unmaintained, and is self-perpetuating. It includes not only trees, but also native shrubs, ground covers, wildflowers, vines, and grasses. 
Natural vegetated area means an undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include, but are not limited to: Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife; outdoor recreational activities, including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting; education, scientific research and nature trails; maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the previous nature of the land shall be minimized; and limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the uses permissible in the area as above. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Net acreage means the total acreage of any parcel or combined parcels of land to be developed as a single project, less the sum of the following: total number of acres contained in the 100-year flood hazard area, total number of acres contained in rights-of-ways and the total number of acres contained in detention or retention ponds to be constructed. 
Net density. See density (net density). 
New development. See development. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 15, 2009, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 15, 2009. 
Noncombustible material means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
Nonconformity or nonconforming use means a land use activity, building or structure legally established prior to adoption of this ULDC, or subsequent amendment to it, that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this section. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollutions a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice (nonstructural practice) means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and green space areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Nursery school, kindergarten schools. See day care definition. 
Nursing home means a use in which domiciliary care is provided to one (1) or more convalescing, chronically or terminally ill non-family members who are provided with food, shelter and care. This use shall not include hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
O 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Open space means permanently protected areas that are preserved in a natural state and. undisturbed lands or otherwise properties set aside for recreational uses, buffers, common areas, landscape areas, as well as other uses defined under the "open space categories" described below. Buffers and wetlands, if located on lots to be conveyed to private property owners, shall not be considered as "open space." Land contained within the 100-year flood zone shall not be considered as "open space" if located on lots that are to be conveyed to private property owners. Land designated as "open space" is divided into five (5) categories (the "open space categories" or, singularly, an "open space category"): 
• Category A wetland stream buffers; 100-year flood hazard areas, undisturbed buffers between various land uses, roadside buffers, wildlife sanctuaries, and other forms of buffers, if owned by the developer or a property owners association; 
• Category B improved and revegetated areas utilized for active recreation, such as ball fields, parks and golf courses; 
• Category C improved, active recreation areas, such as swimming pools, tennis courts and playgrounds; 
• Category D state waters, including wetlands, ponds, lakes, if owned by a developer or a property owners association; and 
• Category E land donated to a governmental entity for public use, provided such land is not located in a wetland or 100-year flood zone. 
In order to calculate the total "open space," the total acreage contained within each open space category is multiplied by its respective factor, as set forth below: 
• Category A factor = 1.0 
• Category B factor = 0.7 
• Category C factor = 0.2 
• Category D factor = 0.5 
• Category E factor = 2.0. 
Open space, public means land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public. It includes parks, recreation facilities, school sites, community or public building sites and similar spaces for public use. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(a)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(b)  Day-to day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site of other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Orphanage means an institution devoted to the care of children whose parents are deceased or otherwise unable to care for them. Parents, and sometimes grandparents, are legally responsible for supporting children, but in the absence of these or other relatives willing to care for the children, they become a ward of the state, and orphanages are a way of providing for their care and housing. 
Outdoor play area means an area outside the principal structure designed and set aside for recreation and play in the open air and sunshine and may contain some play equipment. See child care center definition. 
Outside storage means the placement or containment of goods, materials, or equipment other than within a building, for purposes of keeping such goods, materials, or equipment for processing, use, sale, or transfer to other locations. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through twenty-five-year frequency storm events. 
Overhang means the edge of a roof that projects out over the space or wall beneath. 
Overlay zoning district or overlay district means a defined geographic area that encompasses one (1) or more underlying zoning districts and that superimposes additional requirements above those required by the underlying zoning district. An overlay district can be coterminous with existing zoning districts or containing only parts of one (1) or more such districts. Permitted uses in the underlying zoning district shall continue subject to compliance with the regulations of the overlay zone or district where that use is expanded or enlarged after the adoption of this ULDC. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
P 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Parking space, off-street means an off-street parking space consisting of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, design standards for which are contained in the ULDC. 
Patio cover means an attached structure with open, screened or glazed walls which is used only for recreational, outdoor living purposes associated with the dwelling unit and not as carports, garages, storage rooms or habitable rooms. 
Pavement width means the cross section width of a paved road measured from edges of pavement. 
Perennial stream means any stream which flows throughout the entire year, as shown as a solid blue line on a United States Geological Survey (USGS) 7-minute Topographic Series Maps (1:24,000). 
Perimeter landscape area means an area to be landscaped which is located between the buffer area required by the ULDC and the interior landscape area, as defined in the ULDC. 
Permit means the permit issued by the Henry County to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal care home means a personal care home is a single home where personal care services are provided to no more than six (6) nonfamily adults. Personal care services includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. A care home cannot provide nursing or other medical services or admit and retain residents who need continuous medical or nursing care (see O.C.G.A. § 31-7-12 for state requirements for personal care homes). The term "personal care home" does not include buildings which are devoted to independent living units which include kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, nor does it include halfway houses, residential treatment facilities, nursing homes, sanitariums, hospital or other institutional facilities, or rooming or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
Pet means a tame animal kept for companionship or pleasure. In all residential zoning districts the maximum number of pets allowed per residence is four (4). 
Planned development means development which has both residential and nonresidential land uses according to a master development plan, with related covenants and restrictions. Developments within a PD project may have flexibility in the application of development standards when approved according to a master development plan, and to promote the conservation of natural resources, more efficient use of land, and, efficiency in the extension of streets and utilities. 
Planning and zoning department means the professional planning staff of Henry County, Georgia, responsible for administering the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and comprehensive land use plan. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: Paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter or any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Portico or porch means a covered entrance to a large building or a covered walkway, often leading to the main entrance of a building that consists of a roof supported by pillars. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.) the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
Preserve and protect means to keep from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and may also include the cleaning, maintenance, and upkeep of the site so as to aid in its preservation and protection. 
Primary surface means an area longitudinally centered on a runway extending two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Principal building means the building or structure in which the primary use permissible on the lot is conducted. In RA (less than two (2) acres or a platted subdivision), R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RD, RM, RS and RMH residential zoned districts a dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot. A structurally independent garage, carport or other structure may be attached to the principal buildings by a roofed breezeway which shall cause the entire structure to be construed as part of the principal building and shall be subject to the sections applicable to the principal building or structure. A detached and structurally independent carport, garage or other structure shall conform to the requirements of any accessory building. 
Principal permitted use means that use of a lot which is among the uses allowed as a matter of right under the zoning classifications. (Also see WCF principal or accessory use.) 
Private deed restrictions or covenants means private deed restrictions or covenants imposed on land by private land owners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent owners. They are enforceable only by the land owners involved and not by the county or other public agency. 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Henry County, Georgia, shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property line. See lot line. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
Public facilities or public spaces means: 
(a)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; and 
(b)  Public safety facilities, including police, inmate housing, fire, animal control, emergency medical, and rescue facilities; 
(c)  Libraries and related facilities; and 
(d)  Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any other components of state or federal highways. 
Public streets means right-of-way dedicated to the county or owned by the county for public street purpose. 
Public utility means firms, corporations, or local government authorities providing gas, electricity, communications service, and similar essential services. 
Public water facilities means mains and service lines owned and operated by the Henry County Water and Sewage Authority, or when approved by the board of commissioners, a private water system operating under the direct supervision of the DNR. 
Q 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Quarters means a place of residence. 
R 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional development centers (RDC) means State of Georgia regional agencies created to facilitate coordinated and comprehensive planning in conformity with state standards and procedures. 
Regional stormwater management facility (regional facility) means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirements for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Regulatory flood (regulatory flood elevation) means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood. 
Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a reservoir, defined by its normal pool level (elevation above mean sea level). 
Residence means a home, abode, or place where an individual is actually living on a nontemporary basis. 
Residential fly-in neighborhood means a subdivision designed to include a private airport or landing strip. 
Retail establishment means an establishment that sells goods or merchandise from a fixed location directly to a consuming purchaser and includes establishments that prepare and sell meals or other edible products either for carry out or service within the establishment. The term "retail" means a sale made to the consuming purchaser or purchaser without a retail license. 
Right-of-way means access over or across a particularly described property for a specific purpose. A strip of land intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, storm sewer, drainage structure, sewer line, or other similar use. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Road frontage. See Frontage. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled way consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rotorcraft means a heavier-than-air aircraft that derives its support in flight principally from lift generated by one (1) or more rotors. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Runway means a defined area at the airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
Runway protection zone means a trapezoidal shaped, two-dimensional area located near each planned runway end. 
S 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Self-service storage facility means a fully enclosed facility containing independent bays and/or self contained units which are leased to or owned by individuals exclusively for dead storage of goods or personal property. 
Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
Setback means the horizontal distance between a building or building line and a property line or a buffer line in which a structure cannot be erected or, with respect to a stream, the area established by the ULDC extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. (Setbacks are illustrated in figure A.2.) 
Sewer line, lateral means sanitary sewer collection lines within a subdivision or development that transports effluent to larger trunk sewers for sewage treatment. 
Sewer line, trunk means the main sanitary sewer lines which collect sewage from lateral sewer lines for transportation either directly to sewage treatment plants or to larger interceptor sewers entering a treatment plant. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments having a building composition that is a single architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblage of stores. It is planned and developed as a unit, related in location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves, and provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. Shopping centers are classified by type, each distinctive in its own function: 
Neighborhood shopping center. Provides for the sale of convenience goods (foods, drugs, sundries, etc.) and personal services (laundry, dry cleaning, barbering, shoe repair, etc.) for the day-to-day living needs of the immediate neighborhood. It is generally built around a supermarket which is the major tenant. Neighborhood shopping centers may have an average gross leasable area (GLA) close to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet and range between thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet in GLA. Typically, the lot size for a neighborhood shopping center is between four (4) and ten (10) acres, with a trade area population of five thousand (5,000) to forty thousand (40,000) people. 
Community shopping center. Provides for the sale of a wide range of durable goods and other types of merchandise in addition to convenience goods and personal services found in a neighborhood shopping center and typically has a junior department store or specialty store as the major tenant. Community shopping centers may have an average GLA close to one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet and range between one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet GLA. Typically, the lot size for a community shopping center is between ten (10) and thirty (30) or more acres, with a trade area population of forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) people. 
Regional shopping center. Provides for the sale of a wide range and variety of general merchandise, apparel, furniture, furnishings, novelties, personalized services and amusements in addition to those items found in neighborhood and community shopping centers. Typically, there are several major tenants which include nationally known department stores and grocery stores. Regional shopping centers may have an average GLA close to four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet and range between three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet and one million (1,000,000) square feet GLA. Typically, the lot size for a regional shopping center is thirty (30) to fifty (50) or more acres, with a trade area population in excess of one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) people. 
Sign means every device, item, product, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed in view of the general public. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a single display surface or a single display device containing different elements that are organized, related, and composed to form a unit shall be considered to be one (1) sign. Where different elements are displayed in a random manner without an organized relationship to each other, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the relationship of different elements to each other, each element shall be considered to be a single separate sign. 
Aerial view sign. Any sign which is designed primarily to be viewed from the sky from an airplane, helicopter, etc. This includes, but is not limited to, any sign horizontally affixed to a roof or attached to a roof such that the sign is not readily viewable from the surrounding ground. 
Aggregate signable area. The sum total of the signable area of any and all signs, for a given lot. Street numbers assigned by the United States Postal Service shall not be considered in calculating the aggregate signable area. 
Animated sign. See flashing sign. 
Awning sign. Any sign on a cloth, metal, plastic or other cover designed to shade a window or entrances and attached to any structure. 
Back-to-back sign. A sign with two (2) parallel sign faces oriented in opposite directions. 
Banner sign. See temporary sign. 
Beacon. See temporary sign. 
Bench sign. See ground sign. 
Billboard. An outdoor advertising sign, typically drawing attention to activities on premises other than the sign location. 
Blade sign. See projecting sign or swinging sign. 
Bracket sign. See projecting sign or swinging sign. 
Canopy sign. See wall sign. 
Changeable copy sign. See flashing sign. 
Decal. A picture, design or label made to be transferred (as to glass, wood, metal or any other hard object) from specially prepared paper. 
Detached sign. See ground sign. 
Door sign. See wall sign or window sign. 
Entrance sign. Any sign placed at the intersection of a public street and a public or private entryway into an apartment complex, condominium complex, office complex, industrial complex or other building or buildings with multifamily residential dwelling units or multiple commercial units. 
Externally illuminated signs. Any sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Fascia sign. See wall sign. 
Flag. A usually rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that is used as a symbol as of a nation, as a signaling device or as a decoration. 
Flashing sign. Any sign whose message or appearance scrolls, flashes, rotates or changes, or whose illumination changes in intensity more often than once every fifteen (15) seconds, including, but not limited to, reader boards. 
Flat sign. See wall sign. 
Ground sign. Any sign supported by uprights or braces which are permanently placed into the ground, and not supported by or suspended from any building. 
Hand-held signs. Any sign larger than six (6) inches by six (6) inches carried by a human appendage or prosthesis including, but not limited to, picket signs, shields or sandwich boards. 
Height, sign. The vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the sign or sign structure. 
Internally illuminated signs. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes located within the interior parts of the sign. 
Mansard sign. See roof sign or wall sign. 
Marquee sign. See flashing sign. 
Mobile sign. See temporary sign. 
Monument sign. See ground sign. 
Moving sign. See flashing sign. 
Multiple message sign. See flashing sign. 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this ULDC at the date of adoption of same. 
Painted wall sign. See wall sign. 
Parapet sign. See wall sign. 
Pennant. See temporary sign. 
Pitched roof sign. See roof sign. 
Pole sign. See ground sign. 
Portable sign. See temporary sign. 
Projecting sign. Any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than twelve (12) inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Pylon sign. See ground sign. 
Readerboard. See flashing sign. 
Reflectors. Any device created for the purpose of reflecting light directed at the device so as to render the device especially visible. 
Revolving sign. See flashing sign. 
Roof sign. A sign which is attached to a building or structure and is displayed above the lowest horizontal line of a building's roof. 
Rotating sign. See flashing sign. 
Sandwich sign. See temporary sign or hand-held sign. 
Searchlight. See temporary sign. 
Shingle sign. See projecting sign or swinging sign. 
Sidewalk sign. See temporary sign. 
Sign face. See signable area. 
Signable area. The total area upon which a message is displayed on any sign. For double-face signs, the side with the largest signable area shall be used in computing signable area. If the two (2) faces of a double-face sign are of unequal area, the signable area shall be the area of the larger face. For wall signs consisting entirely of products shaped in the form of letters or other figures attached directly to a wall or roof, the signable area shall consist of the net geometric area measured by the smallest possible single square or rectangle enclosing the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations. 
Stake sign. Any temporary sign supported by at least one (1) upright placed into the ground, and not supported by or suspended from any building with signable area not greater than eight (8) square feet. 
Streamer. See temporary sign. 
Subdivision internal sign. Any sign placed at the intersection of two (2) public roads inside a residential subdivision. 
Subdivision sign. Any sign placed at the intersection of two (2) public roads where one (1) of the roads is the main thoroughfare into and out of a single-family residential subdivision. 
Suspended sign. See projecting sign or swinging sign. 
Swinging sign. Any sign which is mounted such that the sign may freely move back and forth. 
Temporary sign. Any sign or device which is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, which is designed to be mobile or is designed to remain in place for a limited time. This includes, but is not limited to, signs which are designed to be transported regularly from one (1) location to another, signs which are designed with wheels, regardless of whether the wheels remain attached to the sign, or signs tethered to an existing structure. These signs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Sky lights; 
(2)  Balloons; 
(3)  Streamers; 
(4)  Flag strings; 
(5)  Inflatable displays; 
(6)  Banners; 
(7)  Beacons; 
(8)  Searchlights; 
(9)  Pennants; and 
(10)  Mechanical or animated figures. 
V-formation sign. A sign with two (2) sign faces, forming the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above, with an angle between the two (2) faces of not more than sixty (60) degrees. 
Wall sign. Any sign which is attached parallel to or painted on an exterior building wall, which may include a door. 
Window sign. Any sign displayed to an outside observer on or through a window or covering a window, which may include a door. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Special event means a gathering or event for which the promoter or other person, firm, or corporation holding or producing the event must obtain a permit. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Solid waste management facilities means public or private disposal facilities or transfer stations, operated for the purpose of recycling, reclaiming, treating, or disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal, oil field wastes, hazardous waste, or other waste material originating on or off the premises. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Stable, private means a stable with a capacity of not more that four (4) horses, mules or other draught animals. 
Stable, public means a stable other than a private stable with a capacity of more than four (4) horses, mules or other draught animals. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation, except any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area and as may be defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(7). 
Store front means the primary facade of a single, undivided unit. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. "Stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and green space, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Off-site facility. A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the property being developed. 
On-site facility. A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the property being developed. 
Regional stormwater management facility. Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or underground outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, Henry County may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Stream protection area. See protection area. 
Street means the land between the right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, curb and gutter, sidewalks, drainage ditches and structures, and other areas within the right-of-way lines. (Types of streets are illustrated in figure A.3.) 
Alley. A strip of land providing vehicular and pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a public street. 
Boulevard. A street developed with two (2) one-way pavements separated by a landscaped median. 
Collector street. A public street whose function is to collect traffic from local streets and neighborhoods and connects to another public street of equal or greater classification. A collector may also provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
Cul-de-sac. A dead-end local street, of limited length, opened at one (1) end and closed at the other by a permanent turnaround. 
Dead-end street. A local street open at one (1) end and closed at the other. 
Expressway. The expressway system includes high volume limited access thoroughfares through the county and region beyond. 
Frontage road. A street which is parallel to, and adjacent to major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Local street. A public street that serves a limited area and whose primary function is to provide direct access to adjoining properties. 
Major arterial. A public street whose primary function is to connect two (2) highways of equal or greater classification or capacity, provide primary access to a large land area, provide access to a large traffic generator, or connect two (2) or more towns or communities. The secondary function is to provide local access. 
Minor arterial. A public street that serves an intermediate function between collectors and major arterials, and also serves as a traffic feeder to major arterials and for cross-country and regional travel. 
Stub street. A dead-end street at adjoining property lines intended for future extension to serve the development of adjoining areas. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Structure, principal. The building or structure in which the primary use permissible on the lot is conducted. In RA (less than two (2) acres or a platted subdivision), R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RD, RM, RS and RMH residential zoned districts a dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot. A structurally independent garage, carport or other structure may be attached to the principal buildings by a roofed breezeway which shall cause the entire structure to be construed as part of the principal building and shall be subject to the sections applicable to the principal building or structure. A detached and structurally independent carport, garage or other structure shall conform to the requirements of any accessory building. 
Structure, accessory or accessory use. A building subordinate to the principal building or use on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the principal building or use and located on the same lot therewith. An accessory structure shall not be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure to which it is accessory. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Business subdivision. A single parcel on which multiple businesses are located, or multiple connected parcels on which businesses are located and where the owners of the parcel share any common property. 
Lot division. The division of a tract or parcel of land into no more than five (5) separate lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and does not create divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Major subdivision. A type of development not classified as lot division include, but not limited to, the subdivision of land resulting in six (6) or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring the installation of any street, public or private, or utilities or other public improvements or infrastructure. 
Submission date. The date stamped on a sign application indicating the date the application was actually received by the department. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Surface water includes any river, creek, stream, or body of water that is not manmade. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three (3) percent of the total of all other costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one (1) project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
T 
Telecommunications means the transmission and reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
Temporary wireless communication facility (temporary WCF) means a WCF to be placed in use for ninety (90) or fewer days. 
Transitional surface means an area extending outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline, extended at a slope of seven to one (7:1) from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces. 
Transportation facility means the means by which a transportation mode is provided. For example, sidewalks are a facility serving the walking mode, a roadway is a facility serving the driving mode and a heavy rail line is a facility serving the transit mode. 
Tree means any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a trunk DBH of one and one-half (1½) inches and which normally attains a height of at least twelve (12) feet at maturity, usually with one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree diameter means the widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (dbh). 
Tourist home means a dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation. 
Tower means a lattice-type structure, guyed or freestanding, that supports one (1) or more antennas. 
Townhouse, fee simple. See dwelling. 
Toxic means any chemical or substance that has been defined as toxic by the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States, Environmental Protection Department of the State of Georgia, or the Department of Agriculture of the State of Georgia. 
Trailer (motor home) means a motorized vehicle, designed and/or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for travel or recreation purposes exclusively, having no foundation other than for wheels or jacks. 
Trailer (travel) means a nonmotorized vehicle, pulled by an automobile or truck designed and/or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for travel or recreation purposes exclusively. 
Trailer park means a parcel of land which is used solely for the rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes or temporary parking of any other recreational vehicle that is not a mobile home. 
Transportation means the movement of people and goods from one place to another. 
Director of transportation planning. The director of transportation planning [or county engineer], or his or her designee. 
Horizon year. The horizon year shall be twenty (20) years into the future from the year during which a traffic impact study is being prepared, unless otherwise specified or approved by the director of transportation planning. 
Internal trips. Trips that are made within a multi-use or mixed-use development, by vehicle or by an alternate mode, such as walking. 
Level of service (LOS). A quantitative and qualitative measure of how well traffic flows on a given street or highway. Level of service relates to such factors as highway width, number of lanes, percentage of trucks, total traffic volume, turning movements, lateral clearances, grades, sight distance, capacity in relation to volume, travel speed and other factors which affect the quality of flow. Level of service is typically summarized by letter grades described as follows: 
Level "A" is a condition with low traffic volumes, high speeds and free-flow conditions. 
Level "B" is a condition with light traffic volumes, minor speed restrictions and stable flow. 
Level "C" is a condition with moderate traffic volumes, where speed and maneuvering are restricted to a limited degree by the amount of traffic. 
Level "D" is a condition with heavy traffic operating at tolerable speeds, although temporary slowdowns in flow may occur. 
Level "E" is a condition of very heavy flow and relatively low speeds. Under Level "E" the traffic is unstable and short stoppage may occur. 
Level "F" is a condition of extremely heavy flow, with frequent stoppage and very slow speeds. It is an unstable traffic condition under which traffic often comes to a complete halt. 
New trips. Total vehicle trips, minus pass-by trips, minus internal trips, if applicable. 
Pass-by trips. Vehicle trips which are made by traffic already using the adjacent roadway and entering the site as an intermediate stop on the way to another destination. 
Peak hour. From 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., or 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or the highest four (4) fifteen-minute increments within such time period for the a.m. peak hour; 4:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. or the highest four (4) fifteen-minute increments within such a time period for the p.m. peak hour. 
Peak-hour trip generation study. A study by a qualified professional of one (1) or more actual developments of similar land use and development characteristics which provides empirical data on the actual number of trips entering and exiting said development(s) during the a.m. and p.m. peak hour. A peak-hour trip generation study shall consist of a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic counts by direction (entering and exiting) on at least three (3) separate weekdays if the study is based on only one (1) similar development, or at least one (1) a.m. and p.m. traffic count for three (3) different actual developments. The results of actual traffic counts from peak-hour trip generation studies may be adjusted to discount pass-by trips as provided in this ordinance. 
Professionally accepted. Published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, or prepared by a qualified professional under work supervised by the county, or prepared by a qualified professional and accepted by the director of transportation planning. 
Qualified professional. For purposes of conducting traffic impact studies as may be required by this ordinance, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering. For purposes of conducting peak-hour trip generation studies, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering, or another professional approved by the director of transportation planning based on education and experience to conduct such trip generation studies. 
System improvements. Improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one (1) project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
Project improvements. Site specific improvements that are planned, designed or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. 
Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study (TIS) is an important tool in the overall development planning process (residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, etc.). It provides information which identifies impacts of proposed developments on the existing, short range and long range roadway/circulation networks. It also identifies mitigation measures for the impacts identified. Traffic impact studies shall be conducted by a qualified professional. 
Trip. A single or one-directional travel movement with either the origin or destination of the trip inside the study site. 
Trip generation. An estimate of the number of vehicle trips that will be generated due to the new development, which is calculated based on the type and amount of land uses in the proposed development and professionally accepted trip generation rates for each such land use. Trip generation may be expressed on an average daily basis or average peak hour (a.m., p.m. or both). 
U 
Understory tree (also medium or small tree) means a class of trees and large shrubs that do not attain the height of a canopy or shade tree, yet are large enough at maturity to provide shade for people, as well as many of the benefits of larger shade trees. Examples include Dogwood, Red Bud, Crabapple, Crepe Myrtle, Wax Myrtle, Ornamental Cherry, Hawthorne, and tree-type type hollies. 
Undisturbed buffer means a buffer, either impervious or vegetated, in which no encroachment of buildings or structures is permitted. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to requirements. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, intended, or occupied and maintained or leased. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads. 
V 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vehicle, abandoned means a vehicle which does not bear a current state license plate, unless said vehicle is stored within a completely enclosed building or it is stored on a bona fide sales lot and is in satisfactory operating condition. 
Vehicle use area means any area, paved or unpaved, used for egress or ingress, or to store or park motor vehicles. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
W 
Waiver. See administrative waiver. 
Wastewater system means the collection, transportation and treatment of sanitary sewerage, via a pipe network, to a common collection point as required by the department of natural resources for the State of Georgia. 
Stub-out service means sanitary sewer connection facilities within the street right-of-way provided from lateral sewer line to the private property line for connection to building sewer lines. 
Water quality critical area means the water quality critical area is defined as follows: 
(a)  All land that lies adjacent to the normal pool level of a reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed or five hundred (500) feet whichever is shorter; and 
(b)  All land extending a distance of three (3) miles upstream from the normal pool level of the reservoir that is adjacent to each perennial stream upstream from the reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed on each side of the perennial stream or five hundred (500) feet, whichever is shorter. 
Water supply watershed means the drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir or a proposed public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed, and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
WCF principal or accessory use means antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of existing antennas or towers on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of an antenna or tower complies with district development regulation, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
Wholesale establishment means an establishment or place of business primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. The term "wholesale" means a sale made for the purpose of resale and not one made to the consuming purchaser. Retail sales may be permitted within a wholesale establishment and shall be limited to the elimination of wholesale stock due to damage, abandonment, or distribution to employees of the wholesale establishment, with occasional retail sales to the general public. 
Wireless communications means any personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless communications services, including cellular, digital communications (DCS), personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, radio and television communications, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. 
Wireless telecommunications facility means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support, antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, new and existing support structures, replacement support structures, collocations on existing support structures, attached wireless telecommunications facilities and concealed wireless telecommunications facilities. 
Abandonment. The intent to abandon or discontinue operations as evidenced by voluntary conduct or failure to use a wireless telecommunications facility for a period of six (6) months or more. 
Above ground level (AGL). A measurement of height from the natural grade of a site to the highest point of a structure. 
Administrative approval. Zoning approval that the director of the planning and zoning department, or his designee, is authorized to grant after administrative review. 
Attached wireless telecommunications facility. Antennas that are secured to an existing building or structure (except a monopole or tower) with any accompanying pole or device which attaches it to the building or structure, together with transmission cables, and an equipment cabinet, which may be located either on the roof or inside/outside of the building or structure. An attached wireless telecommunications facility is considered to be an accessory use to the existing principal use on a site. 
Collocation. Where two (2) or more wireless personal service providers place a wireless telecommunications antenna on the same support structure without increasing the height of the tower or structure. Collocation also means locating telecommunications facilities on an existing structure (for example: buildings, water tanks, towers, utility poles, etc.) without the need to construct a new support structure. 
Coverage. The geographic area reached by an individual wireless telecommunications facility installation. 
Geographic search area (GSA). An area designated by a wireless provider or operator for a new base station, produced in accordance with generally accepted principles of wireless engineering. 
Modification or modify. The improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound, provided such improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement does not increase the height of the wireless support structure or increase the dimensions of the equipment compound. 
Major modifications. The addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of an existing telecommunications facility or support structure that result in a substantial change to the facility or structure. Collocation of new telecommunications facilities to an existing support structure without replacement of the structure shall not constitute a major modification. "Major modifications" include, but are not limited to, extending the height of the support structure by more than twenty (20) feet or the replacement of the structure. 
Minor modifications. The addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of an existing telecommunications facilities or support structures, that result in some material change to the facility or support structure but of a level, quality or intensity that is less than a "substantial" change. Such minor modifications include, but are not limited to, collocations of new telecommunications facilities, extending the height of the support structure by less than twenty (20) feet, and the expansion of the compound area for additional accessory equipment. 
Provider. Any entity licensed by the FCC to provide subscriber-based personal wireless telecommunications services. 
Radiofrequency engineer. An engineer specializing in electrical or microwave engineering, especially the study of radio frequencies. 
Support structure. A structure, with or without a foundation designed to support or capable of supporting telecommunications facilities including, but not limited to, monopoles and towers. 
Support structure replacement. Constructing a replacement support structure that is a new tower or monopole with related antennas of proportions and of equal height or lesser height to a pre-existing or nonconforming support structure in order to support a telecommunications facility(ies) or to accommodate collocation and removing the pre-existing support structure. 
Telecommunications. The transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
Telecommunications facility(ies). Any unmanned facility established for the purpose of providing wireless transmission of voice, data, images or other information including, but not limited to, cellular telephone service, personal communications service, and paging service. A telecommunication facility can consist of one (1) or more antennas and accessory equipment or one (1) base station. 
Wrecker service means the recovering or removing wrecked, junked, abandoned, disabled or repossessed vehicles by a person, vehicle, or piece of equipment employed, especially a truck with a hoist and towing apparatus. Vehicle storage areas are only allowed with an approved conditional use. Dismantling of stored vehicles for resale purposes shall be prohibited. 
X 
Y 
Yard means a required open space located on the same lot as the principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed except for accessory uses, vegetation, and fences. (Types of yards are illustrated in figure A.2.) 
Front yard. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. The front yard of a corner lot shall include the yard abutting the street with the least frontage, unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. The front yard of a lot existing between two (2) streets not intersecting at a corner of the lot, shall be that yard abutting the street on which adjoining properties face, unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. 
Rear yard. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. The rear yard of a corner lot shall not include the yard abutting the street with the least frontage, unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. 
Side yard. The area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
Z 
Zero lot line means the location of building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more building sides have no (zero) front, side or rear building setback (or yard requirements) and rests directly on a front, side, or rear lot line. A zero lot line development is one where houses in the development on a common street frontage are shifted to one (1) side of their lot. 
Zoning district means the use classification of parcels of land as generally defined under this ULDC. The following zoning districts are further described in chapter 2: 

 
Illustrations of Defined Terms: 

Figure A-1 

Figure A-2 

Figure A-3 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 11-17-09; Ord. No. 10-20, § I(26), 6-15-10; Ord. No. 10-08, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 12-15, § II, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 14-02, § 3, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 14-06, § I(exh. A), 11-4-14 ; Ord. No. 15-04, 4-21-15 ; Ord. No. 16-01, § I, 7-19-16 ; Ord. No. 18-02, 6-19-18 ) 
Appendix B. - Administration of building and technical codes. 
101.1.  Scope. The provisions of the chapter shall govern the administration and enforcement of the building, gas, mechanical plumbing, electrical and the one- and two-family dwelling code, as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County board of commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the "technical codes." 
101.2.  Title. The provisions of this section shall constitute and be known as the "Appendix B, Administration" when used in conjunction with the technical codes as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
101.3.  Code remedial. 
101.3.1. General. The technical codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of building, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
101.3.2 Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the preview of the technical codes except as it relates to the purpose stated herein. 
101.3.3 Permitting and inspections. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by the Henry County Building Department, under the requirements of the technical codes, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the Henry County Building Department nor any employee of same shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
101.4.  Applicability. 
101.4.1. General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the technical codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
101.4.2. Building. The provisions of the building code, as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
101.4.3. Electrical. The provisions of the electrical code, as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
101.4.4. Gas. The provisions of the gas code, as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances, and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
101.4.5. Mechanical. The provisions of the mechanical code, as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. 
101.4.6. Plumbing. The provisions of the plumbing code, as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, when connected to a water or sewerage system and all aspects of a medical system. 
101.4.7. One- and two-family dwelling code. The provisions of the one- and two-family dwelling code, as approved by the State of Georgia and adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to the construction, addition prefabrication, alteration, repair, use, occupancy and maintenance of detached one- and two-family dwellings and one-family townhouses not more than three (3) stories in height, and their accessory structures. 
101.4.8. Federal and state authority. The provisions of the technical codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the technical code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
101.4.9. Appendices. To be enforceable, the appendices included in the technical codes must be referenced in the code text or specifically included in the adopting ordinance. 
101.4.10. Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
101.4.11. Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of the technical codes shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the technical code, the fire prevention code, property maintenance code or the existing building code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
101.4.11.1.  Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to that required for a new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all of the requirements of the Technical Codes, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building. 
102.  Powers and duties of the building official. 
102.1.  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its spirit and purposes. 
102.2.  Right of entry. 
102.2.1 Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the technical codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the technical codes. If such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
102.2.2 When the building official shall have obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the technical codes. 
102.3.  Stop work orders. 
102.3.1 Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
102.3.2 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
102.4.  Revocation of permits. 
102.4.1 Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the technical codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
102.4.2 Violation of code provisions. 
1.  The building official or his/her authorized representative may revoke a permit and/or issue a summons for violation of the building code or development code and require the responsible party to appear in the appropriate court of jurisdiction upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the technical codes and the Code of Henry County. 
2.  The building official may declare buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe as defined in subsection 103.5 and may issue a summons for the violation of the building or safety code and require the responsible party to appear in the appropriate court of jurisdiction to respond to such charges. 
3.  The building official or his authorized representative may issue summons as provided for in subparagraph (a) of this section 103.4.2; "such building official or his representative may not nor shall this ordinance be construed to permit or empower any building official to make a physical arrest, carry a firearm or otherwise perform the duties of a sworn and certified/registered law enforcement official. 
102.4.3 Violation of zoning provisions. 
1.  The building official or his/her authorized representative may withhold a permit on any building or development project if it is determined that the zoning provisions associated with the project have not been fulfilled. 
102.5.  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Unsafe Building Abatement Code as adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners and as approved by chapter 3-17, article V of the Henry County Code. 
102.6.  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
102.7.  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
102.8.  Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the technical codes, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the technical codes impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the technical code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety. 
103.  Permits. 
103.1.  Permit application. 
103.1.1 When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
EXCEPTION: Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of the technical codes shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the technical codes or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Building: 
1.  One (1) story detached, portable accessory structures, or portable structures attached to a permitted and approved permanent foundation, located on a residentially zoned lot, used as tool sheds, playhouses and similar uses. 
2.  One (1) story detached accessory structures, located on a residentially zoned lot, used as tool sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet (11.15m2). 
3.  Fences not over six (6) feet (1,829 mm) high. 
4.  Retaining walls which are not over four (4) feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. 
5.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one (2:1). 
6.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an accessible route. 
7.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
8.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
9.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy, as application in section 101.2, which are less than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (19,000 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
10.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including services systems. 
11.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings. 
12.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3, as applicable in section 101.2, and Group U occupancies. 
13.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet nine (9) inches (1,753 mm) in height. 
Electrical: 
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approve permanently installed receptacles. 
Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of the technical codes shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but does apply to equipment and wiring for power supply, the installation of towers and antennas. 
Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
Gas: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance; 
2.  Portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Portable cooling unit; 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code; 
5.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower (746 W) or less. 
Plumbing: 
The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, water or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspections made as provided in the technical codes. 
The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or repair the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
103.1.2. Temporary structures. A special building permit for a limited time shall be obtained before the erection of temporary structures such as construction sheds, seats, canopies, tents and fences used in construction work or for temporary purposes such as reviewing stands. Such structures shall be completely removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit. 
103.1.3. Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
103.1.4. Repairs. 
103.1.4.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. 
103.1.4.2 Ordinary repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
103.1.5. Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose. Such application shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
4.  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in section 104.2. 
5.  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
6.  Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent. 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the building official. 
103.1.6. Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
103.1.7. Health department approval. 
1.  No building permit shall be issued by the building official until the Henry County Health Department shall have approved the proposed water supply and sewage disposal facilities required in connection with the proposed buildings; provided, that in an area served by a public utility for water or for sewage disposal, or both, the health department may elect to waive the requirement for approval. The Henry County Health Department shall either approve or disapprove said water and sewerage facilities within thirty (30) days after the receipt thereof. 
2.  Nothing contained in these regulations shall be deemed to prevent the commissioner of health, after study of the site of a proposed use, from requiring for reason of health that all or any portion of such site not be used for the intended purpose or that the minimum lot sizes set forth for the zoning district in which the use will be located be increased with regard to the proposed use; provided that the commissioner of health shall define his decision in writing, with reasons therefor, within thirty (30) days upon being so requested by an applicant for the building permit. 
103.2.  Drawings and specifications. 
103.2.1 Requirements. When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
103.2.2 Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
103.2.3 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in the technical codes. 
103.2.4 Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All Group A, E and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
3.  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet (465m2) or more in area. For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the application that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
EXCEPTION: Group R3 buildings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
103.2.5. Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls and where joints occur in required fire resistant construction assemblies. 
103.2.6 Site drawings. All applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plot or site plan drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the right-of-way of existing roads, the location and size of the proposed building or structure to be erected and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot, the setback lines of the proposed buildings, the location of easements and other such information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of the ULDC and all county ordinances are being observed. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirements for a site plan when the application for a permit is for alterations or repair or when otherwise warranted. A record of such applications and plot or site plans shall be kept. 
103.2.7 Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
1.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
2.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn at a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
103.3.  Examination of documents. 
103.3.1 Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
103.3.2 Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings, show the structural design and that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspections reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
103.4.  Issuing permits. 
103.4.1 Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and all license fees required by Henry County have been paid, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
103.4.2 Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing, shall contain the reason for refusal, and shall be issued within ten (10) days after said request. 
103.4.3 Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
103.4.4 Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, until the building official or his designee have confirmed that the structure does not encroach upon the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in the building code or otherwise allowed by the Henry County Department of Transportation. 
103.4.5 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. 
103.5.  Contractor's responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing and inspections which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. 
103.6.  Conditions of the permit. 
103.6.1 Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work is commenced. Construction is said to have commenced at the time when initial inspection is made prior to the installation of the foundation system. One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
103.6.2 Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
103.6.3 Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One (1) set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permit drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representatives. 
103.6.4 Construction and use to be as stated in application, plans, and permits. Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
103.7.  Fees. 
103.7.1 Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the board of commissioners have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, has been paid. 
103.7.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee, at the discretion of the building official or his deputy. 
103.7.3 Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
103.7.4 Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
103.7.5 Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
103.7.6.  Procedure for contesting permit valuations relating to new construction. 
1.  Building permits for new construction are determined by the square footage value established by the International Code Council for the group and type of construction as adopted by the Board of Commissioners. 
2.  If an applicant contests the valuation data provided by the most current International Code Council Construction Costs table, the applicant may contest such valuation by submitting at least two of the following documents to the Building Official for consideration: 
a.  A copy of the turn-key contract for the construction project, supported by an affidavit as sworn to and executed by the owner and the contractor that the contract accurately reflects the true cost of the completed project; 
b.  A bank approved appraisal, prepared no later than twelve months prior to the building permit application, or if no bank appraisal is available, a self-contained appraisal prepared by an appraiser approved by the building official at the applicant's expense; or 
c.  Another type of published National or International Valuation Data (other than the valuation data provided by the International Code Council) nationally recognized and used in other jurisdictions in the United States, supporting the value of the completed project. 
3.  If the building official finds that the alternative documentation supports the applicant's valuation of the completed project, then, with the approval of the county manager, the building permit fee shall be recalculated based on the alternative valuation data as submitted by the applicant. 
4.  If the building official finds that the alternative documentation does not support the applicant's valuation of the completed project, then the building official shall deny the applicant's request and the original permit valuation as initially determined shall prevail. Any applicant aggrieved by any such denial, shall have the right to appeal to the board of commissioners pursuant to the appeal provisions as set forth in U.L.D.C. Section 12.04.00, et seq. 
5.  Any applicant who utilizes the procedure set forth herein to contest a permit valuation shall be ineligible to seek or receive building permit fee reductions or waivers under any other practice, policy or resolution of Henry County. 
6.  This process shall not be applicable to the calculation or assessment of impact fees. 
104.  Inspections. 
104.1.  General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspections by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the technical codes or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the technical codes or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
104.2.  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
104.3.  Manufacturers and fabrication. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
104.4.  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by section 105. He may accept reports of inspections of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
104.5.  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
104.6.  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder of his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
104.7.  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder of his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes: 
Building: 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
Electrical: 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Plumbing: 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
NOTE: See the plumbing code for required tests. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Exception: Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with the mechanical code, shall be permitted to be backfilled prior to inspection. 
Gas: 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site. 
2.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
3.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
4.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
104.8.  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing inspections. 
104.9.  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
104.10.  Gypsum board or plaster fire protection. In all building where gypsum board or plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or before gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished and shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
104.11.  Fire-resistant joints and penetrations. The protection of joints and penetrations in required fire-resistant construction assemblies shall not be covered or concealed from view without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
104.12.  Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the Georgia State Energy Code and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U value, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water heating equipment efficiency. 
104.13.  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the technical codes and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
104.14.  Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by the technical codes. 
105.  Certificates. 
105.1.  Certificate of occupancy. 
105.1.1 Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the technical codes or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
Said certificate of occupancy may be applied for either coincidently with a building permit or at any time thereafter; provided, however, that no such occupancy, use or change of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building official. 
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be maintained and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this chapter. 
105.1.2 Changes in use. Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except as specified in the technical codes. 
105.1.3 Issing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electric, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and any other information that is deemed necessary in accordance with the provisions of this code. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
1.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged. 
2.  Change in use of existing buildings to use of a different classification. 
3.  Occupancy and use of vacant land, except for raising of crops. 
4.  Change in use of land to a different classification, except for the raising of crops. 
5.  Any change in use of a nonconforming use. 
6.  Development of a mobile home park. 
Any final inspection report or a certificate of occupancy issued for any structure shall have noted thereon: "To the best of Henry County's knowledge and belief at the time of inspection, the structure has been erected in substantial compliance with the applicable Technical Codes. Any oversight by the Henry County building inspector shall not excuse violation of any ordinance of Henry County." 
105.1.4 Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not exceeding six (6) months for a portion or portions of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
105.1.5 Correction of code violations after the issuance of the certification of occupancy. 
1.  The requirement of a builder, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity who chooses to do business in Henry County shall comply with all technical codes and local ordinances. 
2.  After issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the county reserves the right for a period of one (1) year to reinspect a dwelling for latent code violations which existed at the time of the final inspection but were not detected. Any inspection made after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy and before the termination of the one (1) year requirement by Henry County Building Department shall be in response to a written complaint by the owner. 
3.  The builder, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity securing the permit shall be responsible for the correction of any code violations by him that are discovered during the period of construction and for a period of one (1) year from the issue date of the certificate of occupancy, excepting routine maintenance, abuse, modification and normal wear and tear. 
4.  In responding to a written complaint and upon inspection of the dwelling, should the Henry County Building Official or his authorized representative determine that there exists in any structure covered by the codes, any violations of these codes, the builder, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity obtaining a permit for construction, shall be notified by certified mail of the violations and shall be allowed ten (10) working days from the receipt of the notification to respond to the charge of violations and to meet with the Henry County Building Official or his authorized representative regarding a remedy for the violations. It shall be the responsibility of said principal to ensure that the Henry County Building Department has a current mailing address for the principal on every permit issued. Unless the principal informs otherwise in writing, the address provided on the building permit shall be deemed to be the proper mailing address for notifications under this section. The principal shall have thirty (30) days from the date the notice of violations is received, refused, or returned to correct the violations cited in the notice. Should the principal not correct the violations in a manner satisfactory to the Henry County Building Official or his authorized representative, or, in the judgment of the building official or his authorized representative, have not made satisfactory progress in remedying the violations within this 30-day period, the principal shall be subject to the provisions of section 106.1.6. 
5.  The principal may appeal the notice of violation to the Henry County Board of Commissioners to hear and rule on such complaints within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the notice of violation. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the Henry County Building Department. Should the Henry County Board of Commissioners, find the principal in violation of the code and in its judgment the violations are sufficiently serious as to affect the structural integrity or the expected normal service life of the structure or installed systems, or the safety and welfare of any occupants of the structure, the principal shall have thirty (30) days to remedy the violations to the satisfaction of the Henry County Building Official or his authorized representative. Should the principal not correct the violations in a manner satisfactory to the building official or his authorized representative, or, in the judgment of the building official or his authorized representative, have not made satisfactory progress in remedying the violations within this 30-day period, then the principal shall be notified in writing that further actions will be taken in remedying the violations. 
105.1.6 Withholding of permits and inspections for previous violations. The building official is authorized to withhold the issuance of building permits or to refuse inspections to any building contractor, or any person authorized to do building under the laws of this Code, until such time as such contractor or person has resolved satisfactorily all outstanding violations from previously issued permits with the Henry County Building Department. 
105.2.  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
105.3.  Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of the technical codes wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
105.4.  Service utilities. 
105.4.1 Connecting of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
105.4.2 Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
105.4.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
105.5.  Posting floor loads. 
105.5.1 Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
105.5.2 Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
105.5.3 Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
106.  Tests. The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
107.  Severability. In any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be unlawful and or unconstitutional; such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
108.  Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the technical code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by section 12.07.00 of the ULDC. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § I, 10-5-10; Ord. No. 12-03, § I, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 13-07, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 13-08, 7-16-13) 
Appendix B-1. - Additional requirements. 
A.  Landscape requirements. 
1.  All disturbed (disturbed shall mean areas other than natural areas) yard areas in residential zoning districts shall be landscaped with grass appropriate to the season and mulched as set forth in the standards for erosion and sedimentation control in section 8.05.00 prior to final inspection of the residential structure by the building department. Landscaping shall be made in all disturbed front, side and rear yards as defined by the zoning ordinance. All yard landscaping shall extend to the edge of pavement of the nearest public street. All drainage easements on the property shall be graded and landscaped for positive surface drainage, with consideration for avoidance of surface drainage problems and flooding of adjoining properties. The grading and landscaping of drainage easements shall be in conformance with drainage easement locations and design as indicated on the approved final plat of the subdivision. 
2.  Inspections. The building inspector shall determine that the minimum landscaping requirements of subsection (a) are in compliance at the final inspection of the structure. 
3.  When weather does not permit landscaping to be done before a final inspection of the structure is made, the builder may request in writing and the building inspector may grant up to a thirty-day extension for the completion of landscaping. Failure to complete the landscaping within the time granted shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be dealt with as provided for in section 12.07.00 of the ULDC. 
B.  Sprinkler systems. 
1.  The 1996 edition of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 13 and 13R of Sprinkler Systems for Residential and Commercial Occupancies is hereby approved and adopted as if the same appeared upon the pages herein; 
2.  All amendments, updates and modifications of said publication, as approved by the State of Georgia, shall automatically become a part of this Code without further action by the governing authority; 
3.  In addition to the NFPA Code any residential occupancies containing more than two (2) dwelling units must install NFPA 13R. 
Exception No. 1, Townhouse — a single-family dwelling constructed in a series or group of attached units with property lines separating each unit. 
4.  In addition to the NFPA Code, the fire department connection (FDC) must be placed at the main entrance (driveway) and out of the collapse zone of the building with no obstructions, and within fifty (50) feet of a fire hydrant. The FDC should stand between thirty-six (36) inches to forty-eight (48) inches above grade. 
5.  In addition to the NFPA Code, all day care occupancies must install NFPA 13R. 
6.  In addition to the NFPA Code, working plans shall be submitted for review and approval to the authority having jurisdiction before any equipment is installed or remodeled and must show the following items: 
• Site plan with fire hydrant and FDC location must be submitted. 
• Copy of state license. 
• All sets of working plans shall be signed and a certified seal placed thereon. 
• Hydraulic calculations. Information sheets (cut sheets) on materials. 
7.  In addition to the NFPA Code, in business and/or mercantile occupancies each suite must have horn/strobe placed inside each unit for communication of water flow on the sprinkler system. 
8.  Additional plan review and inspection fee will be charged by the fire department. This fee will be set and approved by the board of commissioners. 
9.  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the enforcement and penalties set forth in sections 12.06.00 and 12.07.00 of the ULDC. 
APPENDIX AA - OMITTED SPECIAL ACTS 

 

 
APPENDIX BB - OMITTED ORDINANCES, ETC. 

 

 
CODE DISPOSITION TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This is a chronological listing of the Georgia Laws pertaining to the county. The laws included in this Code will contain an indication in the disposition column as to its location within this Code. Laws not included herein will contain a reference in the disposition column to Appendix AA of this volume. 

 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES, ETC. 
This is a numerical and/or chronological listing of the ordinances, resolutions and motions pertaining to the county. Ordinances, etc. included in this Code will contain an indication in the disposition column as to its location within this Code. Ordinances, etc. not included herein will contain a reference in the disposition column to Appendix BB of this volume. 
Legend: 
Ordinances contain no designation 
R-Resolutions 
Mo-Motions 

 

 