THE CODE OF THE UNIFIED GOVERNMENT OF WEBSTER COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

____________ 
George D. Moore Sr. 
Chairperson 
____________ 
Jonah McCluster, District One 
David Scott, District Two 
Melvin Crimes, District Three 
Jack Holbrook, District Four 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
C. Frederick Overby 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Bonnie K. Witt 
County Clerk 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2003 Webster County Code, as updated by ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners through September 11, 2012. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2003 Webster County Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. George Moore, Commission Chairman, and Mr. Fred Overby, County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the unified government's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. 2013. 
ORDINANCE NO. 04-09-2013 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE UNIFIED GOVERNMENT OF WEBSTER COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE UNIFIED GOVERNMENT OF WEBSTER COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSION. 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 32, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 11, 2012, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the county, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Unified Government may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Unified Government to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 11, 2012, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective April 09, 2013. 
Passed and adopted by the Board of Commissioners this 09 day of April, 2013. 

 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners, held on the 9 th day of April, 2013. 
____________  Bonnie Witt County Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS AND LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 
Subpart A - COUNTY CHARTER[1] 
A RESOLUTION OF THE PRESTON-WESTON-WEBSTER COUNTY CHARTER AND UNIFICATION COMMISSION 
To provide for the unification of the existing governments of the City of Preston, the City of Weston and Webster County; to provide for the creation of the unified government of Preston-Weston-Webster County, Georgia; to provide for the status, boundaries, and powers of the unified government; to provide for the form of, administration of, and affairs of the unified government; to provide for officers and employees, elections, courts, taxation, and finance; to provide for other related matters; to provide for a referendum election with respect to the effectiveness of the foregoing; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE PRESTON-WESTON-WEBSTER COUNTY CHARTER AND UNIFICATION COMMISSION: 
The following provisions, exclusive of the Table of Contents which is included solely as a convenience to the reader, shall constitute and may be referred to as the Charter of the unified government of Preston-Weston-Webster County, Georgia. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is the Charter for the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, approved by resolution adopted Sept. 6, 2007. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Amendments to this act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
State Law reference— Home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; county officers, election, term, compensation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; power of county governing authority to fix salary and compensation of persons employed by governing authority, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I(f); local government reorganization to establish a single governing body as the governing authority of a county and municipalities located within such county, Ga. Const. art. IX, § III, ¶ II(b); county government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county as consolidated government, O.C.G.A. § 36-68-4; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3.

ARTICLE I. - UNIFICATION, CREATION, BOUNDARIES, STATUS, AND POWERS OF UNIFIED GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 1-101. - Unification of county and city; creation of unified government; Preston-Weston-Webster County. 
(a)	The governmental and corporate powers, duties, and functions now vested in the governing authority of the City of Preston, a municipal corporation chartered by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved May 17, 2004 (H.B. 1630) and the governing authority of Weston, a municipal corporation chartered by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved August 12, 1911 (Act No. 78) are hereby unified with the governmental and corporate powers, duties, and functions of Webster County. This unification shall result in the creation and establishment of a single county-wide government with powers and jurisdiction throughout the territorial limits of Webster County, which single government shall supersede and replace the governments of the City of Preston, the City of Weston, and Webster County. Said county-wide government shall be a new political entity, a body politic and corporate, and a political subdivision of the state, to be known as the "Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia," (herein at times called the "Unified Government,") having all the governmental and corporate powers, duties, and functions heretofore held by and vested in the Cities of Preston and Weston, and Webster County, and also the powers, duties, and functions provided in this Charter. The unified government shall be a public corporation; shall have perpetual existence; shall adopt a common seal; shall, without the necessity or formality of a deed, bill of sale, or other instrument of transfer, own, possess, and hold all the properties of whatsoever kind or nature, assets, contracts, franchises, things, rights, privileges, immunities, and real and personal property theretofore owned, possessed, enjoyed, or held by the Cities of Preston and Weston, and Webster County; and by the name of Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, shall be capable of suing and being sued when authorized by this Charter and by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. From and after the effective date of this Charter, the political subdivision known as Webster County, Georgia, and the municipal corporation known as the City of Preston, Georgia, and the municipal corporation known as the City of Weston, shall be unified into the said new political entity herein created. 
(b)	The provisions of [this] Section 1-101 not withstanding, if a majority of the qualified voters of Webster County and the City of Preston casting ballots in the referendum called for approving or disapproving this Charter shall approve, and if a majority of the qualified voters of the City of Weston shall disapprove the same, the Unified Government of Webster County shall be formed, but shall not include the City of Weston, and none of the provisions of this Charter shall apply to the City of Weston. 
(c)	The unification of the governments of the City of Preston, the City of Weston, and Webster County is authorized pursuant to the provisions of Article IX, Section III, Paragraph II(a) of the Constitution of Georgia of 1983, as amended, and an Act establishing the Preston-Weston-Webster County Charter and Unification Commission, approved April 19, 2006 (Ga. L. H.B. No. 1298, Act 493). 
Sec. 1-102. - Boundaries. 
The unified government shall embrace the total area included within the existing territorial limits of Webster County as such limits are fixed and established on the effective date of this Charter, provided however that if a majority of the qualified voters of Weston casting ballots upon the referendum to approve or disapprove this Charter shall disapprove, the territorial limits of the City of Weston shall not be included in the territorial limits of the Unified Government of Webster County. However, such limits may be altered and changed from time to time as provided by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to counties. 
Sec. 1-103. - Status of unified government as municipal corporation and county. 
The unified government shall be deemed to be both a municipal corporation and a county throughout the total territory of said government. It is the express intention of this section to declare as a city and as a part of the unified government all of the area of Webster County except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 1-104. - Powers of the unified government. 
(a)	The Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, shall have all powers of self-government authorized by the Constitution and not otherwise prohibited by the laws of Georgia. 
(b)	In addition to the foregoing, the unified government shall have all rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority that the City of Preston, the City of Weston or Webster County, or any of the preceding, have under the Constitution and general and local laws of the State of Georgia at the time of adoption of this Charter, except as herein expressly modified. This authority shall include but shall not be limited to the authority to adopt home rule ordinances and resolutions as provided in Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(c)	In addition to the foregoing, the unified government shall have all rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority herein conferred or herein enlarged, and such other rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority as may be necessary and proper for carrying the same into execution, and also all rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority, whether expressed or implied, that may be now vested in or hereafter granted to counties or municipal corporations, or both, by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, including the powers vested in the unified government by this Charter. 
(d)	The unified government, in addition to the rights, duties, powers, privileges, and authority expressly conferred upon it by this Charter, shall have the right, duty, power, privilege, and authority to exercise and enjoy all other powers, duties, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary and proper to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, and general welfare of said government and its constituents and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein and to do and perform all of the acts pertaining to its property, affairs, and local government which are necessary or proper in the legitimate exercise of its corporate powers and governmental duties and functions. 
(e)	No enumeration of any right, power, privilege, or authority hereinafter made shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any right, power, privilege or authority hereinabove set forth. 
(f)	In addition to and supplementary to all other powers which it may possess, and by way of illustration and not of limitation, the unified government shall have the powers specifically enumerated in Section 7-113 of this Charter. 
Sec. 1-105. - Taxing districts. 
(a)	The unified government may divide the county into two or more taxing districts. Such taxing districts may include one or more districts conterminous with the former boundaries of the City of Preston or the City of Weston, or both, and within any such districts such taxes may be levied as may be necessary to retire any respective bonded indebtedness of the City of Preston or the City of Weston, which is outstanding on the effective date of the abolishment of the City of Preston and the City of Weston. Additionally, in the taxing district of the former City of Preston, and in the taxing district of the former City of Weston, the unified government shall levy such taxes as are necessary to retire any other indebtedness of the respective cities which is outstanding on the effective date of the abolishment of the cities. Such taxing districts may also include one or more service districts. 
(b)	Taxes shall be assessed, levied, and collected in accordance with the kind, character, type, degree, and level of services provided by the government within said service districts, and the rate and manner of taxation may vary in any one district from that in another or other districts. 
(c)	The unified government may also establish special services districts, which shall embrace such territory or territories for which provision is made by the Commission for additional or higher levels of services provided by the unified government. 
(d)	In the establishment or modification of service districts and special services districts, the unified government shall hold one or more public hearings thereon at which all interested persons affected thereby shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time, place, and date of such hearings shall be published in the official legal organ of Webster County at least once a week during the two weeks immediately preceding the date of hearing. 
Sec. 1-106. - Construction. 
The powers of the unified government shall be construed liberally in favor of the unified government. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the unified government as provided in this article. It is the intention hereof to grant to the unified government full power and right to exercise all governmental authority authorized by the Constitution and laws of Georgia which is necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the unified government within its territory and for the conduct of all of its affairs. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE ARTICLE 
CHAPTER 1. - THE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-101. - Name and composition. 
There is hereby created the "Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia." The Commission shall consist of one member, elected at-large, who shall serve full-time as the Chief Elected Officer and manager of the government, and of four members, who shall serve in part-time positions, elected from districts which are coterminous with the existing districts of the Webster County Commission at the time this Charter shall be subject to approval by voters. Said existing districts are further described as being defined within House Bill 1756, Act Number 441 of the 2002 Session of the Georgia General Assembly, with said districts having been pre-cleared by the United States Department of Justice in 2002 and which contain the following U.S. Census Tracts and Block Groups (BG): 
District 001 
Webster County 
Tract: 9601 
BG: 1 

 
District 002 
Webster County 
Tract: 9602 
BG: 1 

 
District 003 
Webster County 
Tract: 9601 
BG: 1 
1113 
Tract: 9602 
BG: 1 

 
District 004 
Webster County 
Tract: 9601 
BG: 1 

 
Tract: 9602 
BG: 1 

 
Sec. 2-102. - Term of office; qualifications; disqualifications. 
(a)	The term of office of all members of the Commission shall be four years, except that the initial term of office for District 2 and District 3 shall be two years, with all members serving until their successors are elected and qualified. A Commissioner appointed or elected to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the balance of the unexpired term as provided in Section 2-106 of this Charter. All terms of office, not inclusive of those to fill a vacancy, shall commence on the first day of January next following the election. 
(b)	No person shall be eligible for election or appointment to the Commission unless such person, on or before the date of election or appointment, shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a qualified voter of the unified government, and shall have resided within the county for a minimum of one year on the date of qualifying for election. A member of the Commission shall continue to reside within the district from which he or she was elected during such member's term of office. 
(c)	Candidates for the office of Chairman of the Board of Commissioners shall have a minimum of a high school diploma or its equivalent. Candidates for district positions on the Board of Commissioners are not required to have a high school diploma, but in the event that they do not, they must present evidence at the time of qualifying that they are enrolled in a program leading to the award of a degree that is the equivalent of a high school diploma. 
(d)	No member of the Commission, during his or her term of office, shall hold any other federal, state, or local government elected office. 
Sec. 2-103. - Salary and expenses of the commission. 
(a)	The base salary of Commissioners shall be as follows:
(1)	The Chairman of the Commission shall receive a base salary equal to that of the Sheriff of Webster County, plus all applicable supplements as received by the Sheriff of Webster County. 
(2)	District Commissioners shall receive a base salary of $3,000 per year, payable in equal monthly installments. 
(b)	In addition to base salary, Commissioners shall be compensated as follows:
(1)	Commissioners who complete the requirements of the Commissioners Training Program and subsequently receive certification, as determined by the Association County Commissioners of Georgia, shall receive an additional $100 per month (O.C.G.A. § 36-5-27). 
(2)	Commissioners who complete the requirements of the Certified Commissioners Advanced Training Program and subsequently receive certification, as determined by the Association County Commissioners of Georgia, shall receive an additional $100 per month. 
(3)	District Commissioners shall be entitled to cost-of-living adjustments (O.C.G.A. § 36-5-27). District Commissioners shall be entitled to longevity increases in compensation (O.C.G.A. § 36-5-29). 
(4)	The Chairman of the Commission shall receive, as a component of base salary, compensation for the attainment of the highest educational degree held, as follows: 5% for a two-year degree from a regionally accredited Junior College or a Technical College; 10% for a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited College or University; 15% for a graduate degree from a regionally accredited College or University. The Chairman of the Commission shall be entitled to longevity increases in compensation and cost-of-living adjustments computed in the same manner as that of the Sheriff of Webster County. 
(c)	In addition to the salary, Commissioners shall be reimbursed, under such regulations and limitations as may be adopted by the Board of Commissioners, for direct expenses incurred in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the unified government. 
(d)	The salary of members of the Commission may be changed by ordinance or resolution, in the manner specified for county governing authorities in Code Section 36-5-24 of the O.C.G.A. or any similar future general law of the State of Georgia. 
(e)	For purposes of computing longevity, any incumbent council members, including Mayor, of the Preston City Council, council members, including Mayor, of the Weston City Council, or District Commissioners of the Webster County Commission, who are elected to the initial terms for the District positions on the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County shall be recognized for longevity in office and compensated as enumerated in this section. For purposes of computing longevity, the incumbent Chairman of the Webster County Commission shall, if elected to the initial term as Chairman of the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, be recognized for longevity in office and compensated as enumerated in this section. 
(f)	Nothing in [this] Section 2-103 shall be construed to prohibit the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County from exercising its home rule powers as established in (O.C.G.A. § 36-5-24). 
Sec. 2-104. - Organization; oath; rules; quorum; meetings; records. 
(a)	The Commission shall meet for organizational purposes on the first Tuesday following the second Monday in January next following its election or as soon thereafter as practicable, except that if the first members of the Commission elected under the provisions of this Charter shall be elected after January 1, 2009, they shall hold an organizational meeting as soon as practicable following the 30 th day after their election. Prior to the organizational meeting, the newly elected or reelected Commissioners shall each take the following oath of office, to be administered by the judge of the probate court or any other person duly authorized to administer oaths: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of Commissioner of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof, as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America, so help me God." 
(b)	The Commission, by majority vote, shall adopt rules of procedure governing the transaction of its business consistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall adopt by ordinance or resolution the time, date, and place for regular meetings, which will be held at least once each month, and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings by the Chairman as provided in Section 3-101 of this Charter. 
(c)	At its first organizational meeting, the Commission shall select the day of the month and the time at which it will hold its regular monthly meetings. 
(d)	A majority of members then serving on the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(e)	Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the chairperson or by any three Commissioners upon no less than 24 hours' written notice to each member served personally or left at the usual place of business or residence of such member. Such notice of a special meeting may be waived in writing either before or after the meeting. Subject to subsection Code Section 50-14-1(d) of the O.C.G.A., special meetings may be held at any time without notice to all Commissioners, upon attendance at such meeting by all members of the Commission, or by waiver of notice of those not in attendance. 
(f)	All meetings of the Commission, except for those exceptions provided for in general law, shall be public and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records thereof at reasonable times. 
(g)	At its first meeting in January of each year, a vice-chairperson shall be elected by and from the membership of the Commission to serve for terms of one year. Such an election shall take place at the first regular meeting of the Commission each year and whenever necessary to fill a vacancy in the office. 
Sec. 2-105. - Powers of the Commission. 
(a)	All legislative powers of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, including any such powers, which may hereafter be conferred by law upon said government, shall be vested exclusively in and exercised by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
(b)	In addition to its legislative powers, the Commission shall specifically have the power to: 
(1)	Adopt and from time to time amend the budget; and
(2)	Approve or reject recommendations concerning the appointments of the County Attorney, and Auditor; and 
(3)	Remove from office the County Attorney and Auditor by majority vote of the entire Commission. 
(c)	In the exercise of its powers, the Commission shall adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, as may be necessary or proper for the purpose of carrying into effect the powers conferred by this Charter and for the promotion and protection of the safety, health, peace, security, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Webster County, Georgia, and may enforce such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations by imposing penalties for violations thereof, as prescribed by ordinance, by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 60 days, or both. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by the Constitution, general or local law, or this Charter, the Commission may by ordinance or resolution create, change, alter, combine, abolish, consolidate, and redefine the manner of appointment, membership, powers, and duties of bureaus, boards, commissions, departments, divisions, authorities, offices, and agencies of the unified government, including positions of public employment, and may transfer and delete functions and assign additional functions to any bureaus, offices, agencies, departments, divisions, boards, authorities, commissions, and positions of public employment existing under this Charter. The Commission may by ordinance or resolution transfer all the assets, liabilities, and obligations thereof to a department, a division, or other unit of a department of the unified government, which shall have the power, and its duty shall be, to perform and exercise all the functions and powers theretofore performed and exercised by such board, commission, authority, division, agency, bureau, office, department, or position of public employment. This subsection, however, does not apply to any authorities or boards which were created by either a local constitutional amendment or by a local Act of the General Assembly. 
(e)	The Commission shall have the power to conduct or cause to be conducted inquiries and investigations of the operations of any office, department, or agency or the conduct of any officer or employee thereof administering the affairs of the unified government. In conducting inquiries and investigations, the Commission shall have the right to: administer oaths; subpoena witnesses, documents, records, or other evidence; take testimony; and require the production of evidence. The conduct of proceedings at Commission inquiries and investigations shall be subject to such rules and regulations as the Commission may prescribe by general ordinance or resolution. 
(f)	The Commission shall provide for the form of oaths and the amount and condition of surety bonds as may be required of any officer or employee of the unified government. 
(g)	The Commission shall have and exercise such other powers as conferred upon it by this Charter and the laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 2-106. - Filling of vacancies. 
(a)	In the event that the office of a member of the Commission shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause, and the term shall expire in less than 180 days, the vacant position shall be filled by an appointment made by the remaining members of the Commission. Any individual so appointed must have the same qualifications required for election to the office. 
(b)	If the term of the vacant Commission position will continue for 180 days or more, a special election shall be held as provided in this Charter and in general state law to elect a new member of the Commission to serve for the remainder of the term. 
(c)	In the event that the office of the Chairman of the Commission shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause, and the term will continue for 180 days or more, the Vice-Chairman shall, until the election and seating of a Chairman, conduct and preside over meetings, execute all manner of documents such as shall be necessary for the continued operations of the Commission, and exercise such other responsibilities as may be necessary to carry out the duties and obligations of the Commission. In the event that the Vice-Chairman shall assume the aforementioned responsibilities and duties, a majority of Commissioners then serving shall establish reasonable compensation for the Vice-Chairman, but in no event shall it exceed the rate of compensation that would be earned by that person if he or she had been elected as Chairman. 
CHAPTER 2. - LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-201. - Legislation by ordinance. 
Every official act of the Commission, which is to have the force and effect of law, shall be by ordinance and shall begin with the words: "The Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, hereby ordains". All other acts of the Commission shall be by resolution or shall take such other form as prescribed by its rules. 
Sec. 2-202. - Introduction, consideration, and passage of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)	Every proposed ordinance and every amendment shall contain not more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. 
(b)	Every proposed ordinance and every amendment thereto shall be introduced in writing by a member of the Commission. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided herein, no ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced, except that where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the Commission. Prior to the introduction of any ordinance, copies of it shall be prepared by the Chairman and distributed to each member of the Commission. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided herein, each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive monthly meetings of the Commission. The reading of each ordinance may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
(e)	The adoption of any ordinance shall be by the affirmative vote of a majority of Commissioners then serving. 
(f)	The passage of all ordinances shall be contingent upon the recording of the "ayes" and "nays" of each Commissioner. The names of the Commissioners voting for and against each proposed ordinance or amendment, those abstaining, and those absent shall be entered upon the minutes of the proceedings of the Commission. The Chairman of the Commission may vote upon any matter before the Commission and shall vote to break any tie. No Commissioner may abstain from any vote unless he or she shall have a conflict of interest in the matter being voted upon. 
(g)	No ordinance shall take effect until noon on the day following its adoption or at such later time as it may specify, unless deemed an emergency measure, in which case the ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
(h)	The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Commission may, by unanimous vote of those then serving, waive the rules and by unanimous vote, adopt an ordinance at the same meeting at which it is introduced. 
(i)	Resolutions may be adopted at any regular or special called meeting, provided the same shall be by the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners then serving. 
Sec. 2-203. - Emergency ordinances. 
To meet a public emergency threatening life, health, property, or public safety, the Commission may adopt emergency ordinances; provided, however, that such ordinances may not be enacted to levy taxes; to grant, renew, or extend a franchise; to regulate the rate charged for any public utility or service; or to authorize the borrowing of money unless it shall be repaid in 30 days or less. An emergency ordinance shall be in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain a declaration stating what emergency exists. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or it may be rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of a majority of Commissioners then serving shall be required for adoption. An emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed on the thirtieth day following the date on which it was adopted; but if the emergency still exists, this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a regular repealing ordinance or an emergency repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 2-204. - Authentication; recording; effective date. 
All ordinances which have become law shall immediately be deposited in the official archives of the Chairman. The Chairman shall note on the face of the ordinance the date and time it has become law and the ordinance shall become effective at noon on the day following it becoming law or at such later time as it may specify. The Chairman shall authenticate by his or her signature each ordinance which has become law. 
Sec. 2-205. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)	The Commission may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the Chairman for public inspection and for purchase at a reasonable price as fixed by the Commission. 
Sec. 2-206. - Codification of ordinances. 
The Commission shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all ordinances of a general or permanent nature as provided in Code Section 36-80-19 of the O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 2-207. - Prima-facie evidence. 
A record or entry made by the Chairman or a copy of such record or entry, duly certified by the Chairman, shall be prima-facie evidence of the terms of every ordinance. 
CHAPTER 3. - ETHICS AND PROHIBITED PRACTICES 

Sec. 2-301. - Conflict of interest. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of Webster County, Georgia, or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly violate the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3, or: 
(1)	Engage in any business or transaction in which the person has a financial interest, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(2)	Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which such person is engaged or is a member of without proper legal authorization or use that information to advance the financial or other private interest of such person or others; 
(3)	Represent private interests other than his or her own in any action or proceeding against Webster County, Georgia, or any portion of its government; or 
(4)	Vote or otherwise actively participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract between Webster County, Georgia, and any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
Sec. 2-302. - Disclosure. 
Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the unified government or of any board, commission, authority, or agency thereof who shall have any private financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the unified government shall disclose such private interest to the Commission. Any Commissioner who has a private interest in any matter pending before the Commission shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the Commission, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any board, commission, authority, or agency of the unified government who shall have any private financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity, shall disclose such private interest to the Commission. 
Sec. 2-303. - Contracts voidable and rescindable. 
Any contract by the unified government or any board, commission, authority, agency, or entity thereof made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be voidable or rescindable at the option of the Commission at any time if any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of such unified government or board, commission, authority, agency, or entity thereof has any interest in such contract and does not disclose such interest in accordance with Section 2-302 of this Charter. 
Sec. 2-304. - Removal of the Chairman or Commissioner; procedure for removal. 
(a)	The Chairman or any Commissioner shall be subject to removal from any office for any one (1) or more of the following causes: 
[(1)]	Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office;
[(2)]	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude or a crime punishable as a felony;
[(3)]	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
[(4)]	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or
[(5)]	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law. 
[(b)]	Removal of an elected officer provided for in this Section from office may be accomplished by one (1) of the following methods: 
[(1)]	By affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Commission. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the Commission, such officer shall be first entitled to a written notice specifying the grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than 30 days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the Commission to the superior court for a jury trial de novo. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
[(2)]	By information filed in the superior court as authorized by Code Section 9-6-64 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 1. - OFFICERS 

Sec. 3-101. - Chairman; powers and duties. 
(a)	The Chairman shall be responsible for:
(1)	The management and coordination of the operations and activities of the various departments and agencies of the unified government; 
(2)	The appointment and removal of all directors of departments who are subject to his or her control and direction as provided for by this Charter but only after having first obtained the advice and consent of the commission; 
(3)	The preparation of the proposed annual budget;
(4)	Keeping the Commission at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the unified government; including a monthly financial report to the commission; 
(5)	Conducting studies and investigations and making reports thereon to the Commission concerning the operations of the departments, offices, and agencies of the unified government; 
(6)	Requiring any department, board, commission, or agency under the Chairman's jurisdiction to submit written reports and to provide other information as deemed necessary; 
(7)	Prescribing, requiring, publishing, and implementing standards of administration, management, and operating practices and procedures to be followed and adhered to by all offices, departments, boards, commissions, authorities, and other agencies of the unified government which are subject to the Chairman's supervision and jurisdiction; 
(8)	Acting as the purchasing agent of Webster County;
(9)	Maintaining all required records of the operations and activities of Webster County, including the minutes of all meetings of the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County; 
(10)	Directing and supervising the administration of the construction, maintenance, and operation of public streets, sidewalks, roads, bridges, drains, buildings and other public works; 
(11)	Hiring a clerk to serve the Board of Commissioners;
(12)	Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this Charter, Ordinance or resolution of the Commission; 
(b)	Except for the purpose of inquiry, investigation, or safety violations the Commission shall deal with employees of the unified government who are subject to appointment and removal by the Chairman solely through the Chairman and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
Sec. 3-102. - Attorney; appointment; term; qualifications; duties. 
(a)	The Attorney shall be appointed for one year at the first meeting in January by a majority vote of the entire Commission and at any time may be removed for cause, after written notice and hearing, by a majority vote of the entire Commission. 
(b)	The Attorney shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia, in good standing, and shall satisfy any other qualifications established by ordinance. 
(c)	The Attorney shall be the legal counsel to the unified government and shall perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter or by ordinance. 
Sec. 3-103. - Sheriff. 
The Sheriff of Webster County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the Sheriff of Webster County, Georgia. The Sheriff shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for Sheriff shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of sheriffs generally. The Sheriff shall be responsible for the operation of the jail if the County shall have one, the transport of prisoners, the service of process, and such other duties being provided on the effective date of this Charter. The Sheriff shall have such other or different powers and duties as provided by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 3-104. - Judge of the Probate Court; Judge of Magistrate Court. 
The Judge of the Probate Court/Magistrate Court of Webster County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the Judge of the Probate Court/Magistrate Court of Webster County, Georgia. The Judge of Probate Court/Magistrate Court shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for the Judge of the Probate Court/Magistrate Court shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of probate judges/magistrate judges generally. The Judge of the Probate Court/Magistrate Court shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on probate judges/magistrate judges generally by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 3-105. - Clerk of Superior Court. 
The Clerk of Superior Court of Webster County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the Clerk of Superior Court of Webster County, Georgia. The Clerk of Superior Court shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for the Clerk of Superior Court shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of clerks of superior court generally. The Clerk of Superior Court shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on clerks of superior court generally by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 3-106. - Tax Commissioner. 
The Tax Commissioner of Webster County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the Tax Commissioner of Webster County, Georgia. The Tax Commissioner shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for Tax Commissioner shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of tax commissioners generally. The Tax Commissioner shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on tax commissioners generally by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 3-107. - Coroner. 
The Coroner of Webster County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the Coroner of Webster County, Georgia. The Coroner shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for Coroner shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of coroners generally. The Coroner shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on coroners generally by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND SERVICE DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 3-201. - Creation and functions; generally. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the administrative and service departments of the unified government shall be created and established by ordinance or resolution and shall perform such functions, duties, services, and responsibilities as enumerated therein and as prescribed by administrative regulations. 
Sec. 3-202. - Administrative reorganization. 
The Commission may, by ordinance or resolution, reorganize, combine, consolidate, or discontinue any department or agency of the unified government subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission and may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe the functions and duties thereof and may establish, abolish, or alter all non-elective offices and positions of employment as necessary for the proper administration of the unified government. 
Sec. 3-203. - Appointment of directors of departments. 
All directors of departments, including the Chief of Fire/EMS, the Superintendent of the Webster County Road Department, the Manager of the Solid Waste Department, and such other directors of departments as may be authorized by the Commission, under the supervision and direction of the Chairman shall be appointed by the Chairman subject to the advice and consent of the Commission. The directors of all such departments shall serve at the pleasure of the Chairman subject to the advice and consent of the Commission. 
Sec. 3-204. - Departments under state law. 
All departments which are created pursuant to state or federal law and which administer various state and federal programs and services shall continue their operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 3. - MERIT SYSTEM OF PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3-301. - Establishment of merit system. 
(a)	The Commission may establish, by ordinance, a Merit System of Personnel Administration for Webster County, Georgia. In such case, all positions in the service of Webster County, Georgia, shall be in the Classified (Merit System) Service except the following which are declared to be in the Unclassified Service: 
(1)	Officers elected by the people and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; 
(2)	Members of boards and commissions;
(3)	Directors of departments;
(4)	Persons temporarily employed in a professional or scientific capacity or to conduct a special inquiry, investigation, examination, or installation; 
(5)	Temporary and part-time employees; and
(6)	Such other employees as may be excluded from coverage under the merit system as provided by ordinance or resolution or other applicable law. 
(7)	The attorney.
(b)	The Merit System of Personnel Administration, if so established, shall provide for classification of positions, the manner and method of publicizing vacancies, employing and appointing personnel, the qualifications of employees, employee performance evaluations, salaries, hours of employment, vacations, sick leave, special workers' compensation, job security, promotion, demotion, disciplinary procedures, transfer, layoff, removal, welfare of employees, retirement policy, payment of premiums of employee insurance benefits, grievance procedures, service awards, training leave, and any other measures that promote the hiring and retaining of capable, diligent, and honest career employees, all of which shall be in accordance with the concept of affirmative action as provided by federal law. 
CHAPTER 4. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES 

Sec. 3-401. - Certain boards, commissions, and authorities continued. 
All existing boards, commissions, and authorities are continued without interruption on the effective date of this Charter. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIARY 

Sec. 4-101. - Superior Court and District Attorney; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. 
The Superior Court of Webster County, including the office of the District Attorney, shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Superior Court of Webster County, Georgia. 
Sec. 4-102. - Juvenile Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. 
The Juvenile Court of Webster County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Juvenile Court of Webster County, Georgia. 
Sec. 4-103. - Probate Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. 
The Probate Court of Webster County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Probate Court of Webster County, Georgia. 
Sec. 4-104. - Magistrate Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. 
The Magistrate Court of Webster County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Magistrate Court of Webster County, Georgia. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5-101. - Applicability of general laws. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, primaries and regular and special elections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." As used in said Code, the terms "election" or "general election" shall be construed to include the term "regular election" as provided in this Charter; the term "governing authority" shall include the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia; the terms "municipal," "municipality," or "county" shall include the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia; and the term "public office" shall include elective offices of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. Pursuant to the authority granted in Article 9 Section 3 paragraph 2(a) of the Georgia Constitution and the authority granted in House Bill No. 1298 Act No. 493 approved by the Governor on April 19, 2006, elections for members of the Commission of the unified government shall be conducted in partisan primaries and elections. 
Sec. 5-102. - Regular election; time for holding; voting. 
Except for the initial elections which may or may not be held on the date of regular state elections, regular elections for the elective public offices of Webster County, Georgia, shall be held on Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even numbered years, in conjunction with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540. 
Sec. 5-103. - Special elections. 
All special elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," that govern the conduct of county elections. 
ARTICLE VI. - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
CHAPTER 1. - TAXATION AND OTHER REVENUES 

Sec. 6-101. - Levy and collection of taxes, fees, charges, and assessments; appropriations. 
(a)	For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, the Commission shall have full power and authority to levy and collect taxes to the extent hereinafter provided and to appropriate funds and expend money: 
(1)	For the purposes authorized by this Charter;
(2)	For the discharge of the powers, duties, obligations, liabilities, and functions specified in this Charter; 
(3)	For any and all purposes and any and all subjects of taxation for which the City of Preston, the City of Weston, or Webster County may have been authorized and in accordance with those authorizations to levy and collect taxes and to appropriate and expend funds under the Constitution or any general or special law of Georgia applicable to the City of Preston, the City of Weston or Webster County on the effective date of this Charter; and 
(4)	For any purpose authorized by the Constitution or any general or special law of Georgia applicable to municipal corporations and counties generally now in force or hereafter enacted. 
(b)	The Commission shall have full power and authority to levy and collect the following taxes, charges, and assessments: 
(1)	Ad valorem taxes on all real and personal property situated within Webster County, Georgia, which is subject to taxation for state, county, and municipal purposes, or for any other public purpose, to the full extent permitted by the Constitution and laws of Georgia; 
(2)	Occupation and business license taxes that are not prohibited by the Constitution and general laws of Georgia; 
(3)	An excise tax on rooms, lodgings, or accommodations as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities; 
(4)	License fees and taxes on insurance companies as authorized by Code Sections 33-8-8 through 33-8-8.6 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(5)	A public utility franchise tax, fee, or both, on each electric light and power company, gas company, telephone and telegraph company, and other public utility making use of the roads, streets, alleys, or other public ways of the unified government for the purpose of rendering services therein; 
(6)	Franchise fees on cable television systems as now or hereafter provided by law for counties; 
(7)	Fees, assessments, and charges for the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, storm sewers, drainage structures, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under any terms and conditions as provided by ordinance; 
(8)	Fees, assessments, charges, and tolls for sanitary and health services or any other services rendered within and outside the limits of the unified government under such terms and conditions as provided by ordinance; 
(9)	All other such taxes, charges, or assessments as the City of Preston, the City of Weston or Webster County were authorized and empowered to make and collect upon the effective date of this Charter, which powers may be exercised throughout the area of the unified government, or appropriate portions thereof, including any tax now or hereafter authorized by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the Commission to govern its local affairs. When authorized by this Charter or a statute or the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Commission shall have full power and authority to assess, levy, charge, and collect taxes, rentals, interest, fees, penalties, fines, and costs; to receive income on investments; to accept funds, services, or property from other political subdivisions and public agencies, either local, state, or national, and from private persons, firms, or corporations; and to contract with them for any public purpose; 
(10)	An excise tax upon the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities; 
(11)	An excise tax upon the sale, transfer, or dispensing of malt beverages and alcoholic beverages within Webster County, Georgia, by wholesale or retail dealers as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities. In addition, the Commission shall have the authority to impose, assess, levy, and collect an excise tax upon the sale, transfer, or dispensing of wine by wholesale or retail dealers within Webster County, Georgia, as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities; and 
[(12)]	Such other taxes and charges as provided by law.
Sec. 6-102. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The collection of delinquent taxes and fees shall be as provided in state law for the collection of delinquent property taxes by counties. 
CHAPTER 2. - BORROWING AND INDEBTEDNESS 

Sec. 6-201. - Issuance of general obligation bonds. 
(a)	The Commission shall be authorized to issue and sell general obligation bonds, after approval of the qualified voters, under the provisions of the Constitution and general laws of Georgia for any public purpose for the benefit of the unified government or any tax area or service district thereof; provided, however, that for the purpose of issuing and selling such general obligation bonds, the unified government shall be deemed a county and the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Georgia governing the limitations, terms, and procedures for the issuance and sale of bonds by counties shall apply to the unified government unless otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(b)	All general obligation bonds shall be issued in the name of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, and shall be an obligation thereof, and the full faith and credit of the unified government shall be pledged for all general obligation bonds issued thereunder which are payable from ad valorem taxes, and for such purpose, the Commission shall have the authority to levy and collect ad valorem taxes without limit as to rate or amount on all taxable property within the territorial limits of the unified government. 
Sec. 6-202. - Debt limitation; general obligation bonds. 
The total general obligation bond indebtedness of the unified government payable from ad valorem taxes (including all outstanding general obligation bonds of the former City of Preston, the City of Weston and Webster County on the effective date of this Charter) shall not exceed 10 percent of the assessed value of all taxable property within the territorial limits of the unified government. 
Sec. 6-203. - Revenue bonds. 
The Commission shall be empowered and authorized to issue revenue bonds for the purposes and in the manner as now or hereafter provided by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law." 
Sec. 6-204. - Use of bond proceeds. 
All revenue derived by the unified government from the issuance and sale of bonds shall be used exclusively for the purposes for which such bonds were issued, and all ad valorem taxes collected for the purpose of servicing or retiring such bonds shall be used exclusively for the payment of principal and interest thereof. 
CHAPTER 3. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 6-301. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, shall begin on the first day of January of each year and shall end on the thirty first day of December next following. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, institution, agency, and activity of the unified government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6-302. - Preparation of budgets. 
The preparation of an annual budget and a capital improvements budget shall be as prescribed by ordinance and provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 6-303. - Scope of budgets. 
(a)	The annual budget should consist of two parts, but may take the form of a single document provided it clearly indicates the parts, as described herein: 
(1)	Part I of the annual budget shall apply only to the operating expenses of the unified government; and 
(2)	Part II of the annual budget shall apply only to capital improvement expenses of the unified government. 
(b)	Each section of the annual operating and capital budget shall contain with respect to each of the operating funds of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, to which they are applicable: 
(1)	A reasonable estimate of cash revenues to be received during the ensuing year, classified according to source; 
(2)	Proposed expenditures detailed by each department, board, commission, office, agency, and activity in accordance with an established classification of accounts, including those capital outlays which are to be financed from the revenues of the ensuing year and including all debt service requirements in full for such fiscal year; and 
(3)	Such other information as may be considered necessary or desirable by the Chairman or the Commission. 
(c)	In no event shall the total proposed expenditures from any fund exceed the total anticipated revenues plus the estimated unappropriated surplus or fund balance and applicable reserves less any estimated deficit at the end of the current fiscal year. 
(d)	The capital improvements budget shall describe capital projects anticipated, the proposed expenditures therefor, and the revenues or other sources of funds anticipated to finance such capital projects. 
Sec. 6-304. - Submission of budgets to the Commission. 
On or before a date fixed by the Commission but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the Chairman of the unified government shall submit to the Commission a proposed operating budget and a proposed capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting schedules shall be filed in the Chairman's office and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6-305. - Adoption of budgets. 
(a)	The Commission may approve, reject, or modify the proposed budget. The budget as finally adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues constituting the resources available of such fund. 
(b)	The Commission shall adopt the final annual operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirty-first day of December of each year and such budget shall be effective for the fiscal year beginning on the first day of January. In the event the Commission fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year, with appropriate items prorated accordingly until such time as the Commission shall adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the annual operating budget shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance or resolution setting out estimated revenues in detail by source and making appropriations accordingly to fund organizational units, purposes, or activities as set forth in the budget document. 
(c)	The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit, purpose, or activity shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriation, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(d)	The Commission shall adopt by ordinance or resolution the capital improvements program and capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirty-first day of December of each year. The capital budget ordinance or resolution shall show in detail the capital expenditures intended to be made or incurred in the ensuing fiscal year that are to be financed from funds subject to control or appropriation by the Commission and shall be in full conformity with that part of the capital program applicable to the year which it covers. Amounts specified as intended to be spent out of new appropriations shall, upon enactment of the capital budget ordinance or resolution, constitute appropriations of such amounts. 
Sec. 6-306. - Property tax levies. 
Following the adoption of the operating and capital improvements budgets for each fiscal year the Commission shall levy by ordinance or resolution a general tax on all real and personal property within the county and one or more taxes on all real and personal property in each service district and special services district. The tax rates set by such ordinance or resolution shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues from such levy shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated in such budgets. 
Sec. 6-307. - Limitation of funds. 
Upon certification by the Chairman that the revenues or other resources actually realized with respect to any fund will be less than was anticipated and will be insufficient to meet the amounts appropriated from such fund, it shall be the duty of the Chairman upon the instruction of the Commission to limit such appropriations as may be necessary to prevent deficit operation. 
Sec. 6-308. - Transfer of funds. 
Upon recommendation of the Chairman, or upon its own motion, the Commission may make inter-fund or interdepartmental transfers in the current operating budget or capital improvements budget at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, provided funds are also available. 
Sec. 6-309. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of the fund or funds from which such appropriations were made. 
Sec. 6-310. - Annual audit. 
(a)	The Commission shall provide annually for an independent audit of the accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, and of every office, department, board, commission, authority, or other agency. The audit shall be made by a certified public accountant who shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, or of any of its departments, offices, boards, commissions, authorities, or agencies. The Commission shall select an accountant or firm by competitive bids, by solicitation, or by such other means as may be employed or found necessary. 
(b)	The audit may be conducted on a quarterly, annual or continuing basis and the final report of the annual audit shall be completed as soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year and in no event later than six months after the close of the fiscal year. The audit report shall be filed with the Chairman and made available to the public. 
(c)	The Commission may at any time order an examination or special audit of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. 
CHAPTER 4. - PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 6-401. - Contracting. 
[(a)]	The Commission shall prescribe by ordinance or resolution, rules and regulations which must be followed in the making of contracts in order to bind the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. Except where otherwise provided by law or by ordinance or resolution, all contracts of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia shall be signed by the Chairperson and authenticated by the Clerk or by at least one other member of the Commission. 
[(b)]	All contracts, and all ordinances or resolutions which make or authorize contracts may be reviewed for form and legal sufficiency by the unified government's attorney. 
(c)	All contracts entered into by the Commission with other persons on behalf of the unified government shall be in writing and entered on its minutes, either in whole or by reference. 
Sec. 6-402. - Sale and disposition of property. 
(a)	The Commission is authorized to sell any real or personal property owned or held by the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, and not needed for governmental or other public purposes in such manner as is required in state law for counties or cities, as provided for in Chapter 9 and Chapter 37 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia. The Commission shall exercise sole discretion upon which Chapter shall be utilized in the sale or disposition of said property. 
(b)	The Commission is empowered to authorize the following transactions, upon finding that such transfer is in the public interest: 
(1)	A transfer of any real or personal property owned by the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, to another governmental entity; 
(2)	A sale of any such property to another governmental entity; and
(3)	An exchange of such property for property that is owned privately or by some other governmental entity. Notice of such transfer, sale or exchange shall be as required by state law, or in the absence thereof, by local ordinance. 
(c)	The Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon a report by the Chairman of the unified government and upon the adoption by the Commission of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public purposes and that the interest of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, therein has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(d)	Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract of land owned by the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, the Commission may authorize the execution and deliverance in the name of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, of a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way in said street, avenue, alley, or public place, or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, has in such property. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7-101. - Application of laws; laws in force. 
(a)	The general laws of the State of Georgia of a criminal nature shall be applicable to and within the limits of the unified government. 
(b)	In construing the applicability of provisions of the Constitution and the general laws of Georgia which apply in general terms to either counties or municipalities, or both, and local Acts of the General Assembly that apply specifically to Webster County or the City of Preston, or the City of Weston, or any of the same, the following terms as used in such laws shall be construed to include the unified government as follows: 
(1)	"County" shall be construed to include Webster County, Georgia;
(2)	"City," "town," "municipal corporation," or "municipality" shall be construed to include Webster County, Georgia; 
(3)	"Commissioners of Roads and Revenues" and "Board of County Commissioners" shall be construed to include the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia; 
(4)	"Council," "Mayor and Council," "Aldermen," and "Board of Aldermen" shall be construed to include the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia; 
(5)	"Chairman of the Commissioners of Roads and Revenues" and "Chairman of the Board of County Commissioners" shall be construed to include the Chairperson of the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia; 
(6)	"Mayor" shall be construed to include the Chairperson of the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia; and 
(7)	Any other terms and provisions as used in such Acts to refer specifically to Webster County, the City of Preston, or the City of Weston, or any of the same, and the officers, employees, departments, and agencies thereof shall be construed to mean the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, and its officers, employees, departments, and agencies. 
(c)	In construing the applicability of laws in force to the unified government, the following order shall prevail: 
(1)	The Constitution of the State of Georgia;
(2)	The general laws of uniform application now in force or hereafter enacted by the General Assembly (as distinguished from general laws of local application through classification by population) applicable to municipal corporations or counties, or both; 
(3)	This Charter and all ordinances and resolutions passed pursuant thereto;
(4)	Special laws applicable to Webster County, not in conflict with this Charter;
(5)	Special laws applicable to the City of Preston, not in conflict with this Charter; and 
(6)	Special laws applicable to the City of Weston, not in conflict with this Charter; and 
(7)	Existing ordinances and resolutions of the former City of Preston, existing ordinances and resolutions of the former City of Weston, and existing ordinances and resolutions of the former County of Webster not in conflict with this Charter. 
Sec. 7-102. - Limitation on claims and service. 
(a)	All contractual claims against the unified government shall be presented within 12 months after they accrue or become payable or the same as claimed, unless held by minors or other persons laboring under disabilities, who are allowed 12 months after the removal of such disability. 
(b)	Service on the unified government of any suit, process, or order of court shall be served upon the Chairman. 
Sec. 7-103. - Tort and nuisance liability. 
The tort and nuisance liability of the unified government shall follow the law and rules of tort liability applicable to counties in Georgia. 
Sec. 7-104. - Conflict of laws. 
For purposes of all applicable laws, the unified government shall constitute a municipality and a county, or both. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, if a law applicable to municipalities and the same or another law applicable to counties are in conflict, the law applicable to municipalities shall prevail. 
Sec. 7-105. - Execution of assessments. 
Whenever any tax or special assessment is authorized or empowered to be levied or imposed by this Charter which is required to be collected by the unified government and such is not paid within the time period specified by the Commission and no specific provision is elsewhere provided in this Charter for its collection, then the Chairman shall issue execution in the name of the unified government against such person, firm, or entity liable therefor or property subject thereto for such sums as may be due with interest at the legal rate from due date and penalties and costs. The unified government shall have the right to enforce payment of such execution by levy and sale as in the case of county taxes, and the purchaser at such sale shall acquire the same title and rights as a purchaser at a sale for county taxes. Executions issued by the Chairman of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, and the levy and sale thereunder shall be governed by general law. 
Sec. 7-106. - Authority to deal with federal and state agencies. 
The unified government shall have the power and authority to participate in, cooperate in, and take all necessary action with respect to any and all projects, programs, and undertakings of any nature authorized by any statute, rule, or regulation of the United States, the State of Georgia, or any federal or state agency or instrumentality, including but not limited to community development, highways, aviation, aviation terminals, airports, airport facilities, marinas, ports, rail depots, municipal, area, or regional development, sewer and sewage disposal, public housing, housing for the aged, and transportation or mass transit or any phase thereof; to borrow money and issue promissory notes, general obligation bonds, or revenue bonds or a combination thereof for any such purposes in accordance with provisions of this Charter; and to execute mortgages or deeds of trust in favor of any federal agency, secured by property of which the unified government is the legal or beneficial or equitable owner, or in favor of any private agency where the loan is guaranteed by a federal agency. 
Sec. 7-107. - Federal and state aid. 
The unified government shall be deemed a county but shall also be deemed an incorporated city or municipality for the purpose of determining its right to receive and for the purpose of receiving state aid or grant-in-aid from the state of Georgia or from the United States or from any agency or instrumentality thereof or from any other source, public or private. The unified government shall be entitled to receive as state aid or as grant-in-aid from the State of Georgia or from the United States or from any agency or instrumentality thereof or from any other source, public or private, all funds to which a county is, or may hereafter be, entitled, and also all funds to which an incorporated city or municipality is or may be hereafter entitled, and to receive the same without diminution or loss by reason of unification. When state aid or other grant-in-aid is distributed to any county on the basis of population or area, or both, then the entire population and the total area of Webster County, Georgia, shall be considered in calculating and determining the basis for such distribution. 
Sec. 7-108. - Budgets of county officers and agencies. 
All elected officers and all agencies not under the direct control and jurisdiction of the Chairman, such as the Board of Health and the Board of Family and Children Services, which receive appropriations from the Commission, shall, on the same date as is applicable to budgets submitted by department heads, submit to the Chairman annual operating and capital budget requests for the ensuing fiscal year. Such budget requests, after any revisions therein by the Chairman, shall be incorporated into the overall unified government budget for submission by the Chairman to the Commission, which shall grant a hearing to any such officer or agency on such proposed budgets. 
Sec. 7-109. - Existing pension rights protected. 
(a)	Persons who, at the time this Charter takes effect, are employed by any office, department, board, commission, or agency of the former City of Preston shall retain all pension rights, if any, which have accrued to them under any existing pension system. The unified government shall continue in force and effect any existing pension system for city employees covered thereby who are employed by the unified government, and the services of such employees shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by the adoption of this Charter. 
(b)	Persons who, at the time this Charter takes effect, are employed by any office, department, board, commission, or agency of the former County of Webster shall retain all pension rights, if any, which have accrued to them under any existing pension system. The unified government shall continue in force and effect any existing pension system for county employees covered thereby who are employed by the unified government, and the services of such employees shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by the adoption of this Charter. 
Sec. 7-110. - Establishment of new pension systems; merging of existing systems. 
The Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to establish and maintain a new pension system or pension systems affecting new employees and such other employees as desire to be covered thereby and to revise, combine, and consolidate any pension system in effect on the effective date of this Charter; provided, however, that in no event shall any revision, combination, or unification of any existing pension system in effect when this Charter is adopted result in the curtailment or diminishment of any right accrued under any existing pension system to any person heretofore employed by the City of Preston, Webster County, or of any agency of such former governments. 
[Sec. 7-111. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 7-112. - New personnel policy authorized; abolishment, amendment, merger of existing personnel policies authorized. 
(a)	The Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to establish and maintain a new personnel policy affecting all employees and to revise, combine, and consolidate any personnel policies in effect on the effective date of this Charter. The services of existing employees shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by the adoption of this ordinance. 
(b)	The Commission shall, upon the creation of a new personnel policy, grant to each employee of the former City of Preston and each employee of the former County of Webster, all accrued sick leave and annual leave, such as may have heretofore been established and granted under the personnel policy of each respective jurisdiction. 
(c)	The adoption of this Charter shall not be deemed to revoke the election previously made by the Sheriff of Webster County and the Probate/Magistrate Judge of Webster County on February 22, 2002, and accepted by the Webster County Board of Commissioners on March 5, 2002, to include employees of those respective agencies and departments within the scope and under the provisions of the Webster County Personnel Manual and Employee Handbook. 
Sec. 7-113. - Amending Charter. 
This Charter may be modified, rescinded, changed, or amended by only the following methods: 
(1)	An Act of the General Assembly of Georgia; or
(2)	An ordinance adopted by the Commission of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, as provided for in Article IX, Section II, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 7-114. - Fidelity bonds. 
All officers of the unified government, both elected and appointed, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the law or the Commission may require. 
Sec. 7-115. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following powers: 
(1)	Ad valorem taxation: to levy, assess, and collect ad valorem taxes on all taxable property; 
(2)	Other taxes: to levy, assess, and collect other taxes allowed by general law and in accordance therewith; 
(3)	Business regulation and taxation: to levy, assess, and collect occupational and business taxes and to license and regulate occupations and businesses; 
(4)	Appropriations: to make appropriations and expend funds for support of the unified government and any other lawful purpose; 
(5)	Debts: to borrow money and issue bonds as authorized by general law;
(6)	Property: to own property and interests in property;
(7)	Gifts: to accept gifts and grants for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the unified government on such terms as the donor may impose; 
(8)	Condemnation: to condemn property inside Webster County for present or future use;
(9)	Public utilities: to acquire, lease, operate, and dispose of public utilities;
(10)	Franchises: to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and to prescribe the conditions of such franchises and contracts; 
(11)	Roadways: to open, maintain, improve, and close streets and roads and to grant franchises and rights of way thereon; 
(12)	Public facilities: to acquire, operate, and dispose of public buildings, public projects, parks, cemeteries, recreational facilities, and other public improvements inside Webster County; 
(13)	Building regulation: to regulate the building trades and the construction of buildings and to adopt and enforce building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, heating, and air-conditioning codes; 
(14)	Planning and zoning: to adopt land use plans and exercise the power of zoning, subdivision regulation, and the like; 
(15)	Police power: to exercise the police power, including the power of arrest through appointed policemen, for the public safety and well-being of the citizens of Webster County; 
(16)	Roadside regulation: to prohibit or regulate signs, billboards, and other items upon or adjacent to streets and roads; 
(17)	Health: to prescribe and enforce health and sanitation standards;
(18)	Pollution: to regulate emissions which pollute the air and water;
(19)	Fire safety: to fix fire limits and to prescribe and enforce fire safety regulations;
(20)	Public hazards: to provide for the destruction or removal of public hazards;
(21)	Waste disposal: to provide for and regulate the collection, disposal, and recycling of garbage and wastes; 
(22)	Water and sewer fees: to fix and collect water and sewer fees;
(23)	Garbage fees: to fix and collect garbage fees;
(24)	Nuisances: to define and provide for the abatement of nuisances;
(25)	Property protection: to preserve and protect the property of the unified government;
(26)	Prisoners: to provide for public work by prisoners and for their confinement;
(27)	Animal control: to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals;
(28)	Motor vehicles: to regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles;
(29)	Taxicabs: to regulate vehicles operated for hire in Webster County;
(30)	Pensions: to provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for employees and officers of the unified government; 
(31)	Special assessments: to levy, assess, and collect special assessments to cover the cost of public improvements; 
(32)	Contracts: to enter into lawful contracts and agreements;
(33)	Agencies: to create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, authorities, and agencies of the unified government and to confer appropriate authority upon them; 
(34)	Penalties: to provide penalties for violations of ordinances of the unified government;
(35)	Fire protection: to operate a fire department;
(36)	Emergencies: to provide for the determination, proclamation, and combating of emergencies;
(37)	Urban redevelopment: to organize and operate an urban redevelopment program;
(38)	Public transportation: to organize and operate public transportation systems;
(39)	Emergency Medical Services: to operate an emergency medical service; and
(40)	General health, safety, and welfare: to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of Webster County. 
Sec. 7-116. - Section captions. 
The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be construed as a part thereof. 
Sec. 7-117. - Effect of repeals. 
No law heretofore repealed, expressly or by implication, shall be revived by the repeal herein of the repealing Act or by any provision of this Charter that disclaims an intention to repeal or affect enumerated laws. 
Sec. 7-118. - Severability clause. 
If any provision of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Charter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 7-119. - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSITION PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-101. - Special election of first officials. 
(a)	A special election shall be held on a date fixed by the county election superintendent but not later than 180 days following the date of approval of this Charter as provided in Section 8-110 of this Charter, for the purpose of electing the first members of the Commission of the unified government. The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Election Superintendent shall, if practicable, set the date of the special election to coincide with the General Primary to be held on July 15, 2008. The Superintendent of elections shall publish notice of the call for such election in the newspaper in which the Webster County Sheriff's advertisements appear at least 30 days prior to the date of such election. Candidates shall qualify in accordance with Georgia law. 
(b)	In all other respects, the election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," applicable to county elections. Within 30 days following the approval of this Charter as provided in Section 8-110 of this Charter, the election superintendent of Webster County shall prepare a list of qualified voters for all county posts. The officials elected at such election shall commence the term of their office on January 1, 2009, or upon the 30th day following the election of such officials, whichever date is later. 
(c)	The qualifications for office for such initial election shall be as prescribed by applicable provisions of this Charter. 
(d)	Any elected official of Webster County or of any municipality lying wholly or partially therein who is otherwise qualified under this Charter shall be entitled to qualify and run for an office of the unified government. 
Sec. 8-102. - Initial terms of office. 
The initial terms for Commissioners serving in Districts 2 and 3 of the unified government shall expire at the end of the first even-numbered year after their election. The initial terms for Commissioners serving in Districts 1 and 4 shall expire at the end of the second even-numbered year after their election. The initial term for the Chairman of the Commission shall expire at the end of the second even-numbered year after his or her election. All terms thereafter shall be four years. 
Sec. 8-103. - Effective date of Charter. 
This Charter shall become effective on January 1, 2009, or, following its approval by voters, upon the 30th day following the election of the members of the governing authority of the Unified Government of Webster County, whichever date is later. 
Sec. 8-104. - Cooperation of former governments. 
All officers, officials, and employees of the former City of Preston, the former City of Weston, and Webster County shall cooperate with and assist the Commission, the Chairman, and other officers of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia: 
(1)	In planning the unification of departments, boards, commissions, and agencies of said former governments and in transferring the functions, duties, and responsibilities of such departments, boards, commissions, authorities, and agencies to the appropriate agencies of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia; and 
(2)	In all other respects in order that the transfer of the governments be accomplished in the most orderly manner possible. The officers of the unified government shall be entitled to examine all records, files, and other data in the possession of the former governments and of all officers, officials, employees, and departments thereof. The former governments shall, to the extent possible, provide working areas and facilities for the officers of the unified government. 
Sec. 8-105. - Existing ordinances and resolutions continued in effect. 
(a)	Subject to subsection (e) of this section, existing ordinances and resolutions of the Commission of Webster County and existing rules and regulations of county departments or agencies, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in effect as ordinances, resolutions, rules, or regulations of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, or the appropriate department or agency thereof until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
(b)	Subject to subsection (e) of this section, existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Preston, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in effect as ordinances and resolutions within the former boundaries of the City of Preston, until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
(c)	Subject to subsection (e) of this section, existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Weston, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in effect as ordinances and resolutions within the former boundaries of the City of Weston, until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
(d)	Subject to subsection (e) of this section, in the event of a conflict between any of the ordinances or resolutions continued by this section, the provisions thereof shall apply only to the territory of the unified government that such ordinance or resolution applied prior to the effective date of this Charter and until such ordinance or resolution is repealed, changed, or amended to eliminate the conflict. 
(e)	The Commission shall review all ordinances and resolutions and take whatever action is needed to remove any conflicts between ordinances and resolutions continued by this section in order to produce a uniform body of ordinances and resolutions, free of any conflicts or contradictions between such provisions. 
Sec. 8-106. - Contracts and obligations. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by Webster County or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the unified government; provided, however, any obligation created by Webster County to become effective after the date of approval of this Charter shall be subject to ratification and approval by the Commission of the unified government within six months following the effective date of this Charter. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by the City of Preston or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the unified government; provided, however, any obligation created by the City of Preston to become effective after the date of approval of this Charter shall be subject to ratification and approval by the Commission of the unified government within six months following the effective date of the Charter. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by the City of Weston or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the unified government; provided, however, any obligation created by the City of Weston to become effective after the date of approval of this Charter shall be subject to ratification and approval by the Commission of the unified government within six months following the effective date of the Charter. 
(d)	No pending action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil, criminal, judicial, administrative, or other) by or against the City of Preston, the City of Weston, or Webster County or an agency or department thereof shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this Charter, and the unified government shall stand substituted as a party in lieu thereof. 
Sec. 8-107. - Dissolution of existing governments. 
On the effective date of this Charter, the Board of Commissioners of Webster County, the Mayor and Council of the City of Preston, and the Mayor and Council of the City of Weston, and all the officers thereof and the offices thereof not continued under this Charter are abolished, and all emoluments appertaining thereto shall cease. Thereupon, the governments of Webster County, the City of Preston, and the City of Weston shall terminate as separate political entities and all powers, functions, duties, and obligations thereof shall be transferred to and vested in the unified government created by this Charter. 
Sec. 8-108. - Transfer of records and equipment. 
When an agency of the City of Preston, the City of Weston, or of Webster County is abolished or unified by this Charter, all books, papers, maps, charts, plans, records, other equipment, and personal property in possession of the same shall be delivered to the agency to which its rights, powers, duties, and obligations are transferred. 
Sec. 8-109. - Officers serve until successors qualify. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, any officer performing duties under the government of the City of Preston, the City of Weston, or Webster County may continue to perform the duties thereof until a successor, whether under the same title or office of another, shall be elected or appointed and qualified to perform the duties, it being the intention hereof that no duty or service shall lapse or be abandoned because of lack of an officer to perform same. 
Sec. 8-110. - Referendum on the Charter. 
(a)	Not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after receipt of the certified copy of the proposed Charter and after receipt of approval by the Department of Justice of such proposed Charter, it shall be the duty of the Webster County election superintendent to call a special election for approval or rejection of the proposed Charter. The election superintendent shall set the date of the election for a day not less than 30 days nor more than 180 days after the issuance of the call, provided however, the provisions of this section notwithstanding, the election superintendent shall, if practicable, set the date of election to coincide with the Presidential Primary to be held on February 5, 2008. The election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two calendar weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official legal organ of Webster County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the following: 

 
(b)	All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Charter shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Charter shall vote "No." The votes cast on such question by the qualified voters of Webster County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Preston and the votes cast on such question by the qualified voters of Webster County shall be counted separately. If more than one-half of the votes cast by the qualified voters of Webster County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Preston are for approval of the Charter and if more than one-half of the total votes cast by the qualified voters residing within both the incorporated and unincorporated areas of Webster County are for approval of the Charter, then the Charter shall become effective as to the City of Preston and Webster County. Otherwise, it shall be void and of no force and effect. In addition, the votes cast on such question by the qualified voters of Webster County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Weston shall be counted separately. If more than one-half of the votes cast by the qualified voters of Webster County residing within the corporate limits of City of Weston are for approval of the Charter and if more than one-half of the votes cast by the qualified voters of Webster County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Preston are for approval of the Charter and if more than one-half of the total votes cast by the qualified voters residing within both incorporated and unincorporated areas of Webster County are for approval of the Charter, then the Charter shall become effective as to the City of Preston, the City of Weston, and Webster County. 
(c)	The special election shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," except to the extent specifically provided otherwise by this Charter. 
(d)	A qualified voter, as used herein, shall mean a voter of Webster County qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia. The election superintendent shall certify the returns to the Secretary of State. The election superintendent shall also furnish a certified copy of the Charter to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State shall issue a proclamation showing and declaring the result of the election on the approval or rejection of the Charter. One copy of the proclamation shall be attached to the copy of the Charter certified to the Secretary of State. One copy of the proclamation shall be delivered to the clerk of the governing authority of the City of Preston who shall attach the same to the copy of the Charter previously certified to him or her. One copy of the proclamation shall be delivered to the clerk of the governing authority of the City of Weston who shall attach the same to the copy of the Charter previously certified to him or her. One copy of the proclamation shall be delivered to the clerk of the governing authority of Webster County who shall attach the same to the copy of the Charter previously certified to him or her. 
(e)	Whenever a Charter for the unification of the governments of the City of Preston, the City of Weston, and Webster County has been accepted, the above-certified copies thereof, with the proclamation of the Secretary of State of Georgia attached thereto, shall be deemed duplicate original copies of the Charter of the unified government for all purposes. The certified copy of the Charter and proclamation deposited with the clerk of the governing authority of the City of Preston, the certified copy of the Charter and proclamation deposited with the clerk of the governing authority of the City of Weston, and the certified copy of the Charter and proclamation deposited with the clerk of the governing authority of Webster County shall subsequently be delivered by them to the successor government. The successor government may issue certified copies of the Charter and any copy so certified shall be deemed a duplicate original copy of the Charter of the unified government for all purposes. The Secretary of State is authorized to issue certified copies of the Charter on file, and copies so certified shall be deemed duplicate original copies of the Charter of the unified government for all purposes. 
  
Duly approved and adopted by a majority vote of the members of the Preston-Weston-Webster County Charter and Unification Commission, this date, September 6, 2007. 

 
Preston-Weston-Webster County Charter and Unification Commission 
Certified true and correct copy, this date, September 6, 2007 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter, and any subsequent amendments thereto. 

 
Subpart B - MAGISTRATE COURT OF WEBSTER COUNTY[1] 
To provide for the election of the initial chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Webster County; to provide for the election of successors to said initial chief magistrate; to provide for the selection of other magistrates; to provide for terms of office; to provide for the appointment of other court personnel; to provide that the sheriff and his deputies shall serve as constables under certain conditions; to provide for filling vacancies; to provide for the compensation of the chief magistrate and other magistrates and of other court personnel; to excuse the chief magistrate from certain jury duty; to provide for reimbursing the chief magistrate and other magistrates for reasonable costs and expenses of training; to provide for severability; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed in this subpart is 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1008), p. 4451. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. For stylistic purposes, the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Section catchlines have been editorially supplied. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - [Judge of probate court to serve as chief magistrate of magistrate court.] 
(a)	Effective January 1, 1997, the judge of the Probate Court of Webster County shall also serve as and be the chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Webster County. The term of office of the judge serving as chief magistrate shall be concurrent with such judge's term of office as judge of the probate court. There shall be no election in 1996 or thereafter for the office of chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Webster County. 
(b)	Effective January 1, 1997, the judge of the probate court and chief magistrate, in addition to any compensation received for service as judge of the probate court, shall receive a supplement for service as chief magistrate in an amount to be fixed by the governing authority of Webster County. Such supplement shall not be less than the minimum amount provided by any general law of the state for additional service by a judge of the probate court as chief magistrate. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), p. 3834, § 1)
Sec. 2. - [Continuation of current chief magistrate.] 
The chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Webster County who is serving as such on January 1, 1996, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in such office shall continue to serve as such chief magistrate for a term of office which shall expire December 31, 1996, and, during such time period, shall continue to receive the same salary such person was receiving for performing such duties pursuant to Section 4 of Ga. L. 1984, p. 4451. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), p. 3835, § 1)
Sec. 3. - [Vacancy.] 
In the event of a vacancy on or after January 1, 1997, the person assuming the position of judge of the probate court shall assume additionally the position of chief magistrate. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), p. 3835, § 1)
Sec. 4. - [Salary.] 
(a)	Upon the conclusion of the term of any other magistrate in office as of the effective date of this Act, any other magistrate shall thereafter be nominated by the chief magistrate at the commencement of the term of office of the chief magistrate and be approved by the governing authority of Webster County for an annual term which shall expire at the end of each calendar year during the term of the chief magistrate. An appointment of any other magistrate shall be automatically renewed for a subsequent annual term which occurs during the term of office of the chief magistrate absent written notice from the chief magistrate of an intent not to renew the appointment of such other magistrate at least 30 days prior to the conclusion of the annual term of office of such other magistrate. The governing authority of Webster County shall not appoint more than one other magistrate to assist the chief magistrate. 
(b)	The chief magistrate shall appoint the clerk and other court personnel of the magistrate court; provided, however, that the number of such court personnel shall be approved by the governing authority of Webster County. 
(c)	If the constable of the Magistrate Court of Webster County is unable for any reason to perform the constable's duties, the sheriff of Webster County and the sheriff's deputies shall serve as constables for the Magistrate Court of Webster County. The sheriff and the sheriff's deputies shall not be entitled to any additional compensation for performing such duties. 
(d)	The governing authority of Webster County shall fix the salaries of the other magistrates and the compensation of the clerk of the court and other court personnel. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), p. 3835, § 1; 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 559), § 1)
Sec. 5. - [Training expenses.] 
The costs and expenses of training required by Chapter 10 of Title 15 of the O.C.G.A. shall be paid by the chief magistrate and other magistrates of Webster County, but such officers shall be reimbursed by the governing authority of Webster County for such reasonable costs and expenses. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
GEORGIA LAWS
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Local Acts, Local Constitutional Amendments, and any subsequent amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3.

Sec. 1-1. - Adoption of Code; name. 
The codification of resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances passed by the board of commissioners is adopted as "The Code of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Webster County Unified Government Code." 
(Code 2003, § 1-1)
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Incorporation of resolutions. 
Any resolution, general resolution or ordinance not presently included in the official Codes of Webster County, Georgia, the City of Weston, Georgia, or the City of Preston, Georgia, and passed subsequent to the preparation of such codification, is automatically included and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 2003, § 1-2)
Sec. 1-3. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of the Webster County Unified Government Code shall be kept on file in the office of the county clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or someone authorized by the clerk to insert in designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances which indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make such resolutions and ordinances a part of the Webster County Unified Government Code, when such resolutions and ordinances have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Webster County Unified Government Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the board of commissioners. This copy of the Webster County Unified Government Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the Code and shall be considered the Webster County Unified Government Code. 
(Code 2003, § 1-3)
Sec. 1-4. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all resolutions and ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board of commissioners, county commission. The terms "board of commissioners" and "county commission" mean the board of commissioners of Webster County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City or cities. The term "the city" or "these cities" means both the City of Preston, Georgia, and the City of Weston, Georgia. 
City limits. The term "city limits" means the corporate limits or legal boundary of the City of Preston, Georgia, and the City of Weston, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means one or more members of the board of commissioners. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County, the county. The terms "county" and "the county" mean the County of Webster, State of Georgia. 
County clerk. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the term "county clerk" means the person employed by the board of commissioners to fulfill the duties of clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Joint authority. All terms giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such terms are used to grant authority to the board of commissioners. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state, the resolutions of the county, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
May. The term "may" is permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is mandatory. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal resolutions, ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances or resolutions of the county. 
Person. The term "person" includes a natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, company, business, trust and any other group acting as a unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Road and street. The terms "road" and "street" include all roads, streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this county which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the county clerk's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Webster County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2003, § 1-4)
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)	The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 2003, § 1-5)
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2003, § 1-6)
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - References to titles of officers, employees, public bodies. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 1-7)
Sec. 1-8. - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Code 2003, § 1-8)
Sec. 1-9. - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the resolutions of the county unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
(1)	Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
(2)	Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)	Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Code 2003, § 1-9)
Sec. 1-10. - Acts by agent. 
When an act is required by resolution or ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by a designated agent. 
(Code 2003, § 1-10)
Sec. 1-11. - Causing, permitting, abetting or concealing prohibited act. 
Whenever in the resolutions or ordinances of the county any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Code 2003, § 1-11)
Sec. 1-12. - Construction of provisions. 
The provisions of the resolutions or ordinances of the county and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Code 2003, § 1-12)
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeal or expiration of resolution. 
(a)	The repeal of a resolution or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the resolution expired and shall not repeal the repealing clause of a resolution or revive any resolution or ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(b)	When a resolution or ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous resolution or ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 2003, § 1-13)
Sec. 1-14. - Matters not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the resolution or ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the county.
(4)	Any resolution or ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee.
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the county.
(6)	Any resolution or ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)	Any appropriation resolution or ordinance.
(8)	Any resolution or ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)	Any resolution or ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor.
(10)	Any zoning resolution or ordinance.
(11)	Any resolution or ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat.
(12)	Any resolution or ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county.
(13)	The administrative resolutions or ordinances of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)	Any resolution or ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code.
(15)	Any resolution or ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county.
(16)	Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures for any county officer or county employee. 
(17)	Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing regulations and/or standards for the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, as codified in chapter 22 of the 2003 Webster County Code. 
(18)	Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision.
No such resolution or ordinance shall be construed to revive any resolution or ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent resolution or ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such resolutions or ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2003, § 1-14)
Sec. 1-15. - Provisions considered continuations of existing resolutions. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as resolutions or ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2003, § 1-15)
Sec. 1-16. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All resolutions or ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent resolutions or ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by their omission from affected reprinted pages. The subsequent resolutions or ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent resolutions or ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent resolutions or ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2003, § 1-16)
Sec. 1-17. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of resolutions or ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest resolution or ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in resolutions and parts of resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the resolution or ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this resolution" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the resolution or ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of resolution or ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of resolution material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2003, § 1-17)
Sec. 1-18. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by resolution or ordinance or other official act of the board of commissioners. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Code 2003, § 1-18)
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-19. - General penalty, continuing violations; authority granted to court. 
(a)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives the board of commissioners, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, authorization to adopt resolutions and ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, violations of which resolutions and ordinances may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both. 
(b)	The Georgia General Assembly, in 1991, amended O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, relating to resolutions and ordinances for governing and policing the unincorporated areas of the county, so as to increase the maximum fine from $500.00 to $1,000.00. 
(c)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives jurisdiction over violations of county resolutions and ordinances to the magistrate court of the county. 
(d)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 is hereby incorporated as a part of the Code of the Unified Government of Webster County, Georgia. 
(e)	Violations.
(1)	In this subsection, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
a.	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
b.	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
c.	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(3)	Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any resolution or ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any resolution or ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such resolution or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the county, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor, and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any resolution or ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(4)	Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(f)	The judge of the magistrate court shall have the power and authority to:
(1)	Impose upon persons convicted in the magistrate court the fines provided for in this Code, the resolutions and ordinances of the county, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)	Sentence such person to community service work; or
(3)	Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(g)	The judge of the magistrate court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the court upon the offenders' failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 2003, § 1-19)
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-91; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-20. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)	Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)	Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the resolution of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 2003, § 1-20)
Sec. 1-21. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the county under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-22. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)	Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the board of commissioners from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the county pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the board of commissioners, and such changes shall be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)	Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the board of commissioners from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the board of commissioners by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-1 et seq., 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Service delivery strategy. 
(a)	The service delivery strategy of the Unified Government of Webster County is hereby approved. 
(b)	The chairperson of the county board of commissioners is authorized to execute the service delivery strategy on behalf of the Unified Government of Webster County. 
(Res. of 10-15-2009)
Sec. 2-2. - Burial of indigent persons. 
The county shall pay from the county's general funds towards the cost of burial of any indigent person who dies within the corporate confines of the county. The amount paid towards the cost of burial shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. of 2-15-2011)
Secs. 2-3—2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-23. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson shall act as chair of the board of commissioners and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairperson shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairperson shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
(Code 2003, § 2-31)
Sec. 2-24. - Absence of chairperson and vice-chairperson: commissioner to serve as temporary chair. 
If the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chairperson of the meeting until either the chairperson or vice-chairperson is present at the meeting. 
(Code 2003, § 2-32)
Sec. 2-25. - Committees. 
The chairperson, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, may create committees of members of the board of commissioners to study any issue before the board of commissioners. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to commissioners, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any litigation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairperson with the concurrence of the board of commissioners. The chairperson shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Code 2003, § 2-33)
Sec. 2-26. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Code 2003, § 2-34)
Sec. 2-27. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be at 4:30 p.m. on the second Tuesday of each month after the first Monday each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the commissioners' office. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 2-35; Res. of 5-12-2003, § 1(G); Res. of 2-14-2005)
Sec. 2-28. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county by the chairperson for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided by state law. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 2-36)
Sec. 2-29. - Emergency sessions. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board of commissioners may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the board of commissioners as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Code 2003, § 2-37)
Sec. 2-30. - Executive sessions. 
(a)	Executive sessions of the board of commissioners may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board of commissioners is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. 
(b)	The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the county clerk at the direction of the chairperson. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board of commissioners may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Code 2003, § 2-38)
Sec. 2-31. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board of commissioners. A quorum is a majority of all of the commissioners then in office. It is the duty of the chairperson to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairperson if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairperson with the approval of the commissioners present. 
(Code 2003, § 2-39)
Sec. 2-32. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean more than half of the commissioners present excluding abstentions. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the commissioners present excluding abstentions. In the event of a tie vote, the chairperson shall vote to break the tie. 
(Code 2003, § 2-40)
Sec. 2-33. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest that would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Code 2003, § 2-41)
Sec. 2-34. - Agenda. 
(a)	The county clerk, with the advice of the chairperson and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the county clerk to finalize the agenda. The chairperson and all commissioners may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the board of commissioners is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least one business day before every board of commissioners meeting. 
(b)	Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the county clerk and must be received before Friday at 12:00 noon before the meeting on Tuesday. 
(c)	The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the board of commissioners. 
(d)	A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Code 2003, § 2-42)
Sec. 2-35. - Consent agenda. 
(a)	A consent agenda may be prepared by the county clerk for the board of commissioners to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)	At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairperson shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairperson shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairperson will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(Code 2003, § 2-43)
Sec. 2-36. - Minutes. 
(a)	The county clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each board of commissioners meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the board of commissioners meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board of commissioners but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The board of commissioners must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board of commissioners. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board of commissioners at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairperson and attested to by the county clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 2-44)
Sec. 2-37. - Order of business. 
All regular board of commissioners meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)	Call to order.
(2)	Minutes.
(3)	Invited guests.
(4)	Reports from committees and departments.
(5)	Consent agenda.
(6)	Old business.
(7)	New business.
(8)	Public comments.
(9)	Adjournment.
(Code 2003, § 2-45)
Sec. 2-38. - Decorum. 
(a)	All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairperson and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairperson. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)	The chairperson shall enforce the rules of decorum stated in subsection (a) of this section. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson can rule on the question or he may allow the board of commissioners to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Code 2003, § 2-46)
Sec. 2-39. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the board of commissioners must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county clerk at least three business days before the board of commissioners meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(2)	Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the board of commissioners may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board of commissioners. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. Anyone wishing to speak at any board of commissioners meeting must be recognized by the chairperson before addressing the board of commissioners. 
(3)	Decorum; compliance with rules. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board of commissioners meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals who violate any rules of the board of commissioners may be ruled out of order by the chairperson or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board of commissioners will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairperson. 
(4)	Public hearings. The board of commissioners may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board of commissioners. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the board of commissioners or at such other places and times as the board of commissioners may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(Code 2003, § 2-47)
Sec. 2-40. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order established in section 2-37 must be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county clerk three business days before a regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all commissioners. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the board of commissioners to be adopted. 
(Code 2003, § 2-48)
Sec. 2-41. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order, as established in section 2-37, may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a two-thirds vote of the board of commissioners. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to commissioners of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Code 2003, § 2-49)
Sec. 2-42. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings may be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Code 2003, § 2-50)
Secs. 2-43—2-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3.

Sec. 2-73. - Rules of procedure. 
Unless otherwise provided in this article, procedures for meetings of the board of commissioners shall follow an edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, prescribed by the chairperson. 
(Code 2003, § 2-71)
Sec. 2-74. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board of commissioners meetings. 
(Code 2003, § 2-72)
Sec. 2-75. - Main motion. 
In order for the board of commissioners to take any official action on any subject, a commissioner must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chairperson until another commissioner agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the commissioner seconding the motion to support the motion. A commissioner may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the board of commissioners has voted on that motion. 
(Code 2003, § 2-73)
Sec. 2-76. - Debate. 
(a)	After a main motion, as described in section 2-75, is recognized by the chairperson, the board of commissioners shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the chairperson in a manner that is fair to all members of the board of commissioners. Commissioners may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the chairperson. 
(b)	During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the board of commissioners take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
(c)	Commissioners may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(Code 2003, § 2-74)
Sec. 2-77. - Voting; procedure. 
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.	If debate has been completed and no other commissioner wishes to speak, the chairperson can call for the vote. If there are no objections then, the chairperson can proceed with the vote; 
b.	If the chairperson calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the board of commissioners may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The chairperson will then read the proposed motion to the board of commissioners and ask for the votes of the commissioners. 
(2)	Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chairperson. The chairperson shall read the proposed motion to the board of commissioners and then call for the vote. 
(Code 2003, § 2-75)
Sec. 2-78. - Ranking of motions. 
(a)	Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the board of commissioners returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
(b)	A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list: 
(1)	Main motion (lowest rank).
(2)	Subsidiary motions (debatable):
a.	Postpone indefinitely.
b.	Amend.
c.	Refer to committee (commit).
d.	Postpone to a certain time (postpone definitely).
(3)	Subsidiary motions (undebatable):
a.	Limit debate or extend limits.
b.	Vote immediately (previous question).
c.	Lay on the table (postpone temporarily).
(4)	Privileged motions (undebatable):
a.	Question of privilege.
b.	Recess.
c.	Adjourn (highest rank).
(Code 2003, § 2-76)
Sec. 2-79. - Subsidiary motions. 
During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce motions that propose that the board of commissioners take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow the board of commissioners to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions: amend, limit debate and vote immediately, also may apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)	Postpone indefinitely. If a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered by the board of commissioners, that commissioner may move to postpone the consideration of the main motion indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)	Amend. If a commissioner believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. 
a.	Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. 
b.	Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a certain time and the motion to recess can also be amended. 
c.	A motion cannot be amended more than two times.
d.	Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable.
e.	A majority vote is required for the board of commissioners to adopt an amendment.
f.	If the amendment is adopted, then the board of commissioners shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)	Refer to a committee (commit). If a commissioner believes that further information is needed before the board of commissioners can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the board of commissioners. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)	Postpone to a certain time (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the chairperson will bring the original motion back to the board of commissioners for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)	Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the commissioner who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(6)	Vote immediately (previous question). If a commissioner believes that the motion being considered should be voted on, the commissioner may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of two-thirds of the board of commissioners is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)	Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the board of commissioners during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2003, § 2-77)
Sec. 2-80. - Privileged motions. 
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)	Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chairperson concerning the rights of a commissioner or of the board of commissioners as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)	Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)	Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a commissioner must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2003, § 2-78)
Sec. 2-81. - Incidental motions. 
Incidental motions allow commissioners to exert their rights as a member of the board of commissioners. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)	Appeal. If a commissioner disagrees with a decision that is made by the chairperson, that commissioner may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the board of commissioners. The chairperson has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The board of commissioners may then debate the appeal. The board of commissioners shall decide by majority vote if the chairperson's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)	Parliamentary inquiry. If a commissioner has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chairperson to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the board of commissioners. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)	Point of order (question of order). If a commissioner believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson can make a ruling on the question or can allow the board of commissioners to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)	Point of information (request for information). If a commissioner has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chairperson and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(Code 2003, § 2-79)
Sec. 2-82. - Supplementary main motions. 
Three motions allow the board of commissioners to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the board of commissioners. The following motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the following ways specified: 
(1)	Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the board of commissioners to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the board of commissioners to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any commissioner may make a motion to reconsider and any commissioner may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the board of commissioners is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the board of commissioners will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)	Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the board of commissioners overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any commissioner. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the commissioner seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-34. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, then the board of commissioners shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)	Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the board of commissioners to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2003, § 2-80)
Secs. 2-83—2-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I.

Sec. 2-108. - Legislative authority. 
The board of commissioners shall exercise the legislative functions of the county, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the county; however, such ordinance or resolution is not in conflict with state law, the state constitution, or the constitution or the laws of the United States. 
(Code 2003, § 2-101)
Sec. 2-109. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this article, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the county shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division, and not inconsistent with the Charter. 
(Code 2003, § 2-102)
Sec. 2-110. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the county attorney. 
(Code 2003, § 2-103)
Sec. 2-111. - Required elements of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the board of commissioners shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: 
(1)	Ordinance number.
(2)	Title and purpose.
(3)	Enacting clause.
(4)	Body of ordinance by sections.
(5)	Severability clause.
(6)	Penalty clause.
(7)	Repealing clause.
(8)	Adoption date.
(9)	Effective date.
(10)	Authentication of county clerk.
(Code 2003, § 2-104)
Sec. 2-112. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the board of commissioners must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 2-105)
Sec. 2-113. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(Code 2003, § 2-108)
Secs. 2-114—2-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.

Sec. 2-140. - Compensation of elected officials. 
(a)	The mode of compensation of the elected officials of the county, known as the fee system, is abolished and an annual salary for such officer is hereby prescribed. 
(b)	Each elected official of the county shall collect all fines and fees, and all other monies, accruing to his office and turn such fines and fees over to the county treasury. Each payment made to the county treasury shall be accompanied by a detailed itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of each elected county official to submit a budget to the board of commissioners for its approval. 
(d)	Each elected county official shall, from time to time, recommend to the board of commissioners the number of personnel needed for his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee. However, it shall be within the sole discretion of the board of commissioners to approve and fix the compensation to be received by each employee in such office. 
(Code 2003, § 2-131; Res. of 5-26-1983)
Sec. 2-141. - Personnel provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to the county's personnel classification system, employee pay plan, retirement plan, or employee benefits. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. 
(Code 2003, § 2-132)
Sec. 2-142. - Workers' compensation coverage. 
(a)	Elected officials. While performing their elected duties, the elected officials of the county shall be covered under the state workers' compensation laws. 
(b)	Volunteer law enforcement personnel. Volunteer law enforcement personnel of the county shall be covered under the state workers' compensation laws for the services they render to the county. 
(c)	Emergency management personnel. Emergency management personnel of the county shall be covered under the state workers' compensation laws for services rendered to the county. 
(Code 2003, § 2-133; Res. of 7-6-1984(1); Res. of 7-6-1984(2); Res. of 12-1-1987)
Sec. 2-143. - Employees of sheriff's department and probate/magistrate court incorporated into the county's civil service system. 
All employees of the county sheriff's department and all employees of the county probate/magistrate court are hereby incorporated into the county's civil service system and granted all the privileges and rights pertaining thereto. The probate/magistrate judge, sheriff, and tax commissioner are covered under the county personnel policy. The clerk of court is not covered under the county personnel policy. 
(Res. of 3-5-2002)
Sec. 2-144. - Hiring of anyone owing county delinquent fees and/or taxes prohibited. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners does herewith establish a policy that shall prohibit the hiring, for any part-time or any full-time position within the county government, of anyone who owes the county for delinquent fees and/or taxes unless the same shall immediately settle all such outstanding debts or shall consent, in writing, to a payroll deduction, such as may be allowed by law, for the payment of said fees and/or taxes. 
(b)	Wherein federal law shall not permit a payroll deduction sufficient to pay the fees and/or taxes owed by a prospective employee, during the anticipated period of employment, said person shall not be eligible for employment. 
(Res. of 12-13-2005)
Secs. 2-145—2-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II; local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; designation of depository, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-196—2-213. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.

Sec. 2-214. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)	Seek lower cost, better quality and purchase terms for acquisitions of goods and services for the county by: 
a.	Seeking standardization of purchasing procedures and processes;
b.	Encouraging the reduction and eventual elimination of small orders and emergency purchases;
c.	Encouraging advanced planning;
d.	Reducing paperwork through combined purchases;
e.	Encouraging competitive purchasing; and
f.	Encouraging cooperative intergovernmental purchasing by departments.
(2)	Provide budget control and ensure the financial stability of the county.
(3)	Ensure that the greatest value is received for the tax dollar expended.
(Code 2003, § 2-211)
Sec. 2-215. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Equipment means automotive equipment, machinery, construction contracts or other items of a permanent or semipermanent nature, both real and personal. 
Inventory means the fixed asset inventory for the county, updated annually. 
Local vendor means a business or supplier which operates and maintains a regular place of business within the geographical boundaries of the county, and which has paid its occupation tax to the county for the current year. 
Materials and supplies means such items as are normally used or consumed during the current year, and for which a general appropriation has been made. 
Purchasing office means the office designated and maintained pursuant to this division and the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 2-212)
Sec. 2-216. - Purchases restricted. 
(a)	No officer or employee of the county shall purchase for or on behalf of the county any materials or supplies, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or character or make any contract for materials or supplies or equipment or for services except through the purchasing office. 
(b)	Purchases contrary to the method provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed unauthorized purchases. The county will not be responsible for the payment of any bills submitted for unauthorized purchases. It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the county to make any purchase, or aid and abet the making of any purchase in any other manner than through the purchasing office; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the provision of medical services for prisoners under the care of the sheriff's department or emergency purchases as provided in section 2-218. 
(Code 2003, § 2-213)
Sec. 2-217. - Purchase orders required; exceptions. 
No officer or employee of the county shall request any merchant, dealer or other vendor to deliver goods to the county except on a purchase order from the purchasing office, except in the case of the provision of medical services for prisoners under the care of the sheriff's department or emergency purchases as provided in section 2-218. 
(Code 2003, § 2-214)
Sec. 2-218. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)	Emergency purchases are those purchases made necessary by situations which could not be anticipated by the department or elected official, usually involving life threatening circumstances or risks of injury, or resulting in work stoppages, undue delay or occurring during non-business hours when the ordinary purchase procedures cannot be followed. Negligence on the part of the department head or elected official to plan properly is not justification of an emergency purchase. 
(b)	If an emergency requiring a purchase occurs during business hours, the department head or elected official shall contact the purchasing office and obtain an emergency purchase order number. The item sought may then be acquired using that number. Such number will be stated to the vendor as evidence that the purchase has been approved and the number shall be noted on any vendor invoice for the item receiving emergency approval. If the emergency occurs during non-business hours, the department head or elected official may make the purchase and, immediately upon the resolution of the emergency, a requisition shall be prepared stating the nature of the emergency. The requisition shall be forwarded to the purchase office on the next business day. The requisition shall be accompanied by the purchase receipt and a memorandum from the department head or elected official setting forth the details of the emergency. 
(Code 2003, § 2-215)
Sec. 2-219. - Open market purchases. 
Except in cases of emergency, no order shall be issued for the delivery on a contract or open market purchases until it has been determined that there exists a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance for the budget line item to be charged. 
(Code 2003, § 2-216)
Sec. 2-220. - Purchasing procedure. 
Where practicable, all county purchases and contract work shall be subject to fair and open bidding subject to state law, county ordinance and the following: 
(1)	State contract prices. Items that can be purchased from a published list of bid prices provided by the state or its agencies may be purchased in accordance with such bid list and contract price without bids subject to the accrual of revenue and availability of funds which shall be confirmed and coordinated with the board of commissioners prior to purchase. 
(2)	Small purchases. Small purchases of less than $250.00 may be made from suppliers and distributors in the ordinary course of business when such purchases are generally sold on a competitive basis. When several small purchases can be reasonably combined for non-monthly recurring purchases, then consideration shall be given to a pooled or bulk purchase subject to the bidding process. 
(3)	Special or custom items. Items of a specialized, unique or customized nature or origin, without more than one distributor in the county area, may be purchased at a price published in catalogues or trade journals or commonly known in the field of use provided that if the value of such item exceeds $2,500.00 in cost, then the board of commissioners may require advertisement of such purchase. 
(4)	Purchases between $250.00 and $2,500.00. For items sold by more than one distributor, at least two sources shall be contacted and a cost estimate obtained from each of the items costing up to $2,500.00. 
(5)	Purchases between $2,500.00 and $10,000.00. All purchases and contracts having an estimated cost between $2,500.00 and $10,000.00 may be subject to bids with at least two suppliers or contractors submitting bids in writing except as follows: 
a.	Bulk gas purchases may be subject to oral solicitation on a regular monthly basis provided the bidders and amounts of bids are noted in writing. 
b.	Items covered by other provisions of this division or law.
c.	Where otherwise requested by the board of commissioners.
(6)	Purchases and contracts over $10,000.00. Unless otherwise provided in this division, all purchases and contracts estimated to cost $10,000.00 or more, except public works contracts and materials, may be subject to a written sealed bid after advertisement in the official organ of the county at least 15 days prior to the bid opening date. Subject to prior notice and approval by the board of commissioners, used equipment and property may be purchased, without advertisement, provided that the department head has made a diligent search of the marketplace and provides documentation of such search. Documentation shall include information as to the cost of such equipment if new, its availability, warranty, expected life, proposed use, etc. 
(7)	Bulk purchases. When items to be purchased are also used by other county departments and can be reasonably purchased in bulk with other county departments, then such departments shall coordinate such purchases with each other and with the purchasing office to promote the most economical purchase price and to minimize the number of transactions involved. 
(8)	Inventory. All purchases resulting in a fixed asset (vehicle, equipment, furnishings, etc.) with a value of over $500.00 shall be properly inventoried and documented by the department head. The department head shall be responsible for affixing the bar code sticker to the fixed asset. Each department head shall review the department's inventory for additions and deletions. 
(9)	Local vendors. Except for matters required to be bid by state law, including, without limitation, public works contracts and materials, any purchase or contract of under $100,000.00 that is put out to bid under the provisions of this division shall be awarded to a local vendor in the case of equivalent bids. In cases in which a bid by a local vendor is within five percent of the lowest overall bid supplied by a non-local vendor, the administration of the county is authorized to negotiate with such local bidder to match the lowest bid supplied by a non-local vendor. Negotiation is limited to purchases and contracts up to $100,000.00 and is not authorized in situations where state or federal laws do not allow vendor preferences. If a local bidder matches the lowest bid, including all other terms and conditions of the bid, then the local vendor will be awarded the contract. If the bids of more than one local vendor are within five percent of the lowest overall bid of a non-local vendor, the local vendor with the lowest bid price will be given the first opportunity to match the lowest overall bid. If this local vendor declines to match such bid, then the vendor with the next lowest bid within five percent will be given the opportunity to match the lowest bid. This process will continue with all local vendors having bids within five percent of the lowest overall bid by a non-local vendor. 
(10)	Indebted vendors. No bid shall be accepted nor any purchase made through any local or non-local vendor which owes real or personal, state, county, or school district ad valorem taxes to the county at the time of such sale. 
(Code 2003, § 2-217)
Sec. 2-221. - Procedures for purchases and contracting. 
All purchasing and contracting shall be in accordance with this division and state law and the following: 
(1)	A request or notice of purchase, in accordance with the approved budget, shall be submitted in writing by the department head to the purchasing office of the board of commissioners at least one week prior to the proposed purchase or need for payment. The board of commissioners or its chairperson may request additional information prior to a decision on such matter. 
(2)	The notice or request for purchase shall contain information about the proposed purchase or contract including the name and purpose of the item, the estimated cost, the method of bidding suggested for the purchase requested and the funding line item source. 
(3)	In the cases of bulk purchases or multiple department involvement, then a spokesperson or coordinator from such departments shall be designated by the departments subject to approval of the board of commissioners, and such spokesperson or designee shall coordinate such purchases with the board of commissioners. 
(4)	Depending on the size and nature of the purchase, and other applicable ordinances and policies, the county administrator, after conferring with the chairperson, may authorize the purchase. Otherwise, such purchase shall be referred to the board of commissioners for information and/or decision. 
(5)	All county contracts must be signed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners.
(Code 2003, § 2-218)
Sec. 2-222. - Schedule of purchases and contracts. 
Where reasonably practical, all equipment and capital purchases shall be made on a periodic scheduled basis rather than all at one time. To avoid excessive demand on county revenue, the equipment and capital purchases shall be broken down and purchased over the term of the entire fiscal year. Bulk equipment purchases shall be scheduled so that no more than approximately one-fourth of bulk equipment purchases shall be made within a single quarter. The board of commissioners may specify with any budgeted item or personnel a time for such purchase or employment. 
(Code 2003, § 2-219)
Sec. 2-223. - Approved vendors. 
(a)	The purchasing office shall maintain a file of all qualified vendors who desire to do business with the county, which file shall be maintained according to the nature of goods and materials offered and shall contain a description of the vendors' goods and services. 
(b)	Purchases on behalf of the county shall be made only from the list of approved vendors.
(Code 2003, § 2-220)
Sec. 2-224. - Discretion for certain purchases. 
The purchasing office shall exercise discretion in making purchases where quality as well as price and service are factors for consideration. In circumstances in which brand name items are requisitioned by any department or official, the purchasing office has the authority to determine whether similar products of equal quality are available to the county at a lower price. If so, such products shall be ordered in lieu of the brand name items. 
(Code 2003, § 2-221)
Sec. 2-225. - Purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(a)	Intent and scope. This section is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the county board of commissioners. 
County means the Webster County Board of Commissioners. 
County purchase card, county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30. 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(c)	Designate officials. The county board of commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this section or for any purchases that are not authorized by this section. 
(d)	Card administrator. The board of commissioners shall designate a county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)	Manage county issued purchasing cards and credit cards.
(2)	Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)	Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issue of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)	Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)	Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards.
(6)	Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary.
(7)	Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this section, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)	Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)	Audit and reconcile transactions monthly.
(10)	Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(e)	Use of cards. 
(1)	Authorized purchases. County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this section, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per Month: $3,000.00 
(2)	Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(3)	Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description unit price total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(4)	Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(f)	Review of purchases and audit. Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)	Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: 
All purchases shall have a receipt turned in to the county clerk with a proper purchase order number indicating where the item was purchased and under which budget class the item goes. 
(2)	Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(g)	Violations. 
(1)	An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this section or the user agreement. 
(2)	In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this section may result in: 
a.	A warning;
b.	Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
c.	Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card. 
(3)	Nothing in this section shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. of 12-15-2015(2), §§ I—VII)
Secs. 2-226—2-241. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COURTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-242. - Courthouse hours of operation. 
The hours of operation for the county courthouse are Monday through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 noon and from 12:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m., excepting holidays as recognized and set by the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 10-7-2008)
Secs. 2-243—2-262. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDIGENT DEFENSE SERVICES 

Sec. 2-263. - Application for indigent defense services. 
(a)	Each person lacking the financial ability to provide, for himself, representation in his own defense in criminal proceedings in the county probate and/or magistrate court, and desiring that the county provide such services on his behalf, shall submit an application to the county requesting indigent defense representation and therein set forth the specific information supporting his need for such indigent representation. 
(b)	The application shall be submitted to the county probate and/or magistrate court:
(1)	At such time as the defendant is arrested and processed into jail;
(2)	Upon first appearance of the defendant at any pre-trial hearing; or
(3)	By mail prior to the first hearing of charges levied against said defendant.
(Res. of 2-14-2005, § 1)
Sec. 2-264. - Application fee. 
Each applicant for indigent defense services shall pay an application fee as determined by the county board of commissioners from time to time to the clerk of the probate and/or magistrate court, or to other such persons as may be authorized by the judge of the probate and/or magistrate court, in which indigent representation is being sought. Such fee must be paid at the time the application is submitted. 
(Res. of 2-14-2005, § 2)
Sec. 2-265. - Waiver. 
The fee required by section 2-264 may be waived only upon order of the presiding judge scheduled to hear the case in which the applicant is seeking a waiver of the application fee. The judge may order waiver of the fee only upon a finding by the court that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying the fee would cause hardship to the defendant. The decision of the judge to grant or deny said waiver shall be based upon information provided by the defendant in the "Motion for Waiver of Application Fee" and other such information as may be available and considered by the presiding judge. 
(Res. of 2-14-2005, § 3)
Sec. 2-266. - Transfer of funds. 
Within ten days after the end of each month, the clerks of the courts in receipt of application fees required by section 2-264 shall remit the total of all application fees collected during the previous month to the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 2-14-2005, § 4)
Sec. 2-267. - Accounting of funds. 
The county board of commissioners shall use all necessary accounting functions as necessary to keep an accurate record of such revenues as may be received from the fees required in section 2-264 and of all such expenditures as may be incurred by the provision of indigent defense representation to defendants in the county probate and/or magistrate courts. 
(Res. of 2-14-2005, § 5)
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; county governing authority given power to regulate alcoholic beverages permitting and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., and 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq., and 3-6-60 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-40 et seq., and 3-4-80; local government may authorize issuance license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open container means any container of any alcoholic beverage which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Wholesaler, wholesale dealer and wholesale distributor mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
(b)	The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 (Alcoholic Beverages - Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
(Code 2003, § 6-1)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Sale on election days. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the sale of alcoholic beverages on local election days is authorized and permitted so long as such sales are in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(Code 2003, § 6-2; Res. of 3-2-1990)
State Law reference— Authority of county to prohibit by ordinance the sale of alcoholic beverages on any election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-3. - Open containers in vehicles. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in the county or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated in the county. 
(b)	An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and it is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle. 
(c)	An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(d)	This section shall not apply to any passenger in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation or in the living quarters of a motor home or house trailer. 
(e)	Any person who violates this section shall be punished as is provided for misdemeanor violations. 
(Code 2003, § 6-3)
Secs. 4-4—4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local license required for wholesale or retail sales of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40.

Sec. 4-25. - Compliance with law. 
No person shall engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the county without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this chapter. In addition to the rules and regulations set out in this chapter, each licensee doing business in the county under this article shall comply with all state laws, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits in the state, and any violation of such laws, rules and regulations shall subject such licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his retail alcoholic beverages license and also shall subject such licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 6-31)
Sec. 4-26. - Residency. 
No retail alcoholic beverages license shall be granted to any person unless such person is of legal age and has been a resident of the county for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. The same requirements apply for a corporation. 
(Code 2003, § 6-32)
Sec. 4-27. - Application. 
(a)	Application for a retail alcoholic beverages license shall be made on forms furnished by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	In addition to the completion and submission of application forms as required by the board of commissioners, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
(c)	All applications for a retail alcoholic beverages license shall be presented in person.
(Code 2003, § 6-33)
Sec. 4-28. - Bond. 
Before any retail alcoholic beverages license is granted, the applicant must post with the board of commissioners, along with his application, a personal performance bond; such bond shall be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the board of commissioners after a hearing is held by the board of commissioners after a three-day written notice is given the violator. Such bond shall be payable to the county in an amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time, shall be approved by the board of commissioners and shall be executed in a form to be furnished. 
(Code 2003, § 6-34)
Sec. 4-29. - Notice of application. 
A notice of each application for an alcoholic beverages license shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation within the county once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the board of commissioners that the application is to be acted upon. 
(Code 2003, § 6-35)
Sec. 4-30. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a retail alcoholic beverages license shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk, and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license. Such fee shall accompany the application and shall be either in cash or certified check. 
(Code 2003, § 6-36)
State Law reference— Payment of license fees for manufacture, sales, etc., of alcoholic beverages required; amount, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-42, 3-5-43. 
Sec. 4-31. - Character of applicant. 
(a)	Any applicant for a retail alcoholic beverages license must be of good character, and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character or such application will not be considered. Corporation applicants shall be of good business reputation. The standards upon which the board of commissioners may base a determination of the applicant's character may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	A person found by the board of commissioners to have been guilty of the violation of any felony under federal or state law; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the renewal of licenses existing on the date of adoption for the ordinance from which this provision was derived, or to subsequent renewals thereof, except as to violations occurring after the passage of such date; 
(2)	A person who has been convicted of the violation of any federal or state law or regulation respecting the manufacture, possession or sale of any alcoholic beverage or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation; 
(3)	A person who is the previous holder of an alcoholic beverage license and is, in the judgment and discretion of the board of commissioners, an unfit person to have a license because of the manner in which he conducted business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law or regulation relating to such business; 
(4)	Where any alcohol license has been revoked or suspended, no further alcohol license shall be issued to the holder of such revoked or suspended license for a period of 12 months from the date of the revocation or suspension; 
(5)	For a location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, no further alcohol license shall be issued at such location for a period of 12 months from the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(6)	For a partnership, if any member of the partnership would be disqualified under this section; or 
(7)	For a corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof would be disqualified under this section. 
(b)	No applicant for a license who has a criminal record, except minor traffic offenses, shall be granted a license. 
(c)	The board of commissioners, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or the proposed location of the business. If, in the board's judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(Code 2003, § 6-37)
Sec. 4-32. - Location restricted. 
No retail alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school grounds or college campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, as provided by law. Each application for a retail alcoholic beverages license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. 
(Code 2003, § 6-39; Ord. of 1-13-2009)
Sec. 4-33. - Term of license; renewal. 
A retail alcoholic beverages license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and renewable each year thereafter so long as the licensee has not violated any of the rules contained under this article, or state law, for the preceding calendar year license. If violations have occurred, the board of commissioners reserves the right to refuse to renew the license solely at the discretion of the board. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next subsequent calendar year must remit the requisite fee the following year before December 15 of the preceding year. 
(Code 2003, § 6-40)
Sec. 4-34. - Separate license for separate place of business. 
A separate retail alcoholic beverages license shall be required for each place of business. 
(Code 2003, § 6-41)
Sec. 4-35. - Restrictions for building to be used. 
No retail alcoholic beverages license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of such building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the county, the regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector, if the county employs an inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located. Each applicant for a retail alcoholic beverages license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(Code 2003, § 6-42)
Sec. 4-36. - Manner of sale. 
All licensed retailers shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken package only and shall sell no package containing less than one-half pint. 
(Code 2003, § 6-43)
Sec. 4-37. - Consumption on premises. 
(a)	No beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in a place of business.
(b)	All nightclubs and bars operating with a legal license within the county shall not be subject to subsection (a) of this section concerning consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or to any other provision contained under this chapter as it pertains to the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or having an open container. It is expressly understood that nightclubs and bars have the right to allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises so long as they are properly licensed. 
(Code 2003, § 6-44)
Sec. 4-38. - Locale of sale. 
No retailer shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in such retailer's place of business. 
(Code 2003, § 6-45)
Sec. 4-39. - Hours, days of operation. 
(a)	No retailer who opens his place of business on the days listed hereinafter in this section shall sale or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages at any of the following times but it shall be permissible for said retailer to remain open for business if said retailer offers items for sale other than alcoholic beverages excluding package stores which are expressly prohibited from opening on any of the following dates or times: 
(1)	At any time on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day or Sundays; or
(2)	At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the board of commissioners. 
(b)	In addition, all licensed retail alcoholic beverage establishments that sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises are expressly prohibited from being open on Saturdays after 12:00 midnight. 
(Code 2003, § 6-46; Res. of 5-12-2003, § 1(I))
Sec. 4-40. - Sales to certain persons prohibited. 
No retailer shall give, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is under the age of 21 years, or who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to such retailer. At any time, proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older shall be considered the only legal proof of age which would relieve a person making a sale from responsibility thereof. For purposes of this section, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under state law. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(Code 2003, § 6-47)
State Law reference— Furnishing alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 4-41. - Storage of alcoholic beverages. 
No licensed retailer shall keep any alcoholic beverages stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the county, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by him is stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A retailer shall keep no inventory or stock of alcoholic beverages at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business his storage space for alcoholic beverages shall be immediately adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business. 
(Code 2003, § 6-49)
Sec. 4-42. - Transfer prohibited. 
No retail alcoholic beverages license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. If a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his license to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 6-50)
Sec. 4-43. - Notice, knowledge of article provisions. 
All holders of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall keep a copy of this article in his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee or his agents selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in any violation of this article, the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Code 2003, § 6-51)
Sec. 4-44. - Availability for inspection. 
The business premises of the holder of a retail alcoholic beverages license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Code 2003, § 6-52)
Sec. 4-45. - False statements. 
The making of any statement on an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of such license. 
(Code 2003, § 6-53)
Sec. 4-46. - Employment of minors. 
No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed under this article. It shall not be prohibited for a minor to work in a place which sells alcoholic beverages such as a grocery store, convenience store, or other type of establishment which sells alcoholic beverages for consumption off premises. The prohibition against those under 21 years of age working at a place which sells alcoholic beverages applies only to package liquor stores, nightclubs, and bars. 
(Code 2003, § 6-54)
Sec. 4-47. - Prohibited activities. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, slot machines, lotteries or tickets or chances, except all lottery tickets and lottery games produced and approved by the state lottery, in any premises licensed under this article, or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensed retailer's place of business or in any room adjoining such place of business, owned, leased or controlled by the licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Code 2003, § 6-55)
Sec. 4-48. - Display. 
Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which they were issued. 
(Code 2003, § 6-56)
Sec. 4-49. - Violations, subject to revocation and punishment. 
Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this article shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 6-57)
Secs. 4-50—4-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 4-72. - Malt beverage excise tax; imposition; collection. 
(a)	There is imposed and levied a specific tax upon all retail dealers in malt beverages within the county limits as follows: 
(1)	Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)	Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)	Each distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages to any retail dealer in the county shall collect the excise tax as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and shall remit the tax to the county not later than the tenth of the month following collection. Each monthly remittance will be accompanied by invoice copies of all sales or deliveries to all retailers in the county for resale in the county, together with the sworn affidavit of such distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer, that the attached invoices are true, correct and complete. 
(Code 2003, § 6-91)
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 4-73. - Wine excise tax; imposition; collection. 
(a)	In addition to the annual retail wine license fee, there is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of a liter which shall be paid to the board of commissioners on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the county. The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the board of commissioners by the wholesale distributors on all wine sold to retailers in the county. Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering wine to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which the tax has not been paid. 
(c)	Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the board of commissioners a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the county on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 2003, § 6-92)
State Law reference— Authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-74. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall submit a return required by this article which is false or fraudulent, or who shall assist any person to evade the payment of any license tax provided in this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Code 2003, § 6-93)
Sec. 4-75. - Retailers' records. 
All retail dealers in alcoholic beverages, and all persons selling alcoholic beverages at retail, shall keep a complete and correct record of all purchases of alcoholic beverages, and shall require all persons from whom they purchase alcoholic beverages to furnish and deliver to them, at the time of delivery of such beverages, a correct invoice of purchase, which invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of six months from the date of purchase. Such invoices and all records of retailers of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the county. All records of purchase shall be kept a period of at least three years from the date of such purchase or sale before being destroyed. 
(Code 2003, § 6-94)
Sec. 4-76. - Possession of untaxed beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any alcoholic beverages on which such tax has not been paid. 
(Code 2003, § 6-95)
Sec. 4-77. - Compensation of wholesaler. 
Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of such tax. 
(Code 2003, § 6-96)
Sec. 4-78. - Monthly summary of sales. 
Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the board of commissioners a summary of all purchase invoices for alcoholic beverages sold to each retailer in the county on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 2003, § 6-97)
Sec. 4-79. - Distilled spirits excise tax. 
(a)	In addition to the annual retail alcoholic beverages license fee, there is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink computed at the rate of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverages. 
(b)	The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. 
(Code 2003, § 6-98)
State Law reference— Authority of county to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-131. 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any living thing other than a plant or a human being. 
Animal control officer means any employee of the county duly designated as an animal control officer by the board of commissioners to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Confined means restricted by a fence or leash to the premises of the owner or custodian at all times or merely on the property under the control of the owner or custodian whereby the animal shall not be permitted to leave those premises unless leashed and accompanied by the owner or custodian. Exempted are hunting dogs while being trained and during the act of hunting. 
Fowl means a bird of any kind. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons and/or animals independently or upon command, and any dog which, while not so trained, has a known propensity to attack persons or animals and is used for the purpose of providing security to any person or premises. 
Health department means the county health department. 
Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine, or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, and other grazing animals. 
Nuisance animal means any animal which: 
(1)	Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
(2)	Attacks other animals;
(3)	Trespasses on school grounds, recreational areas or parks;
(4)	Is repeatedly at large;
(5)	Damages private or public property;
(6)	Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion; or
(7)	Constitutes a nuisance as the term is defined by state law.
Owner means any person having a right of property in any animal; who keeps or harbors any animal or has responsibility for its care; who permits any animal to remain on or about the premises owned, possessed or occupied by him; who voluntarily abandons an animal; or who runs an animal away after possessing or owning it. 
Rabies certificate means a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian bearing a license number, ownership, name, address, breed, color and sex of animal, which shall be issued for each animal vaccinated. The date of the last vaccination of such animal shall be clearly stated on such certificate, and a copy of such certificate shall be sent by such veterinarian to the health department. 
Running at large means the conduct of any animal, other than a hunting dog while hunting, not confined by its owner or keeper within walls or a fence of proper design, controlled by a leash, or kept in some manner as to keep it from coming in contact with members of the public. 
Vaccinate and inoculate mean the injection of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian into the proper site of an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Biological Control Section, license number and approval stamped on the label of the container and having been approved by the state department of human resources. 
Vaccine means an injectable material containing killed or live attenuated rabies virus, licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Biological Control Section, and approved by the state department of human resources. The vaccine used for the purpose of this chapter shall be stored at the temperature prescribed on the package label. An outdated vaccine shall not be used. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a valid license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in any state of the United States or any province of Canada. 
Vicious animal means an animal which has, without provocation, attacked and bitten a person or other animal. 
(Code 2003, § 10-1)
State Law reference— Definition of livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-2(1). 
Sec. 6-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by the county. The animal control officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be deemed reasonably necessary to carry out the duties as referred to in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at any reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating suspected violations of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 10-2)
Sec. 6-3. - Animal control officer. 
(a)	The chairman shall be responsible for the appointment and removal of the animal control officer, with the advice and consent of the board of commissioners as provided for by the Charter. The animal control officer shall be subject to the chairman's control and direction. The animal control officer will be an employee of the board of commissioners and/or other employee of the county duly designated as an animal control officer to enforce the rules and regulations of this chapter. The animal control officer shall also serve as the dog control officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22. 
(b)	The following duties of the animal control officer will include:
(1)	Investigating and maintaining a record of animal bites in the county.
(2)	Providing for proper confinement of an animal involved in a bite; or if the animal is dead or killed, immediate notification of the health department. 
(3)	Enforcing proper disposition of animals exposed to known rabid animals.
(4)	Providing stray animal pickup and impoundment.
(5)	Other related duties as stated in this chapter or as ordered by the board of commissioners.
(Code 2003, § 10-3)
Sec. 6-4. - Interference with the animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful to resist, interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control officer or any person charged with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, in the performance of any duties imposed by this chapter, nor shall any person seek to release or remove any animal captured in the animal control department's humane traps or impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Damaging or removing of the department's traps is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 2003, § 10-4)
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-6. 
Sec. 6-5. - Violations of chapter. 
Whenever it has been determined that any provision of this chapter has been violated, prior to filing a warrant or accusation pertaining to such violation, the appropriate authority may serve the owner of the premises on which the violation has occurred with a copy of this chapter, provide such owner with written notice of the violation, and allow such owner a reasonable time as determined by the appropriate authority or his representative, but not exceeding 30 days, in order to permit such owner to avoid prosecution by correcting the condition constituting the violation. For purposes of this chapter, the appropriate official includes an official of the county health department, the animal control officer or a member of the sheriff's department. 
(Code 2003, § 10-5)
Sec. 6-6. - Penalty. 
(a)	Whenever by this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided by section 1-19. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter. 
(b)	Any person, owner or custodian of an animal who is convicted of a third offense under the provisions of this chapter shall be prohibited from owning, keeping or harboring any animal in the county as long as residency in the county is maintained. Should that person leave the county, upon his return, the same restriction shall apply. 
(Code 2003, § 10-6)
Sec. 6-7. - Animals constituting a nuisance—Determination. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of an animal or fowl to permit, whether willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, such animal or fowl to commit a public nuisance by barking, whining, howling, or making other objectionable noises; by chasing or running after vehicles or persons; by destroying or damaging property of another; by causing annoyance to a neighboring residence and interfering with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the property; or by doing any other thing which is so offensive as to create a nuisance. 
(Code 2003, § 10-7)
Sec. 6-8. - Same—Abatement. 
Upon a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction that any animal constitutes a public nuisance within the definition of this chapter, the court may order the owner or custodian to abate the nuisance by permanently removing the animal from the county, or by whatever other means the court deems reasonably likely to abate the nuisance. If the owner or custodian fails to abide by such order, the court, after hearing, may order that the animal be destroyed by the owner, under humane conditions, at a veterinarian's office or by surrender to the humane society for disposal. 
(Code 2003, § 10-8)
Sec. 6-9. - Same—Impoundment authorized. 
Should any owner or custodian of an animal or fowl fail, upon proper notice of not less than seven days, to abate a nuisance created by such animal or fowl, or fail to take the necessary steps to provide adequate confinement or properly care for the animal, the animal control officer shall be empowered to impound such animal or fowl under the terms and provisions of article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 10-9)
Sec. 6-10. - Vicious animals and guard dogs. 
(a)	Muzzling or caging. No owner or custodian of an animal, having been notified of such animal's viciousness by the animal control officer and/or health department, or having knowledge of such viciousness, shall permit such animal to leave his property unless: 
(1)	The animal is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2)	The animal is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or
(3)	The animal is a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)	Reports. All reports of vicious animals shall be made to the county board of health and/or the animal control department. 
(c)	Posting of notice. It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant or custodian of property upon which or within which a vicious dog is located to conspicuously and permanently post a notice on the outside of the property stating: "Warning—Bad Dog." The letters shall be one inch or larger. In the case of a building, notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance and exit. In the case of a general enclosure in which a guard dog is located, the notices shall be conspicuously posted at every entrance and exit throughout the enclosure. 
(Code 2003, § 10-10)
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 6-11. - Keeping of dogs and cats. 
No person shall raise or keep, or permit to be raised or kept, on premises that he owns or controls any dog or cat, unless: 
(1)	Each part of the premises of which such an animal has access is at least 50 feet from the nearest occupied dwelling house or business establishment of another person; and at least ten feet from any boundary or property line. 
(2)	Cages or other shelters for such animals are kept clean.
(3)	Pens and other enclosures are well drained.
(Code 2003, § 10-11)
Sec. 6-12. - Keeping horses, livestock and other animals. 
(a)	The keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, or similar fowl or animals shall be prohibited except under the following conditions: 
(1)	Any housing or enclosure used by such animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. 
(2)	Horse stables (not enclosures or fences) shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner, unless the owner of the adjacent building and the health officer give permission for a lesser distance. 
(3)	Such animals or fowl shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner: 
a.	Horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats or similar animals .....200 feet 
b.	Swine (fewer than four) .....300 feet 
c.	Swine (four or more) .....1,000 feet 
d.	Dogs (four or more) .....100 feet 
e.	Rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters and similar animals (five or more) .....50 feet 
f.	Chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons and similar fowl (more than 100) .....1,000 feet 
(4)	Animals and fowl not specifically mentioned in this chapter shall be kept at minimum distances deemed reasonable and necessary by the health officer or animal control officer. 
(5)	All animals or fowl, except dogs in areas where confinement of dogs under the rabies control regulations does not apply, and cats shall be kept in adequate enclosures or tethered. 
(b)	Diseased animals or fowl which might infect healthy animals or cause a menace to the public health shall be isolated or destroyed as the health officer or district health director deems necessary. 
(c)	In the case of bona fide licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, stockyards, poultry houses and similar commercial establishments, the health officer may modify the requirements of this section where undue hardship would result from their strict enforcement. 
(d)	These rules and regulations established by this section shall not apply to any existing animal or livestock facility before the adoption of this Code. These facilities are specifically grandfathered in and are not regulated as to distance or numbers as contained in this section. These existing facilities are, however, subject to the health and sanitary requirements contained in subsections (a)(1) and (b) of this section. This grandfather clause shall cease to grant this exception upon the termination of the livestock or animal facility on the properties which are considered grandfathered under this section. 
(Code 2003, § 10-12)
Sec. 6-13. - Commercial livestock operations. 
No livestock operation which confines hogs, chickens, goats, cows, large birds such as emus, ostriches, or the like, buffalo, or any other large livestock operation shall be conducted unless such facility is a minimum of 1,000 feet from any existing home. This section shall not apply to any type of facility existing as of the effective date of this Code, and such existing facility shall be grandfathered in and not subject to this regulation. Any facility which has more than five of the animals identified in section 6-12(a)(3), except chickens, in which the minimum number of chickens being raised which will cause this section to take effect shall be 50 or more chickens. 
(Code 2003, § 10-13)
Sec. 6-14. - General care and feeding. 
Livestock within the county, excluding dogs, cats, chickens, rabbits, and other normally described household pets, shall be adequately confined by a fence, leash or other appropriate measure, to the premises of the owner or custodian at all times, which confinement shall be clean and provide adequate and safe food, water, exercise space and protection from the weather. The animal shall not be permitted to leave those premises unless leashed and accompanied by the owner or custodian or enclosed within a vehicle, cage, or other suitable container so as to prevent escape, and shall not be permitted to run loose on the property of others nor on public streets, alleys, beaches, parks, picnic areas, recreation areas, and/or public sites at any time. This section shall not apply to those animals actively engaged in animal shows, exhibitions, or field trials, or while hunting or training during hunting season as prescribed by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 2003, § 10-14)
Sec. 6-15. - Animal waste. 
An owner of any animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal on public walks, recreation areas, or private property not belonging to the animal owner. No such person shall allow such waste to accumulate in pens or yards so that it becomes a public nuisance. 
(Code 2003, § 10-15)
Sec. 6-16. - Livestock. 
No owner or custodian of livestock shall knowingly permit such livestock to run at large or stray upon any public roads of the county or on any private property not belonging to such owner or custodian unless by permission of the owner of such property. 
(Code 2003, § 10-16)
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-3. 
Sec. 6-17. - Dangerous dog control act. 
The state law regulating dangerous dogs is adopted in its entirety. 
(Code 2003, § 10-17)
State Law reference— Dangerous dog control law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 6-18. - Hunting dogs. 
Deer dogs are allowed to run in wooded areas, where permitted by the owner of the property, during deer hunting season, as established by federal and/or state laws and regulations. All hunting dogs shall bear tags containing the owner's name, address and phone number, and shall be vaccinated in accordance with state rabies shot regulations. All hunting dogs used in hunting games shall be properly supervised. 
(Code 2003, § 10-18)
Sec. 6-19. - City designated bird sanctuary. 
(a)	The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests within the corporate limits of the city. Provided, however, if vandal birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, such authority is authorized to approve the disposal of such birds. 
(c)	Any individual may prevent any such vandal birds from destroying crops of or fruit without authority of health officer. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(2))
Sec. 6-20. - Animal and fowl—Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person having control of any wild or domestic animal or fowl to permit the same to run at large upon any street or public ground of the city or upon the property of any other person. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(2))
Sec. 6-21. - Barns, stables, hog pens; location; consent of neighbors. 
(a)	It shall be a violation of this section to build any barn, stable or hog pen within 50 feet of any of the streets of the city, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)	Any person desiring to build a barn, stable or hog pen within 50 feet of any of the streets of the city shall first secure from all the adjoining property owners and from those owning property on the opposite side of the street 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(2))
Secs. 6-22—6-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; inoculation of animals against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5.

Sec. 6-40. - Vaccination of animals. 
Every owner of an animal three months of age or older that requires a rabies vaccine shall cause such animal to be vaccinated against rabies. No person shall vaccinate any animal against rabies who is not a licensed veterinarian. The first vaccination using an attenuated vaccine, or kill vaccine, shall be administered and is good for 12 months only. Thereafter, vaccination shall be required at least every three years when a live attenuated vaccine is used. If the health department's file copy of the certificate of vaccination is unattainable, the owner's or the veterinarian's copy of the same may be substituted. 
(Code 2003, § 10-51)
Sec. 6-41. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)	Evidence of vaccination shall consist of a certificate of vaccination with each item answered, prepared in triplicate and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine. 
(b)	Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination and vaccination tags, providing one copy of the certificate to the animal's owner, one copy to the health department, and retaining one copy for his files. 
(c)	The certificates of vaccination furnished to the health department shall be maintained in an orderly indexed file for a period of not less than three years. 
(d)	Out-of-state visitors and non-county residents with animals must comply with local animal control regulations while within the county. Current rabies vaccination certificates from other states or territories will be honored. 
(Code 2003, § 10-52)
Sec. 6-42. - Vaccination tags. 
(a)	In addition to the issuance of the certificate of vaccination as stated in section 6-41, the person authorized to issue the certificate shall also furnish to the owner of the vaccinated animal a serially numbered tag bearing the same number and year as the certificate. The tag shall be securely attached to the collar or harness worn by the vaccinated animal, which collar or harness shall be provided by the owner of the vaccinated animal. 
(b)	No person shall remove a vaccination tag from any animal's collar without the consent of the owner or custodian, nor shall any person attach a vaccination tag to any animal for which it was not issued. 
(c)	In lieu of a cat wearing a vaccination tag, the owner of a cat shall be required, upon request of the county health department or animal control officer, to provide a copy of the animal's certificate of vaccination as proof of current vaccination. 
(Code 2003, § 10-53)
Sec. 6-43. - Public clinics. 
(a)	The animal control officer, or other designee of the board of commissioners, may operate or cause to be operated county-organized clinics for the vaccination of animals against rabies. 
(b)	The vaccination fee for such clinics, including the administering and cost of the vaccine, the issuance of certificates and tags, and other necessary expenses shall be predetermined in advance of a clinic. Public notice of the scheduled clinic shall include the day, hour, place and fees. 
(c)	In emergencies or during quarantine, the 15 days' notice prior to the clinic shall not apply. 
(Code 2003, § 10-54)
Sec. 6-44. - Quarantine. 
(a)	Where rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department may designate an area within which quarantine shall be maintained as provided by the terms of this article. Every such animal shall thereupon be immediately confined to the premises designated by the health department, whether or not the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(b)	No animal shall be removed from or brought into a quarantined area without written permission of the health department. The application for such permission shall be in writing, filed with the health department, stating the reason for movement and the location at which the animal will be confined after movement. 
(c)	Where an animal has been suspected of having rabies or has rabies symptoms, the area or premises where such animals are kept shall be posted by the health department with signs to read as follows: "Rabies Suspected" or "Rabies, Keep From Animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises, printed with type that is easily legible and shall remain on the premises for the duration of the quarantine. 
(d)	Persons living within a quarantine area having in their possession an animal subject to rabies or to the terms of this article shall be given written notice of the quarantine, the animals subject thereto, and an order to confine their animals so subject to the premises of the owner, together with any other information the health department deems advisable. Such notice shall be signed by a duly authorized agent of the health department. 
(e)	The violation by any person of any quarantine order issued by the health officer shall be a violation of this article, and the person so violating shall be subject to all the penalties prescribed by law for a violation. 
(Code 2003, § 10-55)
Sec. 6-45. - Examination of heads. 
When a rabies exposure has occurred and been reported, then the heads of all domestic animals and of all wild animals suspected of having rabies before their death or having rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the state laboratory for examination. 
(Code 2003, § 10-56)
Secs. 6-46—6-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CRUELTY PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4.

Sec. 6-64. - Abandonment. 
(a)	No person, owner or custodian of an animal shall release such animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of abandoning that animal. 
(b)	No person, owner or custodian of an animal shall abandon a dead animal on any private property of another, unless he shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is to be left. 
(c)	No person, owner or custodian of an animal shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place is an approved sanitary landfill or other facility designed for receiving such item and has been designated by the board of commissioners as a public facility for receiving trash or other refuse. 
(Code 2003, § 10-91)
Sec. 6-65. - Cruelty generally. 
(a)	No person shall, by his act, omission, or neglect, cause unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death to any living animal, nor shall any person beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. This section shall not apply to the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food, nor does it apply to any person who hunts wild animals in compliance with the state game and fish laws. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting conduct which is otherwise permitted under the laws of the state or of the United States, including, but not limited to, agricultural, animal husbandry, butchering, food processing, marketing, scientific research, medical, zoological, exhibition, competitive, hunting, trapping, fishing, wildlife management, or pest control practices or the authorized practice of veterinary medicine nor to limit in any way the authority or duty of the department of agriculture, department of natural resources, any county board of health, any law enforcement officer, dog, animal, or rabies control officer, humane society, veterinarian, or private landowner protecting his property. 
(Code 2003, § 10-92)
Sec. 6-66. - Exceptions. 
(a)	No person shall harm, maim, or kill any animal or attempt to do so, except that a person may: 
(1)	Defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
(2)	Kill any animal causing injury or damage to livestock or poultry.
(b)	The killing of animals under the circumstances of subsection (a) of this section shall be done as quickly and humanely as possible. 
(Code 2003, § 10-93)
Sec. 6-67. - Defense against vicious animals. 
No person shall willfully or maliciously kill; maim; disfigure; torture; beat with a stick, chain, club or other object; mutilate, burn, or scald with any substance; drive over with any vehicle or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious animals. 
(Code 2003, § 10-94)
Sec. 6-68. - Poison. 
No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that such substance may be liable to be eaten by any animal. This section does not apply to persons exposing to his own property common rodent poison mixed only with a vegetable substance. 
(Code 2003, § 10-95)
Sec. 6-69. - Shelter. 
No owner, custodian, or caretaker shall refuse to provide any animal in his charge or custody with proper food, drink, shade, shelter, space and care, or to carry any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. Any animal habitually kept outside shall be provided with a structurally sound, weatherproof enclosure, large enough to accommodate the animal, except this provision shall not pertain to livestock, cows, hogs, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, bison, buffalos, emus, ostriches, and other typical livestock which is raised for agricultural purposes and not intended as pets. 
(Code 2003, § 10-96)
Sec. 6-70. - Diseased, crippled animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep or harbor any animal which is infected with any dangerous disease or any incurable, painfully crippling condition. The animal control officer may impound such diseased or painfully crippled animal, and all such animals impounded may be destroyed humanely as soon thereafter as possible. Upon the destruction of such animal, the animal control officer shall not be required to give any notice. This subsection shall not be construed to include veterinary hospitals or animals under veterinary care. 
(b)	No owner or custodian of any animal shall fail to provide proper veterinary care to any animal when needed to prevent suffering. 
(Code 2003, § 10-97)
Sec. 6-71. - Protective custody. 
Whenever the animal control officer finds that any animal is or will be without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or other voluntary absence of the owner or person responsible for the care of such animal, the animal control officer may impound such animal for protective care and in the event of injury or illness, the animal control officer may take such action as called for to prevent undue pain and suffering, including immediate euthanasia of the animal. 
(Code 2003, § 10-98)
Secs. 6-72—6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 6-101. - Authority to confiscate and impound. 
Any animal, confined or otherwise, which is found in violation of this chapter shall be confiscated and impounded by the animal control officer. 
(Code 2003, § 10-131)
Sec. 6-102. - Confinement of animals at large. 
Unrestrained dogs which are creating a nuisance, nuisance animals and animals found running at large shall be taken by the animal control officer and impounded in the shelter and confined in a humane manner. 
(Code 2003, § 10-132)
Sec. 6-103. - Pursuit of animals. 
The animal control officer may pursue an animal onto private property, including the owner's or custodian's, but not into a human dwelling, to evoke capture of an animal subject to impoundment under this article. 
(Code 2003, § 10-133)
Sec. 6-104. - Notice to owner. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer impounding an animal under this article to notify the owner of such animal immediately upon impoundment. Such notice shall state the name and business address of the person impounding the animal, the name and address of the state or local government agency having custody of the animal, a description of the animal, the reason the animal was impounded, and a statement of the time limits for the owner to respond and request a hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.5. The notice shall be provided by personal service or by registered mail, certified mail, or statutory overnight delivery sent to the last known address of the owner. Service of the notice which complies with O.C.G.A. § 9-11-5(b) shall in all cases be sufficient. If the owner of such animal is unknown or cannot be found, service of the notice on the owner shall be made by posting the notice in a conspicuous place at the location where the animal was impounded and by publishing a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. 
(Code 2003, § 10-134)
Sec. 6-105. - Tranquilization. 
Any animal that is found away from the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner will be classified as being unconfined; therefore, it may be shot with a tranquilizer gun by the animal control officer in an attempt to capture the animal. The animal control officer operating the tranquilizer gun and/or the county health department or the board of commissioners shall not be held liable for any injury or death to an animal which might occur from the use of the tranquilizer gun or equipment. 
(Code 2003, § 10-135)
Sec. 6-106. - Biting animals. 
(a)	An animal, whether vaccinated against rabies or not, having bitten a human or other pet animal, shall be quarantined for a period of ten days, at the owner's property or in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer or the rabies control officer. 
(b)	Any animal under quarantine, as stated in subsection (a) of this section, that is not confined by the owner or is running at large shall be immediately impounded by the animal control officer and boarded at the humane society animal shelter until the ten-day period is over. 
(c)	At the time quarantine is ordered by the animal control officer or the rabies control officer, the animal owner or custodian shall sign a home quarantine agreement or submit the animal to the humane society for the ten-day period and pay any fees required. All expenses incurred for boarding the animal for this period of time shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal, unless such bite was provoked, in which event the person provoking the bite shall be responsible for all expenses incurred. 
(d)	An unvaccinated animal bitten by a known rabid animal shall immediately be destroyed under supervision of the animal control officer. Exceptions to this section are as noted by the state department of public health. 
(e)	Any animal, the rabies vaccination of which is current as evidenced by the certificate of vaccination, which is bitten by a known rabid animal, must be revaccinated, confined in a manner approved by the environmental health rabies control officer, an employee of the health department, for a period of 45 days and then released only if no signs of rabies are evident. 
(Code 2003, § 10-136)
Sec. 6-107. - Confinement area. 
The area or facility used to confine any animal in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be subject to the approval of the animal control officer. The confinement area or facility may include an animal shelter, kennel, animal hospital, or other place in the county which provides: 
(1)	Construction and management which will keep the animal dry and clean and will prevent its escape or exposure to the public. 
(2)	Assurance that the animal will have safe and adequate water and food.
(3)	Adequate and clean space for the animal to exercise.
(4)	Protection against excessive heat, cold, and other inclement weather.
(5)	Space, cages, pens, and other necessary equipment to isolate the animal for its protection against injury and infectious disease. 
(6)	A method and procedure for the identification of the animal and the date of its admission to the area. 
(Code 2003, § 10-137)
Sec. 6-108. - Report of bites. 
(a)	Any person bitten by an animal shall be required to immediately notify the animal control officer and/or the health department. 
(b)	The owner or custodian of any animal having signs suggestive of rabies shall confine the animal and immediately notify the animal control officer and the rabies control officer of the state department of health, reporting any information regarding any person bitten or attacked by such animal. 
(c)	The health department or the animal control officer shall report all known cases of rabies in the county to the state department of public health. 
(Code 2003, § 10-138)
Sec. 6-109. - Period of impoundment for dogs and cats. 
Impounded dogs and cats shall be kept for not less than three working days depending upon the physical condition of the animal. Abandoned or severely ill/injured animals may be destroyed immediately at the discretion of the humane society and animal control officer. 
(Code 2003, § 10-139)
Sec. 6-110. - Fees and charges. 
Any owner of or person adopting an impounded animal shall pay such fees and charges as set forth by the humane society or animal shelter. 
(Code 2003, § 10-140)
Sec. 6-111. - Deadline for payment of license taxes and fees after impoundment; adoption or euthanasia. 
Any dog or cat impounded under this article, of which its owner, possessor, or representative shall not come forward within five working days after the impoundment and pay the fees specified in this article, shall be put up for adoption or euthanized in some humane way. 
(Code 2003, § 10-141)
Sec. 6-112. - Redemption. 
(a)	Any person reclaiming an animal impounded under this article must supply appropriate proof of proper rabies vaccination or pay a vaccination fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file at the animal shelter. 
(b)	Any animal not reclaimed by an owner or custodian within five working days becomes the property of the animal shelter and may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized at the discretion of the animal shelter. 
(c)	In addition to, or in lieu of impounding an animal found to be in violation of this chapter, the animal control officer may issue to the known owner of such animal a notice of ordinance violation. Such notice shall impose a penalty as provided in section 1-19 that may be paid in full in 72 hours. Failure to satisfy the penalty shall result in a magistrate citation. 
(Code 2003, § 10-142)
Sec. 6-113. - Euthanasia. 
When any animal, for which its owner is unknown or incapable of being located, is impounded subject to the provisions of this article, and such animal is injured or otherwise in a state of suffering, it shall thereupon be the duty of the animal control officer to obtain the opinion of the humane society as to the extent of such suffering or injury to such animal. When such opinion is that euthanasia should be performed, it shall then become the duty of the animal control officer to authorize such euthanasia. If the owner is located, it shall be done at the owner's expense. 
(Code 2003, § 10-143)
Secs. 6-114—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOGS 

Sec. 6-131. - Actions constituting nuisance. 
(a)	No person shall allow a dog of which he has custody or control to remain on his property or premises if the same shall constitute a nuisance as the term is defined by the law of this state. For purposes of this section, it shall constitute a nuisance per se for such animal to bark, howl, whine, or emit any noises whatsoever in a continuous manner for a period of one hour or longer so as to disturb any occupant of any adjacent or adjoining property within hearing distance of such animal. 
(b)	A dog nuisance is further defined as a dog that bites, threatens to bite; or damages the private property of others. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(2))
Sec. 6-132. - Female dogs in heat. 
No person owning or having custody of any female dog shall permit such female dog off the premises of the owner or person having control of such dog when such dog shall be in heat unless the same is under control and attached to a leash as hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(2))
Sec. 6-133. - Authority to dispose of dangerous dogs. 
The sheriff shall immediately dispose of all dangerous, vicious and mad dogs found within the city, whether they shall be tagged or not. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(2))
Sec. 6-134. - Rabies. 
If a dog is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, such dog shall promptly be confined by a chain to the owner's premises. The owner shall then immediately notify the city clerk of the fact that his dog has been exposed to rabies and at the discretion of the city clerk or other official designated by the governing body, the dog shall be removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital and there placed under observation for a period of two weeks. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog to have rabies to allow such dog to be taken off his premises or beyond the limits of the city without first notifying the county health department and obtaining permission from the governing body. 
(2)	Whenever a dog is ascertained to be rabid, notification of same shall be made to any police officer of the city, who shall cause such dog to be removed from the city and immediately [disposed of]. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(2))
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Self-inspection by plumbers and utility contractors. 
The county is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the county. 
(Code 2003, § 14-1)
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 8-21. - Adopted. 
(a)	Generally. The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i), are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, and shall be enforced by the county: 
(1)	International Building Code (IBC), 2006 edition;
(2)	National Electrical Code (NEC), 2011 edition;
(3)	International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2006 edition;
(4)	International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2006 edition;
(5)	International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2006 edition;
(6)	International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC), 2006 edition;
(7)	International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2009 edition; and
(8)	International Fire Code (IFC), 2006 edition.
(b)	Appendices. The following appendices of the codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this subsection: 
(1)	International Building Code (IBC), 2006 edition: Appendix;
(2)	International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2006 edition: Appendix;
(3)	International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2006 edition: Appendix;
(4)	International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2006 edition: Appendix;
(5)	International Fire Code (IFC), 2006 edition: Appendix;
(6)	National Electrical Code, 2011 edition: Appendix; and
(7)	International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC), 2006 edition: Appendix. 
(c)	Additional codes. The latest edition of the following codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are adopted by reference as though they were fully copied in this subsection: 
(1)	Standard Housing Code, including chapter 1, Administration, and Appendix;
(2)	Standard Swimming Pool Code, including chapter 1, Administration;
(3)	Standard Excavation and Grading Code, including chapter 1, Administration;
(4)	Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, including chapter 1, Administration;
(5)	Standard Amusement Device Code, including chapter 1, Administrative, and Appendix;
(6)	International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2006 edition; and
(7)	International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2006 edition.
(Code 2003, § 14-31)
Sec. 8-22. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential, unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
(Code 2003, § 14-32)
Sec. 8-23. - Enforcement. 
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated county official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
(Code 2003, § 14-33)
Sec. 8-24. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(b)	A conviction of any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall automatically suspend the business license of the offending contractor. The license may be reinstated by an application to the board of commissioners upon a showing of good cause. 
(Code 2003, § 14-34)
Sec. 8-25. - Permit and inspection fees. 
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 14-35)
Sec. 8-26. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)	Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. 
(b)	Business licenses or the right to inhabit a dwelling or rent a dwelling for inhabitants by a tenant shall not be allowed until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the county board of health. 
(Code 2003, § 14-36)
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.l. 
Secs. 8-27—8-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 8-56. - Required. 
Prior to the erection of any building of any nature or an addition or alteration to any building in which the cost will exceed more than $300.00 within the county, a building permit must be acquired from the office of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 14-71)
Sec. 8-57. - Application. 
The application for the building permit shall be filed with the board of commissioners and disclose the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant.
(2)	The address of the location of the building that is to be constructed, or the address of the building being repaired. 
(3)	The size and estimated cost of the construction or building alteration or repairs.
(4)	Sewage certification; verification of adequate sewage disposal system.
(Code 2003, § 14-72)
Sec. 8-58. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to issue the applicant a building permit at no cost. 
(Code 2003, § 14-73)
Sec. 8-59. - Display. 
All building permits issued pursuant to this article shall be posted on the property for which issued in such manner as to be clearly visible from the front or from the street or roadway. 
(Code 2003, § 14-74)
Sec. 8-60. - Utility connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any electric, gas or water utility company to connect electricity, gas or water to any building under construction unless a building permit has been issued by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 14-75)
Secs. 8-61—8-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3.

Sec. 8-79. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)	Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; 
(2)	Require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; 
(3)	Promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water;
(4)	Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and
(5)	Reduce wastewater flows.
(Code 2003, § 14-111)
Sec. 8-80. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixture means a device that receives water, waste, or both and discharges the water, waste, or both into a drainage system. The term "plumbing fixture" includes a kitchen sink, utility sink, lavatory, bidet, bathtub, shower, urinal, toilet, water closet, or drinking water fountain. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but does not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(b)	The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 (High-efficiency plumbing fixtures) shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
(Code 2003, § 14-112; Ord. of 6-4-1991, § 1)
Sec. 8-81. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article. 
Citations for violations of this article may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Code 2003, § 14-113; Ord. of 6-4-1991, § 6)
Sec. 8-82. - Standards for fixtures. 
(a)	No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 8-84. 
(b)	The standards are as follows:
(1)	A water closet or toilet that:
a.	Is a dual-flush water closet that meets the following standards:
1.	The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.	The toilet meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: 
(i)	American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; and
(ii)	American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006, "Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device"; and 
3.	Is listed to the WaterSense™ Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or
b.	Is a single flush water closet, including gravity, pressure assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 
1.	The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons;
2.	The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 
3.	The toilet must be listed to the WaterSense™ Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification;
(2)	A showerhead that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	A urinal and associated flush valve that:
a.	Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush;
b.	Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; 
c.	For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSense™ specifications for flushing urinals; and
d.	Where non-water urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Non-water urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where non-water urinals are installed they shall have a water distribution line roughed in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 mm) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shutoff valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where non-water urinals are installed, a minimum of one water-supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; 
(4)	A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSense™ High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and 
(5)	A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 2003, § 14-114; Ord. of 6-4-1991, §§ 2, 3)
Sec. 8-83. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 8-82 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the county building official. All toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
(Code 2003, § 14-115; Ord. of 6-4-1991, § 3)
Sec. 8-84. - Exceptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 8-82 for the following: 
(1)	When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)	When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	When units to be installed are:
a.	Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities;
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Toilets for juveniles.
(Code 2003, § 14-116; Ord. of 6-4-1991, § 5)
Secs. 8-85—8-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWER STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Advanced Broadband Collocation Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-1 et seq.; local governing authority may only undertake a limited review of application for collocation or modification of wireless facilities if applicant has satisfied certain statutory requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-4.

Sec. 8-112. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Provide for the appropriate location and development of communications towers and antennas to serve the residents and businesses of the county. 
(2)	Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscaping, screening and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
(3)	Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
(4)	Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas.
(5)	Maximize use of any new and existing communications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the county; provided, however, that the use of shorter towers of a height which does not require lighting under FAA regulations will normally be given preference over the use of taller lighted structures even when the use of unlighted structures may require a larger number of towers to serve the county. 
(6)	Maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers. 
(7)	Encourage and promote the location of new communications towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Code 2003, § 14-151)
Sec. 8-113. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower and antenna structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, church steeples, light poles, flagpoles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers so as not to be readily discernible as an antenna or tower. In order to establish quantitative and qualitative standards for determining that an alternative tower structure is not readily discernible, nine examples (photographs) of such non-readily discernible structures are included in the appendix to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height, when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if such highest point is an antenna. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
Tower owner means and includes the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, antennas or associated equipment as well as any parent or subsidiary companies of such entities. 
(Code 2003, § 14-152)
Sec. 8-114. - Tower restrictions. 
Any tower which is constructed in the county must be constructed in an area which is at least twice as far as the tower to be constructed is tall from any adjoining landowner's property if the adjoining landowner's property consists of any structures, buildings, or dwelling places. The purpose of this restriction is to ensure that no tower is placed directly beside an adjoining landowner's property in such a manner that the tower could either aesthetically affect the value of the adjoining landowner's home site or other structures, and to ensure that the tower poses no risks of striking a structure of any type if it should fall. The adjoining landowner may waive this requirement if a contractual agreement is reached between the tower owner and the adjoining landowner. There is no requirement for the adjoining landowner to make this waiver and it can only be obtained if the adjoining landowner contracts to waiver or voluntarily waives this right. 
(Code 2003, § 14-153)
Chapter 10 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATION 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Applications. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of the Unified Government of Webster County shall submit an application for such license to the county clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(1)	Form of application. Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the county clerk and shall contain the following information: 
a.	Name and home address of the applicant if an individual or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.	Place where the proposed business is to be located;
c.	Kind of business to be carried on;
d.	Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership;
e.	Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation;
f.	Complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the county, state or federal government; 
g.	Such additional information which the county clerk or county board of commissioners may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
(2)	Verification. 
a.	E-Verify affidavit. 
1.	Applicants for a new business license or occupation tax certificate and applicants for renewal of an existing business license or occupation tax certificate must complete and submit with their application an E-Verify affidavit attesting that they have registered for and will use the E-Verify system to check the employment eligibility of their new hires in accordance with federal regulations. 
2.	If the applicants claim that they are a business exempt from the E-Verify requirements, then the applicant must complete and submit an affidavit attesting to the circumstances under which they claim such exemption. 
3.	If required by the county, the applicants must submit with their application further verification of the employment eligibility of their new hires. 
4.	The E-Verify affidavit forms and county's E-Verify user identification number can be obtained from the county offices. 
b.	SAVE affidavit. 
1.	Applicants for a new business license or occupation tax certificate and applicants for renewal of an existing business license or occupation tax certificate must complete and submit with their application a SAVE affidavit attesting that they are eligible to receive public benefits from the county in accordance with federal regulations. For purposes of this subsection, the term "public benefits from the county" includes, but is not limited to, authorization to conduct a commercial enterprise or business within the county, business certificate, business license, business registration, occupational license, occupational tax certificate, or professional license registration of a regulated business. 
2.	If the applicant claims that it is a business exempt from the SAVE system requirements, then the applicant must complete and submit an affidavit attesting to the circumstances under which it claims exemption. 
3.	If required by the county, the applicant must submit with its application further verification of its eligibility to receive public benefits from the county. 
4.	The SAVE system affidavit forms can be obtained from the county offices.
(3)	Payment of fee. Each application shall be accompanied by the amount of the fee chargeable for such license, such amount to be prorated by quarters to the end of the fiscal year. 
a.	The county clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a license, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
b.	Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the county clerk shall refund such a fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the Unified Government of Webster County. 
(4)	Confidentiality of information. All information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter shall be kept in strict confidence by the county clerk, shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the Unified Government of Webster County responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided by state law. 
(5)	False statements. False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license. 
(Code 2003, § 51-1)
Sec. 10-2. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)	Board of commissioners consideration. Upon the receipt of the application, the county clerk shall forward the same to the board of commissioners for consideration and action at its next regularly scheduled public meeting. 
(b)	Limitation of issuance. No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(c)	Issuance of license. Upon the express approval of the board of commissioners, the county clerk shall issue an occupational license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the county clerk. 
(d)	Board of commissioners discretion. The granting of an occupational license under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to governmental regulation any legal right to engage in such business. 
(Code 2003, § 51-2)
Sec. 10-3. - Display of license. 
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the county to keep his license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Code 2003, § 51-3)
Sec. 10-4. - Inspections. 
(a)	Search of premises. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business of occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the county who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)	Testing of material. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the county whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the county requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request. 
(c)	Refusal to allow inspection. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the board of commissioners may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of a licensed business in the county who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection to take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection; provided that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the county, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. 
(Code 2003, § 51-4)
Sec. 10-5. - Termination and renewal of licenses. 
(a)	All annual licenses shall become due on January 1 of each year and shall be declared delinquent if not paid by the following February 15. 
(b)	Any person subject to the license fee imposed by this chapter who shall fail to pay such license fee on or before the due date shall be subject to a penalty of 20 percent of the license fee. 
(c)	Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the county clerk on or after January 1 but no later than February 15 of each calendar year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application and be accompanied by all required fees. 
(d)	An applicant for renewal of a license shall be entitled to a refund of fees tendered if he withdraws his application for renewal prior to the final action on the same by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 51-5)
Sec. 10-6. - Revocation, suspension, etc. 
The board of commissioners, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings may, if it finds this chapter to have been violated by the licensee, his agent or employee, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation or place other conditions thereon as the board of commissioners may deem necessary. 
(Code 2003, § 51-6)
Sec. 10-7. - Change of location. 
In the absence of any provisions to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed, provided ten days' notice is given to the county clerk, and provided that all any building and zoning requirements are complied with. 
(Code 2003, § 51-7)
Sec. 10-8. - Transfer of licenses. 
All licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom they are issued, but in cases where the ownership is changed and both the name of location of the licensed business or occupation are maintained, the board of commissioners may allow the license to be transferred to the new owner. 
(Code 2003, § 51-8)
Sec. 10-9. - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate license shall be issued by the county clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee to the county clerk. The amount of the fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, § 51-9)
Sec. 10-10. - Joint license. 
A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses for which a license is required. 
(Code 2003, § 51-10)
Sec. 10-11. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall conduct a business or occupation without having obtained a license therefor as required by this chapter, or who shall violate any other provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Code 2003, § 51-11)
Sec. 10-12. - Billiard or pool room; video game room; license required. 
(a)	Each person keeping, operating or maintaining a billiard table, pool table, gaming room or similar establishment, for the operation of billiard tables, pool tables, video games, or any other device or table of like character within the corporate limits of the county for use by the public shall be required, before doing so, to obtain a license from the county clerk in the manner specified in this section. 
(1)	An application for issuance or renewal of an occupational license for all or any of the above-described tables or gaming devices in the following form: 
a.	Name and home address of applicant, if an individual, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; and the name and address of the home office of said business if a corporation; 
b.	The name and home address of each officer and each director, if a corporation;
c.	Address or legal location of such business in the county;
d.	The name or trade name to be used;
e.	Kind of business to be carried on;
f.	List any arrests and convictions against the applicant, any partner, principal officer or director of the applicant. 
Any information furnished hereunder shall be kept in confidence and shall not be subject to public inspection and will be utilized solely by the county board of commissioners responsible for issuing of or refusal to license for the Unified Government of Webster County, except as otherwise provided by state law. 
I, the undersigned, certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief, the information contained in this application is true and correct. 

 
(2)	Upon the application for license being approved, the applicant shall pay in advance the license fee which includes one billiard/pool table or one video game to be operated in said business per year or fraction of a year. Additional billiard/pool tables or video games shall be subject to an additional license fee per table. The amounts of the license fee and additional fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(3)	Clear view of premises required. The owner, operator or manager of any such occupational licensed premises hereunder shall not permit said premises to have any screens, shades, partitions, or other devices of like character which shall have the effect of obstructing views through the windows or doors of the place of business where said tables or games are kept. 
(4)	Doors. The doors of any billiard rooms, pool rooms, or video game rooms licensed under this section shall be kept unlocked whenever the tables or machines are in use, or when any person other than the proprietor or his agent is present in such place of business. 
(5)	Gambling. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or managing or any billiard or pool room or gaming room open for public use under this section to allow gambling or betting of any kind to occur upon such premises. The breach of this restriction on gambling shall be a good cause for revocation of any license theretofore issued. 
(6)	No beer, wine, alcohol, or alcoholic spirits of any kind shall be consumed, sold vended, or kept in the same building or the premises adjacent thereto, that is licensed under this section. A breach of this prohibition shall be good cause for the revocation of any license theretofore issued to any such business. 
(7)	The proprietor of any such business nor his agent or employee shall be permitted to pay, give, furnish, or otherwise pay any personal properties, premiums, monies or merchandise with respect to the operation of playing of any games permitted to be licensed hereunder. A breach of this prohibition shall be good cause for the revocation of any license theretofore issued to any such business. 
(8)	Any drinking, consuming, or possessing any alcoholic beverages of any kind on the interior of the premises of any building licensed hereunder shall not be permitted, nor shall any sales or consumption of alcoholic beverages be permitted on the licensed premises or the approaches thereto. A breach of this prohibition shall be good cause for the revocation of any license theretofore issued to any such business. 
(9)	It shall be unlawful to operate a game room other than normal business hours described here as: 

 
(b)	The game tables shall be supervised by an employee of the business at all times when in use. 
(Code 2003, § 51-12)
Sec. 10-13. - Circuses, carnivals and public exhibitions; license required. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means and includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means and includes circuses, menageries, sideshows and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(b)	Fees established. The occupational license fee imposed on each circus, carnival or public exhibition operating within the county limits shall be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(c)	Conditions of issuance. No license under this section shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)	The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival, or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers and other debris, and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public; 
(2)	All rides have been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical and other hazards by the appropriate officers and employees of the county, and adequate safeguards have been placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches and other possible or potential hazards; and 
(3)	The applicant has placed on file with the county clerk a certificate of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for each person, and $300,000.00 for each accident or occurrence. 
(d)	Inspection. It shall be the duty of the county clerk and county sheriff's department to see that proper inspections and patrols are made of the premises used for the activities licensed in this section. 
(Code 2003, § 51-14)
Sec. 10-14. - General contractors. 
To the extent required by state law, all general contractors who contract with the county for any public work shall be required to obtain a performance and payment bond. 
(Code 2003, § 51-15)
Sec. 10-15. - Junk dealers and junkyards; license required. 
Each junk dealer who does business within the county shall be required to obtain a license from the county clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(1)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises or premises means the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this section. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones, wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form, and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but the term "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste, or scraps from the operation of his own business or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
Junk dealer means any person, firm, or corporation or officer, agent, or employee of any person, firm, or corporation, within the county, who engages in the purchase of junk for the purpose of resale or refabrication, or both. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act are to be used for charity. 
(2)	Application. Application for a junkyard or junk dealer license shall be made as provided in this chapter, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
a.	Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each person signing the application, along with the locations of prior establishments; 
b.	Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous five years; 
c.	The name, residence address, and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the application is filed; 
d.	A sketch of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings, and uses; and 
e.	A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the licensed business are or are to be made; a sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators, and walls. 
(3)	General operating requirements. The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
a.	The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition; 
b.	No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes; 
c.	Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees, shall be kept at a reasonable height; 
d.	No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk and is in use in the licensed business; 
e.	No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway, or curb or become scattered or blown off the business premises; 
f.	Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes; 
g.	No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard; 
h.	No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with licensed business on any Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
i.	The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoor) shall be enclosed from public view, except for entrances and exits, by a solid, vertical wall or fence. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting the name of the licensee's business. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business; 
j.	The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by any police officer at any reasonable time; and 
k.	No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance, nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
(4)	Records. Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent-type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any police officer. 
(5)	Stolen goods. Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall, upon demand, produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
(6)	Other requirements. In addition to the requirements of this section, each junk dealer and the owner of each junkyard licensed by the county shall comply with all federal and state statutes, rules, and regulations, and the failure to do so shall subject the licensee to revocation of his license. 
(Code 2003, § 51-16)
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-16. - Insurers' license fees. 
(a)	There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the county in an amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)	For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and, in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee per location for each year. The amount of the additional license fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, § 51-17)
Sec. 10-17. - Insurers' agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 10-16 in an amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time, for each such location within the county. 
(Code 2003, § 51-18)
Sec. 10-18. - Timber harvesting. 
Whereas the purpose of this section is to provide procedures governing persons, firms, businesses, companies and corporations engaged in timber harvesting in the county and to provide for the issuance of permits to such operators to ensure that the county has knowledge of all timber harvesting within the county so that appropriate ad valorem taxes shall be assessed to the owner. 
Notice of timber harvesting: 
Written notice within 48 hours of beginning of timber harvesting operations shall be required of any person or firm harvesting timber for each separate tract to be harvested. Notice may be submitted in person to the county commission office; by facsimile to the county commission office, such notice consists of: 
(1)	A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale or owner harvest. 
(2)	The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller.
(3)	The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm buying the timber. 
(4)	The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting the timber. 
(5)	A map, aerial photo, or a drawing of the tract to show the specific road or reads to be used to access the tract. 
Standards for operations: 
(1)	Prevention of contamination.
a.	Contamination of public roads with mud, dirt, or debris from timber operations is prohibited. All harvesting operations shall cease if there is a contamination of a public read until all contamination has been removed. 
b.	A temporary exit may be installed and maintained for any timber harvesting operation in the county is such a way to prevent contamination on county roads. 
(2)	Additional requirements.
a.	All timber harvesting operations must post or cause to be posted along the public road from which the operations enter and exit that road signs that states: 
"TRUCKS ENTERING HIGHWAY" 
b.	No timber operator or person shall park or leave unattended a truck or other motor vehicle or trailer upon the right-of-way of any county road. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2013)
Secs. 10-19—10-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES, ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND REGULATORY FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq.

Sec. 10-38. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, an IRS Form W-2 but not an IRS Form 1099. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the Unified Government of Webster County acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the Unified Government of Webster County acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
Unified Government of Webster County means the entire County of Webster. 
(b)	The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 (Specific, Business, and Occupation Taxes - Definitions) shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
(Code 2003, § 51-19)
Sec. 10-39. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. The amount of the administrative fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, § 51-20)
Sec. 10-40. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)	Businesses and individuals engaging in the following occupations must pay an annual nonrefundable regulatory fee. The amount of the regulatory fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(1)	Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, and workers.
(2)	Carnivals.
(3)	Taxicab and limousine operators.
(4)	Tattoo artists.
(5)	Stables.
(6)	Shooting galleries and firearm ranges.
(7)	Scrap metal processors.
(8)	Pawnbrokers.
(9)	Food service establishments.
(10)	Dealers in precious metals.
(11)	Firearms dealers.
(12)	Peddlers.
(13)	Parking lots.
(14)	Nursing and personal care homes.
(15)	Newspaper vending boxes.
(16)	Modeling agencies.
(17)	Massage parlors.
(18)	Landfills.
(19)	Auto and motorcycle racing.
(20)	Boardinghouses.
(21)	Businesses which provide appearance bonds.
(22)	Boxing and wrestling promoters.
(23)	Hotels and motels.
(24)	Hypnotists.
(25)	Handwriting analysts.
(26)	Health clubs, gyms and spas.
(27)	Fortunetellers.
(28)	Garbage collectors.
(29)	Escort services.
(30)	Burglar and fire alarm installers.
(31)	Locksmiths.
(b)	If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the Unified Government of Webster County on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)	Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this section shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the Unified Government of Webster County, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or county official upon request. 
(Code 2003, § 51-21)
Sec. 10-41. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)	An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the Unified Government of Webster County, and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the county but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)	An amount, as established by the board of commissioners from time to time, per employee up to seven employees, with a minimum charge in an amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time, for businesses within such category; 
(2)	For any business with more than seven but less than 21 employees, such business shall pay an occupational license tax in an amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time per employee up to a maximum amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time; 
(3)	For any business with more than 21 employees, such business shall pay an occupation tax in an amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time; 
(4)	The number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis shall be computed so that an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added, and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(b)	The Unified Government of Webster County shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)	A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation of the occupation tax imposed by this section shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)	If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the county proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from the occupation tax. 
(2)	A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume if business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the Unified Government of Webster County satisfactory proof of as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)	A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the Unified Government of Webster County for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the county. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the Unified Government of Webster County satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments. 
(4)	If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the county only if the county is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)	If a business or practitioner commences business in the county on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)	If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of the occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of the occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31, the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the Unified Government of Webster County for any reason, or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the county clerk. 
(f)	Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this section only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the county. 
(Code 2003, § 51-22)
Sec. 10-42. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by section 10-41 shall display an occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the county, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer or the county clerk upon request. 
(Code 2003, § 51-23)
Sec. 10-43. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 10-41 or shall pay a flat fee occupation tax per practitioner. The amount of the flat fee occupation tax shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. On the tax return for such time as the practitioner first commences business in the county, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such elections shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Code 2003, § 51-24)
Sec. 10-44. - Exemptions. 
(a)	No occupation tax shall be levied for the following:
(1)	Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission;
(3)	Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(4)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)	Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)	Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15;
(7)	Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the county agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in the state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the county; 
(9)	Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93;
(10)	Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States; 
(11)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55; or
(12)	Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization.
(b)	The exemptions and limitations contained in this section shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Code 2003, § 51-25)
Sec. 10-45. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the Examining Boards of the Secretary of State's Office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensing before any county occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Code 2003, § 51-26)
Sec. 10-46. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)	Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)	Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Code 2003, § 51-27)
Sec. 10-47. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)	On or before December 31 of each year, an individual, business, or practitioner subject to the occupation tax levied by this article shall file with the county clerk on a form approved by and available from the county a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the county shall submit to the county clerk or make available within the county such information as may be required or requested by the Unified Government of Webster County to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee. 
(Code 2003, § 51-28)
Sec. 10-48. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the Unified Government of Webster County for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under article 4 of chapter 18 of title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Code 2003, § 51-29)
Sec. 10-49. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)	Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the county after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)	Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(c)	Any individual, business or practitioner subject to occupation tax or regulatory fee or administrative fee which does not pay such tax or fee within 90 days after the date on which such payment is due shall also be subject to interest on the unpaid balance thereof at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(Code 2003, § 51-30)
Sec. 10-50. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)	It is the duty of the county clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the appropriate court. The county clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)	The county clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the county clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the county and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code and the Charter of the Unified Government of Webster County and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the Unified Government of Webster County and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(c)	When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to punishment according to the general penalties described in section 1-19 and suspension of the right to conduct business in the county until such tax or regulatory fee is paid in full. 
(e)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the county requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee, shall be subject to punishment according to the general penalties described in section 1-19 and shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business in the county until such information is provided. 
(f)	All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person business shall be subject to the same penalty as other person, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Code 2003, § 51-31)
Sec. 10-51. - Application to prior delinquencies. 
This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 2003, § 51-32)
Sec. 10-52. - Public hearing before future tax increases. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year for the county, the Unified Government of Webster County shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue derived from such occupation taxes. This hearing shall be held pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-28. 
(Code 2003, § 51-33)
Sec. 10-53. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by board of commissioners. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the Unified Government of Webster County. All provisions hereto relating to any form or tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 2003, § 51-35)
Sec. 10-54. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The Unified Government of Webster County may, by subsequent ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation taxes or a credit against occupation taxes owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation taxes shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons therefor shall be set forth in the minutes of the county board of commissioners. Such exemptions, reductions or credits may include, but shall not be limited to, those exemptions, reductions or credits more particularly set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f)(2). 
(Code 2003, § 51-36)
Sec. 10-55. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 2003, § 51-37)
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.

Sec. 12-1. - National Incident Management System. 
The board of commissioners hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents. 
(Res. of 2-14-2006)
Sec. 12-2. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)	Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management agency in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)	Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy; imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of the county; or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of the county. 
(3)	Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
(Code 2003, § 18-32)
Sec. 12-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services (public safety); medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; nuclear power plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the state emergency management agency. 
(Res. of 3-10-2009, § I)
Sec. 12-4. - Local organization for emergency management. 
The chairperson of the board of county commissioners shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the county emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the chairperson or board of commissioners and shall serve at the pleasure of such chairperson or board of commissioners. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	Represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management.
(2)	Assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations.
(3)	Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)	Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)	Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activities, etc.). 
(6)	Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)	Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Res. of 3-10-2009, § II)
Sec. 12-5. - County emergency management agency. 
(a)	The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments. The emergency support functions (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows: 

 
*As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan. 
Department/agency assignment listed above is an example only. It is the responsibility of local governments to make assignments based upon local capabilities. 
(b)	Heads of county departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Res. of 3-10-2009, § III)
Sec. 12-6. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(Res. of 3-10-2009, § V)
Sec. 12-7. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Res. of 3-10-2009, § VII)
Sec. 12-8. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 2-14-2012, § 1)
Sec. 12-9. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)	Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)	Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the chairperson of the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for the county. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)	Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of a local emergency, the chairperson may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)	Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chairperson finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time the chairperson shall execute and file with the county clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chairperson. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)	Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.	Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chairperson shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.	The county emergency management agency (EMA) director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.	In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director or his designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
3.	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
b.	Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chair is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chair may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 12-12 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and section 12-13 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.	Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 12-11 as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
d.	Additional emergency powers. The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.	To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.	To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation;
3.	To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.	To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5.	To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.	To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.	To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.	To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances, and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.	To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; and 
10.	To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)	Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth in this subsection, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, Webster County, Georgia, has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the chair of the Webster County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Webster County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Webster County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)	That the Webster County Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)	That the following sections of the Webster County Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 12-12, Registration of Building and Repair Services to be effective only if the Governor has declared a state of emergency; and/or Section 12-13, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)	That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 12-9(a)(4)c. or d. or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [time] on [date]. 
[Signed] 

 
(Res. of 2-14-2012, § 2)
Sec. 12-10. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)	Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the chairperson or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)	Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any Code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chair or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)	Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this chapter, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)	Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the sheriff's office, the EMA director and the chairperson of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 2-14-2012, § 3)
Sec. 12-11. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)	County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)	Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)	Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)	Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)	Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" includes fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)	Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designee may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by the development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and development services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Res. of 2-14-2012, § 4)
Sec. 12-12. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the county board of commissioners and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the incorporated areas of the county without complying with this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)	The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)	When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)	Name of applicant;
(2)	Permanent address and phone number of applicant;
(3)	Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number;
(4)	If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation;
(5)	Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business;
(6)	List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)	Georgia sales tax number or authorization;
(8)	Georgia business license number, if required;
(9)	Copy of license from the Secretary of State, if required.
(d)	This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Res. of 2-14-2012, § 5)
Sec. 12-13. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)	Unlawful acts. To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chairperson until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)	Authority. To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chairperson shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chairperson shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the county emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)	Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)	Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel;
(2)	Authorized and essential health care providers;
(3)	Authorized and essential personnel of the county;
(4)	Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel;
(5)	Authorized and essential firefighters;
(6)	Authorized and essential emergency response personnel;
(7)	Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)	Authorized and essential utility repair crews;
(9)	Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own properties or places of business; 
(10)	Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the EMA, the director of public safety and/or the county sheriff. 
(d)	Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)	Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Res. of 2-14-2012, § 6)
Sec. 12-14. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this chapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 2-14-2012, § 7)
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Outdoor watering of landscape—Restrictions. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the county may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops: feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, rabbits, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens;
(6)	Watering new and replanted plants, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(13)	Hydroseeding.
(Ord. of 12-14-2010)
Sec. 14-2. - Same—Enforcement. 
(a)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in section 14-1. 
(b)	The Unified Government of Webster County shall be the enforcement authority for this section and section 14-1. The county chairperson may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010)
Secs. 14-3—14-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; local land disturbing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; local erosion programs, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means an area immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation, and the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as "excavation." 
Department means the state department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
District means the Lower Chattahoochee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity; also known as "the plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition. This includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority which has been certified by the director as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means the state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Lower Chattahoochee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed, as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow trout, brown trout or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover;
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such practices can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term "wetlands" generally includes swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Code 2003, § 22-171; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § II)
Sec. 14-24. - Exemptions. 
(a)	This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72.
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying.
(3)	Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; however, construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in division 3 of this article. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20—12-5-53). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal streamflow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of division 3 of this article and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, which shall include the following:
a.	Raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard.
b.	Feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry.
c.	Producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chicken, hens and turkeys. 
d.	Producing plants, trees, fowl or animals.
e.	The production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products. 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing activities or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 14-87(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(8)	Any project involving 11 acres or less; however, this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters; and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways that have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that do not have water in them year round; however, any person responsible for a project which involves 11 acres or less that involves land disturbing activity and that is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and further, nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (a)(1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section. 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority, or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by the county; however, such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in division 3 of this article; provided further that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1. 
(10)	Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission; provided that any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in sections 14-86 and 14-87. 
(b)	Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in sections 14-86 and 14-87, the issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued; and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Code 2003, § 22-172; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § III)
Sec. 14-25. - Inspection of permitted sites; notice to comply; failure. 
The county will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-173; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VI(A))
Sec. 14-26. - Right of entry. 
The county shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably deemed necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(Code 2003, § 22-174; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VI(B))
Sec. 14-27. - Refusal of entry or access. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials; nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Code 2003, § 22-175; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VI(C))
Sec. 14-28. - Review of issuing authority's actions; deadline for corrective action. 
(a)	The district or the commission, or both, shall periodically review the actions of the county which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to the county for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(b)	The division may periodically review the actions of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of this article and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the board of commissioners. If such review indicates that the board of commissioners has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the board of commissioners in writing. The board of commissioners so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county as an issuing authority. 
(Code 2003, § 22-176; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VI(D), (E))
Sec. 14-29. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining such permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(Code 2003, § 22-177; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VII(A))
Sec. 14-30. - Stop work orders. 
(a)	For the first and second violations of this article, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; however, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or state waters or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining a permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(b)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(c)	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(Code 2003, § 22-178; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VII(B))
Sec. 14-31. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 14-60(e). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Code 2003, § 22-179; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VII(C))
Sec. 14-32. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting conditions, or a stop work order shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 2003, § 22-180; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VII(D))
Sec. 14-33. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within 31 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(Code 2003, § 22-181; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VIII(A))
Sec. 14-34. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Code 2003, § 22-182; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § VIII(B))
Sec. 14-35. - Liability. 
(a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)	The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 2003, § 22-183; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § IX(C))
Secs. 14-36—14-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-59. - Review of ordinances regulating land development by applicant. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances that regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party that can obtain a permit. 
(Code 2003, § 22-201; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § V(A))
Sec. 14-60. - Application requirements. 
(a)	No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the board of commissioners to perform such activity. 
(b)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Such plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 14-87. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of sections 14-86 and 14-87. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(c)	A fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk, shall be charged for each acre or fraction of an acre in the project area. 
(d)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 14-87(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (e) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(e)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction of an acre of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Code 2003, § 22-202; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § V(B))
Sec. 14-61. - Plan requirements. 
(a)	Generally. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements contained in this section and section 14-60. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(b)	Data required. Data required for the site plan are as follows: 
(1)	Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)	Description of existing land uses at the project site and description of the proposed project. 
(3)	Name, address and phone number of the property owner.
(4)	Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation control. 
(5)	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres.
(6)	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, including the statement in bold letters that the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities. 
(7)	Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
(9)	Detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)	Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(c)	Certification of plans; contents. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north.
(2)	Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.
(3)	Boundary line survey.
(4)	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.
(5)	Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(6)	Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., that might be affected. 
(7)	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas.
(8)	Delineation of the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
(9)	Delineation of the 25-foot horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
(10)	Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(d)	Maintenance of control practices. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Code 2003, § 22-203; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § V(C))
Sec. 14-62. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)	Deadline. Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, provided that variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(b)	Approval of plan prior to issuance. No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 14-60 and 14-61 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 14-60(e) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)	Phased development; separate permits. If the tract is to be developed in phases, a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(d)	Suspension, revocation or modification. The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(e)	Certification of payment of ad valorem taxes required for issuance. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Code 2003, § 22-204; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § V(D))
Sec. 14-63. - Injury by permit holder to property of another. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 2003, § 22-205; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § IV(E))
Secs. 14-64—14-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-85. - Plans to contain control measures and practices; application and installation. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 14-86 and 14-87. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(Code 2003, § 22-231; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § IV(A))
Sec. 14-86. - Best management practices. 
(a)	Best management practices as set forth in this section and section 14-87 shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of BMPs shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(b)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where BMPs have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten NTUs for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(c)	Failure to properly design, install or maintain BMPs shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(Code 2003, § 22-232; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § IV(B))
Sec. 14-87. - Conservation and engineering practices. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices, to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum.
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property.
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible; provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on the site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 14-86(b). 
(15)	Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal streamflow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet, established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq., shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.	Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation cover as long as a protective vegetation cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal streamflow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.	Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(Code 2003, § 22-233; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § IV(C))
Sec. 14-88. - Adoption of requirements exceeding article standards. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions that contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 14-86 and 14-87. 
(Code 2003, § 22-234; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § IV(D))
Secs. 14-89—14-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-120. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and to promote a healthy economic climate in the county and surrounding communities, it is essential that public drinking water resources of high quality be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources the county and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
(b)	Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas to ensure that pollution threats to water resources are minimized. 
(Code 2003, § 22-261; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 1.2)
Sec. 14-121. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use, or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)	Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and
(3)	Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Code 2003, § 22-262; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 1.3)
Sec. 14-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Groundwater recharge area (synonymous with aquifer recharge area) means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps prepared by the state department of natural resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Code 2003, § 22-263; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 11)
Sec. 14-123. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
A groundwater recharge area district is established which shall correspond to all lands in the unincorporated area of the county, outside the municipalities, that are mapped and designated as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. 
(Code 2003, § 22-264; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 2)
Sec. 14-124. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the state pollution susceptibility map prepared by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 2003, § 22-265; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 3)
Sec. 14-125. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the permitting officer unless the permit, request or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-266; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4)
Sec. 14-126. - Right of entry. 
The permitting officer, his agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their assigned duties and responsibilities under this article, and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary. 
(Code 2003, § 22-267; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.1)
Sec. 14-127. - Bond may be required. 
The permitting officer may require a bond with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. Upon a breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute such breach of bond to judgment and execution. 
(Code 2003, § 22-268; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.1.1)
Sec. 14-128. - Authority of permitting officer. 
The permitting officer shall have authority to enforce this article, issue permits under this article, and address violations or threatened violations of this article by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(Code 2003, § 22-269; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.1.2)
Sec. 14-129. - Authority of other officials. 
Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the permitting officer in the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-270; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.1.3)
Sec. 14-130. - Cease and desist orders. 
The permitting officer shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-271; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.1.4)
Sec. 14-131. - Removal of nonconforming structure. 
When the permitting officer determines that a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer, be required to remove the structure. 
(Code 2003, § 22-272; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.1.5)
Sec. 14-132. - Restoration of affected land. 
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(Code 2003, § 22-273; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.1.6)
Sec. 14-133. - Permit review and site plan requirement. 
With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in section 14-134, applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan providing the following information: 
(1)	A map, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways, water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations. 
(2)	Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or toxic materials which may be released accidentally. 
(6)	Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(Code 2003, § 22-274; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.2)
Sec. 14-134. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of the site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed can be amended only with the approval of the permitting officer. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions, are exempted from this requirement. 
(Code 2003, § 22-275; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.3)
Sec. 14-135. - Exemptions to site plan requirements. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)	Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels.
(2)	Repair to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development.
(3)	Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences.
(Code 2003, § 22-276; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.4)
Sec. 14-136. - Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the permitting officer and shall be reviewed within 14 days. The review period shall begin with the permitting officer's written determination that the application is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, conditional approval or disapproval) by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the permitting officer. If the review process is not completed and written findings released within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the permitting officer may be appealed to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 22-277; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.5)
Sec. 14-137. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)	If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of permit issuance, the permit shall expire. The permitting officer is not required to notify the permittee of the pending expiration of the permit. 
(b)	If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date work ceased. The permitting officer is not required to notify the permittee of the pending expiration of the permit. 
(Code 2003, § 22-278; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 4.6)
Sec. 14-138. - Penalties. 
Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 2003, § 22-279; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 5)
Sec. 14-139. - Appeals. 
All final decisions of the board of commissioners concerning approval, conditional approval or denial of a permit under this article shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(Code 2003, § 22-280; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 7.1)
Sec. 14-140. - Alternative actions. 
Based on the proceedings of this article and the decision of the court, the board of commissioners may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)	Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)	Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)	Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 22-281; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 7.2)
Sec. 14-141. - Amendments. 
The provisions of this article may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(Code 2003, § 22-282; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 8)
Sec. 14-142. - Assessment relief. 
The county board of tax assessors shall consider the requirements of this article in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 2003, § 22-283; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 9)
Sec. 14-143. - Maps for regulating development; permit program for environmentally sensitive areas. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners hereby affirm the presence of wetlands and significant groundwater recharge areas in the county, and adopt the National Wetlands Inventory Maps of Webster County and Hydrologic Atlas 18, Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia, as the official maps for use in regulating development activities in and over these sensitive natural areas, recognizing and hereby adopting future updates and upgrades to said maps. 
(b)	The county board of commissioners accepts the offer made by the West Central Georgia Health District through the county health department to assist with development, implementation and maintenance of a permit program to regulate development activities in these environmentally sensitive areas, enforcement to become effective as of July 1, 2001. 
(Res. of 6-5-2001)
Secs. 14-144—14-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROTECTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 14-170. - Required features. 
For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities in the county must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(Code 2003, § 22-301; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.1)
Sec. 14-171. - When lining required. 
(a)	New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within:
(1)	A high pollution susceptibility area.
(2)	A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet.
(3)	A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet.
(b)	At a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot, and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five by 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(Code 2003, § 22-302; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.2)
Sec. 14-172. - When land disposal of wastes prohibited. 
Land disposal of municipal/household solid waste or hazardous waste shall not be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(Code 2003, § 22-303; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.3)
Sec. 14-173. - Disposition of hazardous materials. 
For all significant groundwater recharge areas, the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials, excluding underground storage tanks, and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD), and in conformance with the local fire prevention code requirements. 
(Code 2003, § 22-304; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.4)
Sec. 14-174. - Secondary containment for storage tanks. 
For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new, above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume, or 110 percent of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt from this requirement, provided they comply with applicable federal regulations. 
(Code 2003, § 22-305; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.5)
Sec. 14-175. - Basin liners. 
For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD. 
(Code 2003, § 22-306; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.6)
Sec. 14-176. - When infiltration basins prohibited. 
For high pollution susceptibility areas, no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. 
(Code 2003, § 22-307; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.7)
Sec. 14-177. - Wastewater spray irrigation and land application of sludge. 
For high pollution susceptibility areas, the use of wastewater spray irrigation systems and the land application of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with department of natural resources criteria for slow rate land treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land application of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. 
(Code 2003, § 22-308; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.8)
Sec. 14-178. - Minimum lot sizes and septic systems. 
(a)	Generally. Construction shall not proceed on any building or structure to be served by an on-site sewage management system until the county health department approves the proposed sewage management system as meeting requirements outlined in section M of the department of human resources (DHR) Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, incorporated herein by reference, and the required building permits have been issued. (See Appendix A to this Code for section M requirements.) 
(b)	Minimum requirements in areas of significant groundwater recharge. The following minimum lot size requirements apply to on-site sewage management systems in areas of significant groundwater recharge. Minimum lot sizes shall be based on the application of Table MT-1 of the DHR manual referenced in subsection (a) of this section. 
(1)	One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(2)	One hundred twenty five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)	One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
The minimums set forth in subsections (b)(1)—(3) of this section may be increased based on consideration of factors such as those enumerated in section M of the department of human resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Code 2003, § 22-309; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), § 6.9)
Secs. 14-179—14-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WETLAND PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-210. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)	Nationally, a considerable number of wetland resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. It is, therefore, necessary to discourage development activities that may adversely affect wetlands by ensuring maximum protection for wetlands located in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 22-351; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 1.1)
Sec. 14-211. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
(Code 2003, § 22-352; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 1.2)
Sec. 14-212. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetland map means a map showing the general locations of wetlands within the unincorporated area of the county. The generalized wetland map used on February 6, 2001, is the National Wetlands Inventory as published by the United States Department of the Interior. 
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soil conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the soil conservation service. 
Hydrology means science dealing with the properties, distribution, and circulation of water on the surface of the land, in the soil and underlying rocks, and in the atmosphere. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions. 
Jurisdictional determination means an official, written statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, stating whether a certain specified site is a wetland or is in a wetland. 
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States except for those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in section 14-248. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. The term "wetlands" generally includes swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the Corps. 
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the unincorporated area of the county and shown on the generalized wetland map. 
(Code 2003, § 22-353; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 10)
Sec. 14-213. - Wetland protection district. 
(a)	Application. This article shall apply to all lands within wetlands located in the unincorporated area of the county outside the municipalities. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this article, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is adopted by reference and declared to be part of this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)	District boundaries. The generalized wetland map is a general reference document, and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners that a subject site may be in a jurisdictional wetland or in proximity to a jurisdictional wetland, requiring the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' guidance as to whether a section 404 permit will be required prior to initiation of any development activity on the subject site. The generalized wetland map does not represent precise boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands in the unincorporated area of the county, and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 2003, § 22-354; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 2.2)
Sec. 14-214. - Right of entry on private property. 
The permitting officer shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this article are applicable, for the purpose of performing duties required under this article, and for the purpose of taking or causing to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary. 
(Code 2003, § 22-355; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.1)
Sec. 14-215. - General authority of officer. 
The permitting officer shall have authority to enter the subject site to monitor development and to enforce this article, issue permits under this article, and address violations or threatened violations of this article by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(Code 2003, § 22-356; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.1.1)
Sec. 14-216. - Assistance by other officials. 
Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the permitting officer with enforcement of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-357; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.1.2)
Sec. 14-217. - Issuance of cease and desist orders. 
The permitting officer shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders for any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-358; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.1.3)
Sec. 14-218. - Bond may be required. 
The permitting officer may require a bond with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. Upon a breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute such breach of bond to judgment and execution. 
(Code 2003, § 22-359; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.2)
Sec. 14-219. - Removal of violative structure. 
When the permitting officer determines a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer, be required to remove the structure. 
(Code 2003, § 22-360; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.3)
Sec. 14-220. - Restoration of affected land. 
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer and as far as practicable, be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation. 
(Code 2003, § 22-361; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.5)
Sec. 14-221. - Issuance of notice of violation. 
If the permitting officer discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the permitting officer shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(Code 2003, § 22-362; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.5)
Sec. 14-222. - Suspension and revocation. 
The permitting officer may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The permitting officer shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Code 2003, § 22-363; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 4.6)
Sec. 14-223. - Penalties. 
Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-19. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 2003, § 22-364; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 5)
Sec. 14-224. - Appeals. 
(a)	Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the board of commissioners concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be appealed to the county superior court. 
(b)	Alternative actions. Based on the proceedings of the county superior court and the decision of such court, the board of commissioners may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)	Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)	Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)	Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 22-365; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 6.2)
Sec. 14-225. - Amendments. 
The regulations of this article and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(Code 2003, § 22-366; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 7)
Sec. 14-226. - Assessment relief. 
The county board of tax assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Code 2003, § 22-367; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 8)
Secs. 14-227—14-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 14-246. - Permit requirements. 
No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the permitting officer in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified in section 14-247 or by other local development ordinances shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development appears to be located within a wetland protection district boundary, or within 50 feet of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the permitting officer from review of the generalized wetland map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' determination shall be required. If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following receipt by the local permitting officer of a copy of the section 404 permit or letter of permission issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Code 2003, § 22-391; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.1)
Sec. 14-247. - Permissible uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided in this section: 
(1)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)	Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, birdwatching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)	Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)	The continued cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall, however, be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. Disturbances of wetlands for agricultural purposes are subject to the Swampbuster Act of the 1985 Farm Bill, and are to be reported to the USDA Farm Service Agency prior to commencement. 
(5)	The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)	Education, scientific research and nature trails.
(Code 2003, § 22-392; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.2)
Sec. 14-248. - Temporary emergency permit. 
A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the permitting officer for the following reasons: 
(1)	Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged, and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the permitting officer, and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired, and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(2)	Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
(3)	Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of section 14-247(4). 
(4)	Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided such facilities and structures are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(Code 2003, § 22-393; Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.3)
Sec. 14-249. - Site plans. 
Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, unless a different scale is approved, in advance, by the permitting officer, with the following information: 
(1)	A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved with cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)	A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)	Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the subject site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)	Elevation of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or toxic materials released accidentally. 
(7)	All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology.
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.4)
Sec. 14-250. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of the site plan. The site plan may be amended only with approval of the permitting officer. The permitting officer may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.5)
Sec. 14-251. - Subdivision approval. 
Any application for subdivision approval in a wetland protection district shall include a jurisdictional determination approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, subdivision approval will be issued only following issuance of the section 404 permit or letter of permission. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.6)
Sec. 14-252. - Subdivision design options. 
Any subdivision that includes jurisdictional wetlands shall be allowed and encouraged to use the following options: 
(1)	Lot size averaging. Lot size averaging is encouraged in single-family detached subdivisions as a means to work around wetland areas. The permitting officer may allow a reduction in lot size, provided the same number of lots in the same subdivision are oversized by an equal or greater area. The maximum permissible reduction shall not exceed 25 percent of the minimum required lot area. The number of lots with areas reduced shall not exceed 25 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision. The permitting officer shall allow no more than a 25 percent adjustment of rear, side and front setbacks for each affected lot. 
(2)	Cluster development. Clustering of residential development is encouraged in single-family detached subdivisions as a way around wetland areas. When considering subdivision approval, the permitting officer may allow incorporation of wetland or other significant natural areas as open space in the subdivision plan. Such plans should designate at least 25 percent of the gross land area as open space. Density shall be calculated by subtracting from the total acreage of a parcel all land dedicated or in use for private or public roads, including all vehicular rights-of-way. The resultant acreage will then be divided by the minimum allowed lot size of the district to derive the number of lots permissible. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.7)
Sec. 14-253. - Filing fee. 
At the time of the application for a development permit, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the permitting officer. Filing fees, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk, shall be required to evaluate the application. However, if after review of the initial application it is determined that expert consultants are necessary to provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determination, those fees will be in addition to the filing fee. The additional fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services as deemed necessary by the permitting officer. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.8)
Sec. 14-254. - Enforcement authority. 
The permitting officer is the department, office or individual assigned the responsibility of administering this article. The administrative authority is vested in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.9)
Sec. 14-255. - Review procedures. 
The application for a development permit shall be made to the permitting officer and will be reviewed within 14 days. The review period shall begin upon the permitting officer's written determination that the application submitted is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, conditional approval or disapproval) by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the permitting officer. If the review process is not completed and written finding not released within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.10)
Sec. 14-256. - Appeals. 
Decisions on permit applications for development permits made by the permitting officer may be appealed to the board of commissioners. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the county clerk within ten days of the decision rendered by the permitting officer. A public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners for appeals. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be issued within 15 days of the public hearing and may be appealed to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.11)
Sec. 14-257. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)	If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)	If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date work ceased. 
(c)	Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit may be issued by the permitting officer, but no such notification is required. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2001(2), § 3.12)
APPENDIX A - MANUAL FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, as adopted in the 2003 Webster County Code. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. As a part of Supp. No. 1, to improve consistency and clarity within the Code by keeping similar provisions together, and for the convenience of the user, app. A was relocated to the end of ch. 14, to read as set out herein.

Sec. 1. - Text from Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
The text of this division is from the department of human resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, section M, pages M-1 and M-2, and is included in this division for convenience only. In the event of any conflict between the text of this division and the referenced manual, the referenced manual shall govern. 
(Prior Code § 22-331)
Sec. 2. - Lot sizing. 
(a)	To provide for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, minimum lot sizes have been established. Larger lot sizes may be required to meet the requirements of the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems depending on the proposed development of the property. County boards of health and/or county zoning authorities may require larger minimum lot sizes; the larger minimum lot sizes will take precedence. Lot size requirements are as follows for single-family dwellings including, but not limited to, manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by local zoning, must be provided in multiples of the following minimum lot sizes for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. See Table MT-1 and subsections (b)—(g) of this section. 
Table MT-1 
Minimum Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System 

 
*In this context, the term "nonpublic" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
(b)	The minimum lot sizes in subsection (a) of this section are for the typical size home (three-bedroom or four-bedroom) with basic appurtenances such as driveway, minimum number of trees, and water supply line. If larger homes, swimming pools, tennis courts or outbuildings, etc., are proposed to be constructed, or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the county board of health will require larger lots to ensure usable soil area. 
(c)	The county board of health may also require larger lot sizes when physical factors indicate the need to do so. These factors include, but are not limited to, the availability of sufficient unobstructed land areas for an approved on-site sewage management system and approved replacement system, slope greater than five percent, percolation rates higher than 45 minutes per inch, need for subsurface drainage or adverse topographic features. 
(d)	Lots shall be a minimum width of 100 feet or 150 feet measured within the area where an approved on-site sewage management system and replacement system are to be located when served by a public water supply system or nonpublic water supply system, respectively. 
(e)	The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size: rights-of-way of roads, easements (such as a power line or pipeline) that exclude installation of an on-site sewage management system, bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetland or other bodies of water and similar limiting factors. 
(f)	There must be an unobstructed area on each lot for installation of an approved on-site sewage management system and an area equal in size for a conventional system or larger area, as appropriate, for an approved replacement system; this will include sufficient area for necessary site modifications for installation of both the initial system and a replacement system. All pertinent county zoning setbacks and other space requirements must also be met. 
(g)	The maximum daily sewage flow for each lot or parcel of land shall not exceed 600 gallons per acre per day (gpad) when served by nonpublic or individual water supply system or 1,200 gpad when served by a public water supply system. When sewage flows exceed these qualities (600 or 1,200 gpad as indicated) for a given dwelling structure, the minimum lot size or parcel of land shall be increased proportionally. Example: Assume a public water supply exists (so 1,200 gpad maximum sewage flow allowed per minimum required land area of 21,780 square feet), and there is a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd. To determine X = the square footage of the lot needed, use the following formula: 

 
Likewise, for a nonpublic (individual) water supply, to determine Y = the square footage of the lot needed for a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd, use the following formula: 

 
(h)	Lot sizing requirements are as follows for multifamily residential dwellings, all other non-single-family dwellings and commercial structures, and this also includes mobile homes located in commercial mobile home parks. Subsections (b)—(g) of this section also apply to Table MT-2. 
Table MT-2 
Minimum Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System 

 
*In this context, the term "nonpublic" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
(Prior Code § 22-332)
Sec. 3. - Criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas. 
Rules of the department of natural resources, environmental protection division, chapter 391-3-16-.02 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-16-.02), require the following minimum lot sizes in the state groundwater recharge areas: 
(1)	Subdivisions and individual lots. New homes served by septic tanks and absorption field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified in Table MT-1: 
a.	One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-1 if the lot is within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.	One hundred twenty five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-1 if the lot is within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.	One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-1 if the lot is within a low susceptibility area. 
(2)	Mobile home parks. New mobile home parks served by septic tanks and absorption field systems shall be on lots having the following size limitations as identified in Table MT-2: 
a.	One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-2 if the lot is within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.	One hundred twenty five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-2 if the lot is within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.	One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-2 if the lot is within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)	Lot size requirement. If a local government requires a larger lot size than that required by subsection (1) of this section for homes or subsection (2) of this section for mobile homes, the larger lot size shall be used. 
(4)	Exemption. Local governments at their option may exempt from the requirements any lot of record prior to the date of adoption of the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, chapter 3 91-3-16-.02, criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas. 
(Prior Code § 22-333; Ord. of 2-6-2001(1), app.)
Sec. 4. - Definitions. 
County Board of Health: This term shall refer to and mean the Webster County Board of Health. 
County Planning Commission: This term shall refer to and mean the Webster County Board of Commissioners. 
On-Site Sewage Management System: This term shall refer to and mean a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system, whether serving single or multiple buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences of other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Included are conventional septic tank systems, privies, experimental and alternation on-site sewage management systems, portable toilets, and other systems subject to approval by the County Board of Health. 
On-Site Sewage Management System Required: Where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide and approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use of frequent the building, residence or other property for two hours or more. 
Standards Required: New installations, additions and repairs of on-site sewage management systems shall meet all standards and satisfy all applicable provisions set forth by the County Board of Health and the Georgia Department of Public Health. No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon, where and on-site sewage management system is required or will be utilized, nor install an on-site sewage management system without having first applied for and obtained from the County Board of Health, approval and a construction permit for the installation. No person may cover or use an on-site sewage management system until final inspection has been made by the County Board of Health to determine compliance with the provisions and standards of construction, and written approval has been issued by the County Board of Health. 
Subdivision and Mobil Home Parks: No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise commence the physical development or improvement of a subdivision or mobile home park where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available or contemplated to be available to serve the proposed development until proposals and plans for the water supply and sewage disposal method to be provided or installed have been submitted to, and written approval thereof has been obtained from the County Board of Health, County Planning Commission and the Georgia Department of Public Health. 
Prohibited Discharge: No person shall allow the unapproved discharge, dumping, or spillage of sewage or septage, nor shall an on-site sewage management system be used or maintained in such manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent form such system to the ground surface or into a water well, abandoned well, water course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, lake, stream, river, groundwater or other body of water. Septage removal and disposal of the contents of on-site sewage management system shall be carried out in accordance with public health and environmental protection regulation. When, in the opinion of the County Board of Health, an existing on-site sewage management system presents an eminent or probable threat to public health, the use of such system shall be immediately discontinued and corrective measures shall be taken by the owner to preserve public health. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2014)
Chapter 16 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, section II of the state Constitution and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 1, § A)
Sec. 16-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 1, § B)
Sec. 16-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 1, § C)
Sec. 16-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health;
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
(7)	To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 1, § D)
Sec. 16-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the chairperson's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 16-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before August 18, 2009 (the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 18, 2009 (the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by the community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after August 18, 2009 (the effective date of the initial FIRM), and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after August 18, 2009 (the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community), and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after August 18, 2009 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community). 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.) (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)	The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(2)	For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)	The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include:
a.	Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.	Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 6)
Sec. 16-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § A)
Sec. 16-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated February 18, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)	For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated February 18, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the Unified Government of Webster County are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)	Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (*NONE*) 
(d)	The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the office of the Unified Government of Webster County. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § B)
Sec. 16-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § C)
Sec. 16-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § D)
Sec. 16-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § E)
Sec. 16-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements;
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the county board of commissioners; and
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § F)
Sec. 16-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Unified Government of Webster County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § G)
Sec. 16-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Unified Government of Webster County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 2, § H)
Secs. 16-14—16-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 16-45. - Designation of administrator. 
The chairperson of the board of commissioners is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 3, § A)
Sec. 16-46. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the chairperson on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 16-69(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. 
a.	For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.	The chairperson shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 3, § B)
Sec. 16-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
(a)	Duties of the chairperson shall include, but not be limited to:
(1)	Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-7, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 16-46(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 16-46(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 16-46(1)c and 16-69(2) or 16-71(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process; ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the chairperson and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 3, § C)
Secs. 16-48—16-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 16-68. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 4, § A)
Sec. 16-69. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements.
a.	Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-68(4). 
b.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 16-47(a)(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles where base flood elevation data are available. 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on:
1.	Individual lots or parcels;
2.	In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
3.	In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or
4.	On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer to section 16-68(6).) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a and c of this section. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-7 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 4, § B)
Sec. 16-70. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
(a)	Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-7, then the chairperson shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections (2) and (3) of this section) shall apply. 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-68(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(b)	The chairperson shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 4, § C)
Sec. 16-71. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 16-69. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 4, § D)
Sec. 16-72. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-7 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	Elevation requirements.
a.	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-68(4). 
b.	The chairperson shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 16-46(1)c and (2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 4, § E)
Sec. 16-73. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 4, § F)
Sec. 16-74. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 4, § G)
Secs. 16-75—16-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 16-92. - Requirements. 
(a)	The board of commissioners as established by the Unified Government of Webster County shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the chairperson in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this article and other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 5, §§ A—G)
Sec. 16-93. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)	A variance shall be issued only when there is:
(1)	A finding of good and sufficient cause;
(2)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)	The chairperson shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)	Upon consideration of the factors listed in this article and the purposes of this chapter, the may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, art. 5, §§ H, I)
Chapter 18 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; county board of health empowered to adopt and enforce rules and regulations appropriate to its functions and powers as long as such rules do not conflict with those enacted by department of human resources, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4; county board of health empowered to establish local rules and regulations applicable throughout county, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Unsanitary deposits of wastes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the county, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 2003, § 26-1)
Secs. 18-2—18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-21. - Adopted. 
The following rules and regulations of the state department of human resources are adopted: 
(1)	Chapter 290-5-26 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 290-5-26), On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(2)	Chapter 290-5-14 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 290-5-14), Food Service.
(3)	Chapter 290-5-18 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 290-5-18), Tourist Courts.
(Code 2003, § 26-31)
Sec. 18-22. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)	Any person violating the provisions of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-19. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)	In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2003, § 26-32)
Sec. 18-23. - Issuance of citations. 
(a)	Upon information of a violation of any of the rules and regulations adopted in this article being made known to the county health officer or to his designee, there shall cause a citation to be issued requiring such violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and certain time, then and there to stand trial for such violation. 
(b)	Citations issued under this section shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused of such violation. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Code 2003, § 26-33)
Chapter 20 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND DECALS 

Sec. 20-19. - Location permit required. 
The owner of any mobile home now located in the county or any owner of a mobile home desiring to locate such mobile home in the county shall obtain from the county tax commissioner a permit authorizing the location of such mobile home within the respective confines of the county when the owner thereof is using or intends to use such mobile home as a residence for himself or others for any other purpose. 
(Code 2003, § 30-31; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Sec. 20-20. - Permit for relocation. 
The owner of a mobile home used as a residence may not relocate such mobile home within the confines of the county or any other county without first obtaining a permit from the county tax commissioner. 
(Code 2003, § 30-32; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Sec. 20-21. - Payment of local taxes. 
The tax commissioner shall ascertain that all applicable local taxes have been paid before any permit provided in this article shall be issued. The owner shall submit proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid before such permit will be issued. 
(Code 2003, § 30-33; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Sec. 20-22. - Issuance of permit and decals. 
No mobile home shall be moved into the county or from one location to another in the county without having a current year's decal. To receive an appropriate decal, the owner of any mobile home shall comply with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-492—48-5-495 and all requirements of these four sections must be met before the county will consider the mobile home as being in compliance with the decal regulations. 
(Code 2003, § 30-34; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Sec. 20-23. - Display of decals. 
All decals issued under this article shall be affixed to all mobile homes in such manner as to be easily visible for inspection. 
(Code 2003, § 30-35; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Sec. 20-24. - Fees imposed. 
A fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk, shall be charged for the issuance of a permit under this article and for the annual renewal of such permits authorizing the location of a mobile home within the confines of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 30-36; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Sec. 20-25. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person failing to comply with the provisions or violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. The county tax commissioner shall be duly authorized to assess and collect any penalty that may accrue under this article. 
(Code 2003, § 30-37; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Sec. 20-26. - When fees due. 
All fees pursuant to this article shall be due on or before April 1 of each year. 
(Code 2003, § 30-38; Res. of 3-7-1972)
Chapter 22 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything within the county that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 22-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 22-2. - Nuisances declared. 
(a)	Nuisances deemed nonexclusive. The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)	Specific conditions declared offensive. The following are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)	Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the county. 
(2)	Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood. 
(3)	Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)	Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the county. 
(5)	Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the county so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)	Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)	Nonconforming structures and machines. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or county ordinance. 
(8)	Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)	Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the county. 
(10)	Depositing trash, garbage and refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the county or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)	Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)	Unsafe vehicles, machinery and equipment. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)	Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 22-82)
Sec. 22-3. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the county. 
(Code 2003, § 22-83)
Sec. 22-4. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the county, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the county that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the county, and the owner or other responsible person refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the sheriff, or the officer having responsibility for enforcement of this chapter, may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the magistrate judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Code 2003, § 22-84)
Sec. 22-5. - Order for abatement. 
(a)	If the magistrate judge at the hearing required by section 22-4 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the county is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including, but not limited to, rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the county shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever actions are deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for county taxes. 
(b)	Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of county taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of county taxes. 
(Code 2003, § 22-85)
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 22-6. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. 
(a)	Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of the county is a nuisance. 
(b)	The owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of the county upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the county, or otherwise by removing it to a location outside the corporate limits. 
(Code 2003, § 22-86)
State Law reference— Counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 22-7. - Junkyard licensing. 
(a)	A business license must be obtained from the county for the operation of any junkyard within the county on a yearly basis. The license fee for a junkyard business shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk and shall be paid on or before December 20 of the preceding year for which the business license is applied. A junkyard shall be defined as any business which recycles automobiles, or stores automobiles for salvage or for the sale of parts from such automobiles if the business contains more than ten such automobiles or vehicles. Furthermore, in order to license a junkyard for business in the county, the junkyard must comply with all environmental regulations and laws established by the state pertaining to operation of a junkyard in the state. 
(b)	No junkyard shall be operated within the county unless such junkyard is at least 1,000 feet minimum from any existing home, excluding the home of the operator or family members. Any junkyard existing in the county on the effective date of this Code shall be excluded from the provisions of this section and shall be grandfathered in as complying with the Code. 
(c)	Each junkyard shall maintain an adequate privacy fence to shield the junkyard from view of any roadway which parallels or crosses in front, beside, or behind such junkyard, excepting any private drive or dirt roads. 
(Code 2003, § 22-87)
Sec. 22-8. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 22-4 and 22-5. 
(Code 2003, § 22-88)
Sec. 22-9. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the county to proceed under sections 22-4 and 22-5 and the owner of the property or other responsible person resides outside the county limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 22-5 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the county once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the county limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
(Code 2003, § 22-89)
Sec. 22-10. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way affect the power and authority of the magistrate judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the magistrate judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
(Code 2003, § 22-90)
Secs. 22-11—22-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler that causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c).

Sec. 22-39. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the county. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)	Any vehicle of the county while engaged in necessary public business.
(2)	Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)	The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 2003, § 22-31)
Sec. 22-40. - General noise standard. 
The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article; but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(Code 2003, § 22-32)
Sec. 22-41. - Horns. 
The following shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)	The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the county except as a danger warning. 
(2)	The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(3)	The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.
(Code 2003, § 22-33)
Sec. 22-42. - Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener shall be a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 2003, § 22-34)
Sec. 22-43. - Loudspeakers, amplifiers, other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the county clerk or board of commissioners shall be a violation of this article. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(Code 2003, § 22-35)
Sec. 22-44. - Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing. 
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-36)
Sec. 22-45. - Animals and birds. 
The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-37)
Sec. 22-46. - Exhausts. 
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-38)
Sec. 22-47. - Defect in vehicle or load. 
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-39)
Sec. 22-48. - Loading, unloading, opening boxes. 
The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-40)
Sec. 22-49. - Construction or repairing of buildings. 
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:01 a.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the county building official, shall be a violation of this article. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and may be renewed by the board of commissioners for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the board of commissioners determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the board may grant permission for such work to be done from 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. 
(Code 2003, § 22-41)
Sec. 22-50. - Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. 
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-42)
Sec. 22-51. - Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. 
The shouting and crying of hawkers, peddlers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-43)
Sec. 22-52. - Noises to attract attention. 
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-44)
Sec. 22-53. - Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-45)
Sec. 22-54. - Piledrivers, hammers, other such appliances. 
The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, without a special permit from the board of commissioners shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-46)
Sec. 22-55. - Blowers. 
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-47)
Sec. 22-56. - Vehicle repair in residential areas. 
The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 22-48)
Sec. 22-57. - Exemptions. 
(a)	The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)	Noises of safety signals and warning devices.
(2)	Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or responding to an emergency. 
(3)	Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(b)	Applications for other exemptions should be filed with the county clerk for approval by the chairperson, and should state the time, date, organization and reason for the request. 
(Code 2003, § 22-49)
Sec. 22-58. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of the county shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2003, § 22-50)
Secs. 22-59—22-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 22-90. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)	Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the county, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the county are declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(b)	Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 2003, § 22-111)
Sec. 22-91. - Notice to abate. 
(a)	For a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)	Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(Code 2003, § 22-112)
Sec. 22-92. - Abatement by county; notice of abatement. 
(a)	Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property in violation of this article, when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 22-91, the county is authorized to enter upon the property and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The county shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the county. The county shall inspect the work, and, if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the county treasurer for payment. 
(b)	The county treasurer, for the purposes stated in subsection (a) of this section, shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)	If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the county treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the magistrate judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)	If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required in section 22-91 was given, that the work was performed and the cost paid by the county, and that the county has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, and shall be executed by the sheriff in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)	If the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply; but in lieu thereof, a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern"; shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved; shall provide a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation; and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the magistrate judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Code 2003, § 22-113)
Sec. 22-93. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the county has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this article, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the county, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance; and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 2003, § 22-114)
Secs. 22-94—22-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.

Sec. 22-115. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)	Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)	Is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)	Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle; 
(4)	Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim to the vehicle; or 
(5)	Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle and vehicle mean a motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
(Code 2003, § 22-141)
Sec. 22-116. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the county. There shall be an exception to this section for all persons, owners, or businesses described in sections 22-6 and 22-7 as these apply to junkyards or the like. 
(Code 2003, § 22-142)
Sec. 22-117. - Removal—Required. 
Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the sheriff's department of the county shall remove or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of at least two bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
(Code 2003, § 22-143; Res. of 5-12-2003, § 1(J))
Sec. 22-118. - Same—Notice to owner and state. 
(a)	Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the state bureau of investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)	Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)	If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(Code 2003, § 22-144)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; abandoned motor vehicles generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.

Sec. 24-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the unincorporated area of the county to engage in any of the following activities: 
(1)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of his life, limb, or health. 
(2)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed. 
(3)	Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another. 
(4)	Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming. 
(5)	Be in or about any place, along or with another or others with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing; or to aid or abet any person or in doing so. 
(6)	Be in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs (controlled substances) is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages. 
(7)	Direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite a breach of the peace. 
(8)	Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation.
(9)	Congregate with another or others in or on any public way or grounds so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear that public way or grounds after being ordered to do so by a county law enforcement officer or other lawful authority. 
(10)	Disrupt, by actions which tend to incite a breach of peace, the activities of any house of worship, hospital, home for the elderly or any lawful meeting, gathering, or procession. 
(11)	Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property. 
(12)	Be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not their own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, or loud unbecoming language. 
(Code 2003, § 34-1)
State Law reference— Fighting in a public place, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; use of "fighting words," obscene and vulgar or profane language, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 24-2. - Theft and diversion of county and public utility services. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the county or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, herein "utility services." 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the county or of a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of utility services, or to intentionally divert any of the services of the county or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without consent of the county or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the county or such company. 
(c)	No person shall knowingly receive the benefits of acts of diversion or of tampering with utility services without the proper charge. 
(d)	Proof that any of the acts specified in this section were done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
(Code 2003, § 34-2)
Sec. 24-3. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)	A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when that person is in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity or under circumstances which cause a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern that such person is involved in unlawful activity. 
(b)	The circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm or concern is warranted include, but are not limited to, the following: taking flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; refusing to identify oneself; or manifestly endeavoring to conceal oneself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by allowing the person to produce satisfactory identification and an explanation of that person's presence and conduct. 
(Code 2003, § 34-3)
Sec. 24-4. - Fee for impounded vehicles. 
(a)	The county sheriff may impound any vehicle and charge a minimum $100.00 impound fee for any vehicle lawfully towed and impounded for violations of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30, 16-13-31, 16-30-32, 40-2-20, 40-5-20, 40-5-121, 40-6-10, 40-6-15, or 40-6-391. 
(b)	Whenever a person has been arrested for a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30, 16-13-31, 16-30-32, 40-2-20, 40-5-20, 40-5-121, 40-6-10, 40-6-15, or 40-6-391 committed while driving, moving, or operating a vehicle, the arresting agency may impound the vehicle that the person was driving, moving, or operating at the time of arrest until such time as the arrestee or owner claiming the vehicle meets the conditions for release in compliance with this section. 
(c)	A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall not be released unless:
(1)	The person claiming the vehicle presents a valid driver's license, proof of ownership, or lawful authority to operate the motor vehicle, and proof of valid motor vehicle insurance for that vehicle. 
(2)	The vehicle is owned or leased by the arrestee, the arrestee gives written permission to another person to operate the vehicle, and the conditions for release in subsection (c)(1) of this section are met. 
(3)	The person claiming the vehicle pays the mandatory $100.00 impound fee attached to each vehicle towed and impounded by the county sheriff's office for violation. The impound fee must be paid in cash, by a cashier's check or money order made payable to the sheriff's office to be disbursed by the general fund in a monthly report. 
(d)	This section requires that all fees collected for impounded vehicles under this resolution be placed in the general fund and restricted to law enforcement use by the sheriff's office. 
(e)	The county board of commissioners does hereby authorize the sheriff to charge an impound fee on all such violations of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30, 16-13-31, 16-30-32, 40-5-20, 40-6-10, 40-6-15, or 40-6-391 in the county. 
(Res. of 4-14-2009)
Sec. 24-5. - Bonfires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, during a holiday or at any other time, toe build a bonfire of any description within the city limits, except at places approved and designated by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(3))
Sec. 24-6. - Damaging, interfering with poles, wires, other fixtures. 
It shall be unlawful to cut, break, or in any other manner molest or interfere with any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole used for the support of electric wires, or to throw at, break, injure, or in any other manner molest or interfere with any fixture, wire, lamp, or other thing placed thereon, or to tie any horse, mule or other animal of any sort to any such pole. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(3))
Sec. 24-7. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, air gun or other such weapon projecting lead or any other missile within the city limits. 
This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizens from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(3))
Sec. 24-8. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(3))
Sec. 24-9. - Posting signs on posts, trees, poles. 
It shall be unlawful to tack, nail, or otherwise place any signs on posts, trees, or poles of the city without permission of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(3))
Sec. 24-10. - Public address systems; permission required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate or use a public address system upon the streets of the city, or within the corporate limits of the city, upon either public or private property, without the written permission of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(3))
Sec. 24-11. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013(3))
Sec. 24-12. - Issuance of licenses, permits, or provision of other county services when initial or renewal applicant or any resident relative is indebted to the county. 
(a)	When an application is made for the granting or renewal of any license, permit or any service offered to the general public by the consolidated government to include utility services, the clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made to determine if the applicant (or any relative residing in the same household) has any outstanding monetary obligations or past due indebtedness due the county. Such outstanding monetary obligations or past due indebtedness as referenced herein shall not be deemed to include delinquent property taxes, as the collection of taxes is governed by other applicable state law. 
(b)	No license or permit shall be issued, renewed or considered for approval, nor shall any such other service be provided to the applicant, until the outstanding monetary obligation or past due indebtedness is satisfied and brought current. 
(Res. Of 8-11-2015(1))
Chapter 26 - ROADS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of county to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Design standards. 
The county adopts the state department of transportation's minimum design standards for hydraulics and roadway geometrics for all new and reconstructive roadway projects. 
(Code 2003, § 38-1; Res. of 4-29-1998)
Sec. 26-2. - Franchise fee for use of streets. 
The governing authority is hereby authorized to initiate and collect a franchise fee on all public electric light or power companies, gas companies, telephone and telegraph companies, and other public utilities for the use and occupancy of the streets of the county for the purpose of rendering utility services, upon such conditions and for such time the governing authority of the municipal corporation may deem wise and subject to the constitution and the general laws of the state (O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7)(A)). 
(Ord. of 1-13-2009)
Secs. 26-3—26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTING FOREST PRODUCTS 

Sec. 26-23. - Regulations. 
The language contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 12-6-23 and 12-6-24 is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out, and to the extent O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24 requires an ordinance or resolution adopting this suggested language contained within O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and provisions shall constitute an ordinance or resolution as contemplated by said O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
(Res. of 5-12-2003, §1(K))
Sec. 26-24. - Timber harvesting. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24 are invoked and applied within the unincorporated areas of the county and all such persons engaged in the harvesting of standing timber within the unincorporated areas of the county are hereby required to comply with the provisions thereof. 
(Res. of 12-13-2005)
Sec. 26-25. - Purpose. 
Whereas the purpose of this article is to provide procedures governing persons, firms, businesses, companies and corporations engaged in timber harvesting in the county and to provide for the issuance of permits to such operators to ensure that the county has knowledge of all timber harvesting within the county so that appropriate ad valorem taxes shall be assessed to the owner. 
Sec. 26-26. - Notice of timber harvesting. 
Written notice within 48 hours of beginning of timber harvesting operations shall be required of any person or firm harvesting timber for each separate tract to be harvested. Notice may be submitted in person to the Webster County Commission Office; by facsimile to the Webster County Commission Office, such notice consists of: 
(1)	A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale or owner harvest. 
(2)	The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller.
(3)	The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm buying the timber. 
(4)	The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting the timber. 
(5)	A map, aerial photo, or a drawing of the tract to show the specific road or roads to be used to access the tract. 
Sec. 26-27. - Standards for operations. 
(a)	Prevention of contamination. 
(1)	Contamination of public roads with mud, dirt, or debris from timber operations is prohibited. All harvesting operations shall cease if there is a contamination of a public road until all contamination has been removed. 
(2)	A temporary exit may be installed and maintained for any timber harvesting operation in the county in such a way to prevent contamination on county roads. 
(b)	Additional requirements. 
(1)	All timber harvesting operations must post or cause to be posted, along the public road from which the operations enter and exit, road signs that state "TRUCKS ENTERING HIGHWAY." 
(2)	No timber operator or person shall park or leave unattended a truck or other motor vehicle or trailer upon the right-of-way of any county road. 
Secs. 26-28—26-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 26-52. - Permit required for installation. 
Before installing any driveway or means of ingress and egress to any property abutting a county road or county-maintained road, the owner or the person installing such driveway shall make application to the board of commissioners, through its building inspection department, for a permit authorizing such installation. 
(Code 2003, § 38-121)
Sec. 26-53. - Permit provisions. 
The permit issued under this article shall specify the location of the driveway, the width of the driveway, the size culvert to be used, and other matters required for adequate drainage of the road in accordance with good engineering and road management practices. The permit may contain other reasonable conditions that the circumstances may warrant. 
(Code 2003, § 38-122)
Sec. 26-54. - Minimum pipe sizes. 
A minimum pipe size must be used for all driveway construction and for all cross drains under the road suitable to adequately handle water flow for the particular area in which construction occurs. The minimum pipe size which may be used for construction shall be established on a case-by-case basis by the county road department and each construction project must receive permission from the county road department prior to the placement of a pipe to include a designated minimum pipe size at the time of construction. 
(Code 2003, § 38-123)
Sec. 26-55. - Responsibility of permittee. 
Driveway construction and material shall be the responsibility of the owner or applicant for the permit. 
(Code 2003, § 38-124)
Sec. 26-56. - Inspection of work. 
All work shall be in conformity with the permit as granted and shall be subject to inspection by an authorized representative of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 38-125)
Secs. 26-57—26-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRADING AND DRAINAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basement means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 6½ feet. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Driveway grade means the grade of the centerline of a driveway measured at its steepest point. 
Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose by the general public, a corporation or certain persons. 
Gradient means slope. 
Gradient formula means D = G × L/100, where D is the vertical difference in elevation in feet, L is horizontal distance in feet, and G is the slope or gradient expressed as a percent. 
Infiltration means the use of pervious surfaces to allow rainfall to soak into the ground on site. 
Intensity refers to the rate at which rain is falling at any given instant during the life of a rainfall event expressed in inches per hour. 
Lot is defined in the county zoning regulations. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
Office means the county inspection department. 
On site means the individual property within its property lines except for the provision of streets for vehicular access, and essential services and facilities at the site. 
Open space means a yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage space. 
Owner means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the site. 
Parcel is a general term including all plots of and with separate identification on the official tax appraisal maps. Parcels may or may not be lots, depending upon whether or not such parcels are created as herein provided. 
Principal use means the primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Public utilities means water, gas, sanitary and storm sewer, electrical, and communications lines and facilities, and improved drainage facilities. 
Required means mandatory. 
Return frequency refers to statistically expected time intervals between recurrences of a storm of an equal or greater intensity for a given duration. 
Right-of-way means access over or across a particularly described property for a specific purpose. 
Right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Sidewalk means that portion of on-site development that provides access through the site to the dwelling unit and includes walkways. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground. 
Surface water means the surface drainage of water, its management, control, transportation, storage, and disposal. 
Swale means a shallow linear depression with a parabolic cross section and gently sloped sides. 
Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of this article when strict enforcement would cause undue hardship owing to conditions of the individual property on which the variance is sought. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
(Code 2003, § 38-161)
Sec. 26-87. - Jurisdiction. 
This article controls the grading and the drainage to be established thereby during the development of any portion of real property within the unincorporated portions of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 38-162)
Sec. 26-88. - Enforcement. 
In case of any violation or attempted violation of the provisions of this article, the county may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation or attempted violation including injunctive relief, and the county building inspector or authorized representative is authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 38-163)
Sec. 26-89. - General principles. 
(a)	Drainage of surface water should be provided away from all sides of all buildings and off the lot in a manner that will: 
(1)	Minimize the possibility of dampness in basements and crawl spaces;
(2)	Prevent adverse supporting soil behavior;
(3)	Prevent soil erosion; and
(4)	Prevent standing or ponding of water on the site.
(b)	Walks, driveways, retaining walls and other improvements should be constructed so as not to interfere with drainage. Required walks should not be used as drainage channels. Site grading and drainage should: 
(1)	Provide suitable access from the abutting street to the dwelling and any accessory buildings; 
(2)	Provide immediate diversion of water away from buildings and off the site;
(3)	Avoid concentrating runoff onto neighboring properties where erosion or other damage may be caused; 
(4)	Provide usable outdoor space for occupants; and
(5)	Minimize erosion.
(c)	The Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), where applicable, shall apply. 
(Code 2003, § 38-164)
Sec. 26-90. - Access to dwellings. 
(a)	Each dwelling shall have safe and convenient pedestrian access from the street to the dwelling. 
(b)	Each dwelling shall have convenient access for service and the provision of utilities.
(Code 2003, § 38-165)
Sec. 26-91. - Groundwater hazards. 
Buildings, structures, paved areas, driveways, and utilities shall be located on the site in such a way as to reasonably minimize groundwater hazards. 
(Code 2003, § 38-166)
Sec. 26-92. - Drainage and flood hazard exposure. 
(a)	The minimum grades at buildings and at openings into basements shall be at elevations which prevent adverse effects by water or water entering basements from flood levels. 
(b)	Protection shall be equivalent to a 50-year return frequency after full development. The floor elevations of all habitable space shall be above runoff and flood levels equivalent to a 100-year return frequency after full development. 
(Code 2003, § 38-167)
Sec. 26-93. - Special conditions. 
When special conditions exist or arise during construction which were unforeseen and which necessitate precautionary or hazard mitigating measures, the inspection office shall require corrective work to mitigate potential adverse effects from the special conditions as may be necessary. Special conditions include rock formations, unstable soils or slopes, high groundwater levels, springs, or other conditions which may adversely effect a property. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to ensure proper design, construction and satisfactory performance where such are present. 
(Code 2003, § 38-168)
Sec. 26-94. - Variances. 
Variances from the requirements of this article may be granted by the inspection office upon the submission of such information as may be required by it. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the inspection office may appeal such decision to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 38-169)
Secs. 26-95—26-116. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINISHED GRADING 

Sec. 26-117. - General conformance standard. 
All unpaved lot areas, except those preserved in an appropriate natural condition, should be fine graded to provide smooth even surfaces conforming to the elevations specified in this division. All debris should be removed prior to fine grading. 
(Code 2003, § 38-191)
Sec. 26-118. - Minimum protective slope. 
All walls and foundations of buildings and any water-supply well should be provided with protective slopes to ensure immediate drainage and diversion of surface water away from these structures and off the site. 
(Code 2003, § 38-192)
Sec. 26-119. - Minimum specifications. 
(a)	The finish grading should:
(1)	Provide a minimum fall of six inches away from the structure in ten feet, except as restricted by side lot lines or other major considerations, without regard to soil type or ground frost conditions. The horizontal length of such slopes may be reduced as necessary at building corners and side yards. 
(2)	Provide at least six inches in 25 feet (two percent gradient) in all other unpaved areas, subject to ground frost, expansive soils, or collapsible soils, or at least three inches in 25 feet (one percent gradient) in unpaved areas not subject to such conditions. 
(b)	If minimum slopes cannot be attained, paved gutters or other drainage structures may be installed as required by the inspection office. 
(c)	All unpaved areas should slope continuously at the gradients provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section to lower elevations off site, or to a drainage structure on the lot. 
(d)	Drainage swales or valleys formed by intersecting slopes should have adequate depth, width and longitudinal gradient to carry away the maximum predictable volume of stormwater runoff based on a 100-year return frequency. In no instance shall swales be positioned over sewage infiltration fields. 
(1)	Gradients of unpaved swales should not be less than required in subsection (a)(2) of this section for other unpaved areas. 
(2)	Surface erosion protection should be in place to prevent accumulation of water in critical drainage swales. 
(e)	Where catchbasins or inlets are installed, other than at required basement areaways, finish grade elevations of adjoining areas should provide for emergency surface overflow so that, in the event of failure of catchbasins or inlets, buildings and window wells (or areaways) will be protected against flooding. 
(f)	Areaways for basement windows, entrances, and garage entrances should be provided with effective drainage facilities. Catchment areas should be as small as possible and must be protected from the overflow of stormwater from adjacent areas. 
(g)	Roof drainage should discharge at least five feet away from building walls when expansive, collapsible or erodible soils are present. 
(Code 2003, § 38-193)
Sec. 26-120. - Height; gradients. 
The height and steepness of slopes and maximum gradients of unpaved drainage channels should be such as can be satisfactorily maintained without erosion or land slippage and should provide reasonable access to and around the structure. 
(1)	For access around buildings and for maintenance of building and lot improvements, an area generally at least four feet wide with a gradient away from the building no steeper than one in ten (ten percent gradient) should be provided. 
(2)	Where considered necessary by the inspection office, precautionary measures should be taken to stabilize the soil (e.g., retaining walls, sodding or planting). 
(Code 2003, § 38-194)
Sec. 26-121. - Drainage structures. 
(a)	Suitable drainage structures, such as paved gutters, drain inlets and subsurface drain lines, should be installed, where necessary, to protect against dampness, flooding, erosion or other damage by surface water or groundwater. Drainage structures should be properly connected to adequate outlets that are protected by recorded permanent easements, if required. 
(b)	Perimeter foundation drains are necessary on all houses with basements or potentially habitable living space below the finished exterior earth grade or in other situations where water and/or soil conditions warrant their use. Outlets must not permit backflow into subsurface drains. 
(Code 2003, § 38-195)
Secs. 26-122—26-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WALKS, STEPS AND DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 26-141. - General design and construction. 
A walk and any necessary steps should provide safe and convenient use from a dwelling directly to the street or to a driveway connected to the street. Walk and step construction should be of durable and appropriate material, on stable adequately drained subgrade or bed. 
(Code 2003, § 38-221)
Sec. 26-142. - Walk design. 
(a)	The gradient should not be steeper than one in 20 (five percent) in areas subject to frequent freezing or one in ten (ten percent) in other areas. 
(b)	The cross slope should be adequate for immediate drainage of surface water off the walk; required walk must not be used as a drainage channel. 
(c)	Walk surfaces should be at or below adjacent ground elevations.
(Code 2003, § 38-222)
Sec. 26-143. - Step design. 
(a)	The width of steps should not be less than the width of the walk that is served.
(b)	A single step in a walk and any flight of steps of more than five feet total rise should be avoided wherever practicable. A substantial handrail of durable construction must be provided if there is more than a 30-inch rise in a single flight. 
(Code 2003, § 38-223)
Secs. 26-144—26-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY RELOCATION 

Sec. 26-170. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public utility includes, but is not limited to, power, telephone, natural gas, storm drainage, sanitary sewer, and cable television. 
(Code 2003, § 38-251)
Sec. 26-171. - Compliance required. 
All public utilities installed in the rights-of-way of public streets in the unincorporated area of the county, and county roads, shall be installed in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2003, § 38-252)
Sec. 26-172. - Review and approval of plans for installation. 
No public utility shall be installed in existing county roads or in a street to become a county road, other than those streets described in section 26-173, unless the plans for such installation have been submitted to the county for review and approval. Such review and approval shall be based on the design standards then in use by the county and the location of other utilities installed prior to January 1, 2001. 
(Code 2003, § 38-253)
Sec. 26-173. - Applicability of subdivision regulations. 
No public utility shall be installed in a street to become a county road pursuant to the land subdivision regulations of the county unless the plans for same have been submitted to the county for review and approval. Such review and approval shall be based on the design standards then in use by the county. The submission shall be made at the same time as the engineering layout and road profile required by section 300(5) of the land subdivision regulations of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 38-254)
Sec. 26-174. - Right of entry for inspection. 
The employees, authorized agents and other duly authorized employees of the county bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection of the installation of utilities. 
(Code 2003, § 38-255)
Sec. 26-175. - Review of design standards. 
All design standards set forth in this article shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners and approved by resolution of the board. 
(Code 2003, § 38-256)
Sec. 26-176. - Removal and relocation of utility facilities. 
(a)	Any utility using or occupying any part of a public road which the county has undertaken to improve or intends to improve shall remove and relocate its facility when, in the reasonable opinion of the county, the facility constitutes an obstruction or interference with the use or safe operation of such road by the traveling public or when, in the reasonable opinion of the county, the facility will interfere with such contemplated construction or maintenance. 
(b)	Whenever the county reasonably determines it necessary to have a utility facility removed and relocated, the county shall give the utility at least 60 days' written notice directing the removal and relocation of such utility obstruction. If the utility does not thereafter begin removal within a reasonable time sufficient to allow for engineering and other procedures reasonably necessary to the removal and relocation of the utility facility, the county may give the utility a final notice directing that such removal shall commence not later than ten days from receipt of such final notice. If such utility does not, within ten days from receipt of such final notice, begin to remove or relocate the facility or, having so begun removal or relocation, thereafter fails to complete the removal or relocation within a reasonable time, the county may remove or relocate such facility with its own employees or by employing or contracting for the necessary engineering, labor, tools, equipment, supervision or other necessary services or materials and whatever else is necessary to accomplish the facility's removal or relocation; and the expenses of such removal or relocation may be paid and collected as provided in section 26-178. 
(Code 2003, § 38-257)
Sec. 26-177. - Replacement right-of-way for relocated utility. 
(a)	Whenever a public road improvement necessitates the acquisition by the county of a utility's privately owned rights-of-way and the relocation of such utility's facilities, the county may, with written consent of the utility, provide a replacement right-of-way. 
(b)	Whenever a public road improvement requires the relocation of a utility occupying public road rights-of-way, the county may, at the written request of such utility, provide to the utility a right-of-way which is not on a public road right-of-way. In this event, the utility shall reimburse the county for the acquisition costs. 
(c)	Title to property acquired for utility relocations under subsection (a) or (b) of this section and as authorized by section 26-176 may be transferred to such utility as authorized in section 26-178. However, the procedures for sale of property as set forth in this Code shall not be applicable to the transfer of property acquired for utility relocation. Any such property transfer to the utility shall be conveyed by the execution of a quitclaim deed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 38-258)
Sec. 26-178. - Payment of expenses of removal and relocation. 
The expenses incurred by the county as a result of utility removal and relocation pursuant to section 26-176(b), including the cost of acquiring new land or interest therein pursuant to section 26-177(b), shall be paid out of the available appropriations of the county for the construction or maintenance of public roads. A statement of such expenses shall be submitted to the utility, which shall make payment to the county. If the utility does not make payment or arrange to make payment to the county within 60 days after the receipt of such statement, the county shall certify the amount for collection to the county attorney. Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to deprive any utility, relocated from a location in which it owned a property interest, of compensation for such property interest. 
(Code 2003, § 38-259)
Sec. 26-179. - Promulgation of regulations. 
The county may promulgate reasonable regulations governing the installation, fees, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal and relocations of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, tracks, traffic and other such signals, and other equipment and appliances of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the county road system which the county has undertaken or agreed to undertake or which has been completed by the county pursuant to its authority. In addition to the requirement of such county regulations, it shall be the responsibility of the utility to obtain whatever franchise is required by law. 
(Code 2003, § 38-260)
Sec. 26-180. - Right to injunctive relief. 
(a)	The county may petition for an injunction to enforce the performance of any duty or act imposed by this article or for an order to restrain the breach of any duty or the commission of any act imposed or prohibited or unauthorized by this article. 
(b)	Any person who violates any provision of this article or fails to comply with the regulations thereof, including any regulation promulgated by the county, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-19. The owner of any utility, its agents, representatives, employees or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in section 1-19. 
(Code 2003, § 38-261)
Secs. 26-181—26-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ROAD ADDRESSING 

Sec. 26-199. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address program administrator means the county official charged with the administration of this article, including his authorized representative. The county EMS director, or such other person as may be designated by the board of commissioners, shall serve as the address program administrator. 
Address program administrator assistant means the county official charged with assisting the address program administrator. The address program administrator assistant shall be the county clerk or such other person as designated by the board of commissioners. 
Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter of persons, for residential or business use. When separated by division walls from the ground up without openings, each such enclosure may be deemed a separate building. Buildings without divisions as heretofore described, that are used as multifamily or multi-use facilities, may, at the discretion of the address program administrator, be assigned more than one address. 
Concurrence. The county board of commissioners shall have the right to disapprove any action of the address program administrator by a majority vote. If the board of commissioners shall fail to act within two regular meetings after the action of the address program administrator, the board of commissioners shall be deemed to have concurred with said action. 
Driveways means a private way, beginning at the property line of a lot abutting a public road, private road, easement or private right-of-way, giving access from the public road, private road easement or private right-of-way, and leading to a building, lot or physical location. 
Road address means the combination of numbers and road names assigned under the terms of this article which identifies a particular building, lot or other physical location. 
Private road means any one-way or two-way road for ingress and/or egress, serving two or more properties, but not for use by the general public. 
Public road means any road, street, highway, thoroughfare, or other way of passage that has been irrevocably dedicated to the public or in which the public has acquired rights by prescription, without regard to whether it is open for travel. 
(Code 2003, § 38-301; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 3)
Sec. 26-200. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide a uniform system of assigning addresses for all properties and buildings throughout the county in order to facilitate provision of adequate public safety and emergency response service and to minimize difficulty in locating properties and buildings for public service agencies and the general public. 
(Code 2003, § 38-302; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 2)
Sec. 26-201. - Administration and application. 
The address program administrator, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, will be responsible for the interpretation and administration of this article, including: 
(1)	Assigning all numbers for properties and buildings (except that the initial system shall be created by LAS Systems). 
(2)	Maintaining a database of addresses of each property and building.
(3)	Designating individual unit addresses within multiple housing units in conformity with this article. 
(4)	Recommending to the board of commissioners such changes to this article or to the road name system as may be necessary to facilitate the perpetuation and efficiency of the address system. 
(Code 2003, § 38-303; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 4)
Sec. 26-202. - Enforcement. 
Owners or occupants of buildings already constructed which do not comply with this article will be notified and requested to meet the requirements within 60 days from the date of notification. A warning notice will be issued by registered or certified mail after the 60 days if the requirements have not been met. The owner or occupant who does not comply with this article within 30 days after delivery of a warning notice shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or 30 days in jail, or both; and if such violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. Violation of this article may also be enforced by seeking an order to compel compliance of civil remedies against the violator. Prosecutions for violation of this article shall be upon citation as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63 in the magistrate court of the county. The address program administrator is hereby authorized to issue citations for the enforcement of the provisions contained within this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. 
(Code 2003, § 38-304; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 13)
Sec. 26-203. - Display of road address numbers. 
(a)	At such time as each owner of improved property is contacted by the county board of commissioners and instructed to do so, he shall purchase and display official address numbers so that they are clearly visible from the street or road on which the property fronts. The following criteria shall be used to properly display the numbers: 
(1)	Address numbers must meet the following minimum size requirements:
a.	Mailboxes and/or the posts upon which they are mounted must bear numbers no less than three inches in height. 
b.	Residences and businesses within 150 feet of the road upon which their address is assigned must bear numbers no less than four inches in height and be of contrasting color to the background upon which they are placed. 
c.	Residences and businesses more than 150 feet but less than 500 feet from the road upon which their address is assigned must bear numbers no less than six inches in height and be of contrasting color to the background upon which they are placed. 
d.	Residences and businesses more than 500 feet from the road or which are not visible from the road upon which their address is assigned, must place a pole, post, sign or other device, bearing address numbers no less than four inches in height, in immediate proximity to the driveway or private road that leads to their residence or business. 
(2)	Numbers for a multiple dwelling complex or nonresidential building shall be at least six inches in height and shall be placed on the front of the building facing the road or on the end of the building nearest the road. Individual units within a multiple dwelling complex shall be required to display a unit number which is at least three inches in height on the front door or immediately adjacent to the door. 
(3)	On a corner lot, the house number shall face the street named in the address.
(b)	The address program administrator, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, will have the right to authorize and approve alternate methods of displaying numbers which meet the intent of this article when strict adherence to these standards cannot be met or is impractical. 
(Code 2003, § 38-305; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 5)
Sec. 26-204. - Types of numbers. 
Two types of numbers are to be used under this article: 
(1)	Primary numbers. A primary number is to be assigned to each street frontage of each improved property. The primary number must be posted on that property if the property is occupied by a dwelling unit, structure or active use and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified under section 26-203. 
(2)	Secondary numbers. Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures and uses coexist on the same parcel of land. Examples of secondary numbers include apartment projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit developments, recreational vehicle parks, recreational areas, shopping centers and other uses where the use of secondary numbers would clarify the location of a unit or use for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers, the address program administrator shall work with the owner, manager or person in charge of the project to determine a logical numbering system. 
(Code 2003, § 38-306; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 6)
Sec. 26-205. - Exempt and excluded structures. 
The intent of this section is to exclude from this article those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life if destroyed by fire or other events. The following structures shall be excluded from the provisions of this article: 
(1)	Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address, such as a barn, poultry house, outbuilding, or equipment storage building. 
(2)	Storage and accessory buildings for the use of the occupant of another building on the same property. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices, or the nominal work station of an employee, or such building that requires a separate mailing address, shall not be exempt. 
(Code 2003, § 38-307; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 7)
Sec. 26-206. - New road names. 
(a)	No new public roads in the unincorporated area of the county shall be named without the approval of the county board of commissioners. 
(b)	No new private road names shall be recognized by this article or added to the county's list of road names without the approval of the county board of commissioners. 
(c)	The name of any new public or private road name shall not duplicate or be confusingly similar to an existing road name. This restriction shall not apply to extensions of existing roads. 
(Code 2003, § 38-308; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 8)
Sec. 26-207. - Renaming an existing road. 
(a)	Anyone requesting the renaming of an existing road shall submit to the county board of commissioners a petition requesting the change. The petition shall state the existing name, the proposed name, the reason for requesting the change, and the signatures of those citizens supporting the change. 
(b)	The county board of commissioners shall decide whether or not to grant the request for changing the road name. If the change is approved, the petitioners shall be required to pay the county the full costs of purchasing and installing the new signs, including the cost of labor. This fee shall be calculated by the county and shall be paid by the petitioners prior to the purchase of the new signs. 
(Code 2003, § 38-309; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 9)
Sec. 26-208. - Numbers for future structures and lots. 
At such time as the county implements a building permit system within the unincorporated area of the county, an address number must be assigned prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 2003, § 38-310; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 10)
Sec. 26-209. - Utility company compliance. 
Following the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, all utility services regulated by the state public service commission or any utility cooperative service organization providing service in the unincorporated area of the county shall withhold service from any building, dwelling, mobile home or other structure not exempt under this article until the owner or other requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid, assigned number. 
(Code 2003, § 38-311; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 11)
Sec. 26-210. - Implementation by county departments. 
Every department and official under the jurisdiction of the county board of commissioners shall withhold non-emergency service until the occupant, owner or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid, assigned number. Non-emergency service includes any service except law enforcement, fire, rescue or emergency medical service. 
(Code 2003, § 38-312; Ord. of 5-13-2002, § 12)
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
(a)	All terms used in this chapter shall have the definitions ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as such terms may be from time to time amended, whether such definition is set out in this section or not. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment dwelling, roominghouse, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a one-family or two-family dwelling unit or condominium. 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Owner means any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the county. 
Person means the state or any state agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, limited liability company, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in the state or any other state. The term "person" also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in this state or any other state. The term "person" also includes employees, departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation Standard of at least 1.5 mills and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist ties. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible waste include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing material from solid wastes for future use. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial solid waste. 
Rubbish means discarded wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass crockery, dunnage or similar materials. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of by means of placing an earth cover thereon and which is approved by state and federal authorities for such purpose. 
Wastestream means the total flow of solid waste from residential units, commercial establishments, condominiums, apartments, institutions and the like to its ultimate disposal site or facility. 
(b)	The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 (Solid Waste Management - Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
(Code 2003, § 42-1)
Sec. 28-2. - Collection of sanitation/solid waste fees. 
The county shall bill each solid waste customer at the end of each month, such fees as are approved by the board of commissioners, and said fees shall be due no later than the tenth of the following month, or at such time as may be designated upon the face of the bill. If the fee is not paid by the time indicated, a late fee as established by the board of commissioners from time to time shall be added to the balance due. Nonpayment of the fees provided for in this chapter shall constitute a lien against the real and personal property of the person or legal entity responsible for payment of said fees. Should any person liable for the payment of said fees fail to pay the fees within 15 days of having been billed, the chairperson of the county commission, or such person as may be authorized by the board of commissioners, shall be authorized to issue an execution against such person or legal entity and deliver the execution to the sheriff for levy and sale as provided by law. 
(Res. of 5-16-2006)
Secs. 28-3—28-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANAGEMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 28-23. - Solid waste management district established. 
A solid waste management district is created and established, composed of all that unincorporated area within the county. 
(Code 2003, § 42-31)
Sec. 28-24. - System of household garbage collection. 
(a)	The primary purpose of the district created by this article is to establish, maintain and operate within the district a system of household garbage collection. 
(b)	The system of solid waste management shall be as follows:
(1)	The county shall locate, maintain and operate one or more landfills for the disposal of solid waste or enter into contracts for the services of other legally permitted solid waste handling facilities. 
(2)	The county shall provide curbside collection of household waste to each residence and business located in the unincorporated county, provided the same is not a customer of a municipal water system operated by Preston, Weston or Richland. Each customer of the county solid waste department is required to provide his own trash receptacle or other form of storage of household waste. Each form of storage used must be placed in immediate proximity to a public road to receive service and must be of a reasonable size and weight so that it can be emptied by the personnel collecting solid waste. Commercial customers requiring dumpster (or greenbox) service shall receive the same from the county or its contractor, at the fees established by the county board of commissioners. 
(3)	The county shall transport the household garbage placed in the containers to the landfill or other legally permitted solid waste handling facility. 
(4)	The county may implement other measures as called for in the county's comprehensive solid waste management plan. 
(Code 2003, § 42-32; Res. of 3-14-2006, § 42-32(b)(2))
Sec. 28-25. - Rules and regulations governing solid waste system. 
From time to time, the board of commissioners may form and establish rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the solid waste system and to carry out the intention of this article, and instruct the chairperson/administrator and other county personnel to carry out such rules and regulations. 
(Code 2003, § 42-33)
Sec. 28-26. - Authorized solid waste haulers. 
Solid waste may only be collected for disposal by the county, municipalities or by sanitary contractors authorized by the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 2003, § 42-34; Res. of 5-12-2003, § 1(L))
Sec. 28-27. - Solid waste contracts. 
The county may enter into contracts to perform all or a part of the solid waste collection and/or disposal system; provided that such contracts are entered into in accordance with county bidding procedures. 
(Code 2003, § 42-35)
Sec. 28-28. - Haulers to secure waste in vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any hauler to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any waste upon or along the public streets and roadways, except when the material transported is adequately covered in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from the transporting vehicle. The operator and/or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(Code 2003, § 42-36)
Sec. 28-29. - Depositing waste at landfills. 
Haulers shall only deposit solid waste, except prohibited waste, at the county sanitary landfill or transfer station in accordance with the regulations of the landfill or transfer station. In no event shall haulers, except individuals transporting household garbage, deposit solid waste at county container collection sites. 
(Code 2003, § 42-37)
Sec. 28-30. - Permits required prior to waste disposal. 
In addition to all other requirements of this article, no sanitary landfill, inert waste landfill or other landfill dump shall be used unless the owner of property used for such a purpose and the person causing the material to be dumped have first obtained all permits as may be required by the laws of the state and a permit from the county. 
(Code 2003, § 42-38)
Secs. 28-31—28-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES 

Sec. 28-49. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article apply to all persons presently engaged in solid waste handling as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(Code 2003, § 42-71)
Sec. 28-50. - General restriction. 
No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will: 
(1)	Be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; 
(2)	Impair the air quality or the quality of the groundwater or surface water;
(3)	Impair the quality of the environment; or
(4)	Create other hazards to the public health, safety or well-being.
(Code 2003, § 42-72)
Sec. 28-51. - Exemptions. 
(a)	The provisions of this article shall not apply to any individual disposing of solid wastes originating from his own residence onto land or facilities owned by him when disposal of such wastes does not adversely affect the public health. Nothing in this article shall limit the right of any person to use poultry or animal manure for fertilizer. 
(b)	The provisions of this article shall not apply to owners of record of all one-family and two-family dwellings, condominiums or multifamily dwelling units who dispose of solid waste by self-hauling such waste to a state-approved landfill or to a collection center operated by the county. Failure to provide evidence of proper disposal upon request by county officials (receipts, canceled checks or other proof of payment) shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)	The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person collecting and disposing of municipal solid waste, commercial solid waste, construction/demolition waste or industrial waste, but not charging a fee, and who is a holder of a valid solid waste handling permit from the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources pursuant to Rules 391-3-4-.02 and 391-3-4-.06 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4-.02 and 391-3-4-.06) of the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division for disposal or on-site burial. Such disposal shall be governed by state environmental protection division regulations. 
(Code 2003, § 42-73)
Sec. 28-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Violations of any provisions of this article shall be reported initially to the sanitation department, which office is charged with administration of the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The provisions of this article regarding the disposal or burial on-site of solid waste shall be enforced by the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division. 
(Code 2003, § 42-74)
Sec. 28-53. - Penalties. 
Any person or any employee or agent violating any provision of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-19. Each full day a violation continues may constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 2003, § 42-75)
Sec. 28-54. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	No person shall engage in solid waste handling except in such a manner as to conform to and comply with this article and all applicable state and federal legislation, rules, regulations and orders. 
(b)	No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property. 
(1)	A person shall be presumed to have violated this provision if, upon written notification that litter or solid waste has been dumped on that person's property, not otherwise subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-51 to 16-7-54, that person fails to provide the county, within 15 days of notification, with written assurance that the accumulation of litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within 30 days from the original date of notification. 
(2)	No person who first informs the county in writing that illegal dumping has occurred on a particular parcel of that person's property shall be deemed to have violated this section, if such person provides written assurance all accumulated litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within 45 days of the date of such written notification and subsequently provides proof of such disposal. 
(Code 2003, § 42-76)
Sec. 28-55. - Responsibility of owner or occupant. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry or similar facility shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution or similar facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with the state environmental protection division rules and regulations unless arrangements have been made for such services with a collector operating in compliance with this article. 
(b)	No owner or occupant shall allow the accumulation of solid waste on his residential unit or commercial establishment where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 42-77)
Sec. 28-56. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by an entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Code 2003, § 42-78)
Sec. 28-57. - General conditions of residential collection. 
(a)	Occupants of one-family and two-family dwelling units, condominiums or multifamily dwelling units not served by a commercial container shall place refuse receptacles, rubbish and bundles, on assigned collection days, at roadside locations in such a manner as not to obstruct passage. Occupants shall place such refuse at appropriate locations prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. 
(b)	Occupants shall remove containers from such locations to storage locations, which shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; removal should be accomplished within a reasonable time following collection on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(c)	Occupants shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon their property or the public thoroughfares bounding upon such occupant's property. 
(d)	It shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed for collection any hazardous waste. 
(e)	Solid waste generated from the conduct of customary home occupations carried on from residential dwelling units will be collected on a residential fee basis, with the owner of each residence being billed for the requisite solid waste fees, regardless of who occupied the residence. 
(f)	Property owners shall not be responsible for the cost of solid waste collection during any period when the property is vacant for a calendar month, provided they have notified the county board of commissioners in writing in advance of or during that period. 
(g)	Deer camps, to the extent that ownership can be determined, shall be billed for collection and disposal during its use. The amount of the rate billed shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, § 42-79; Res. of 3-14-2006, § 42-79(f), (g))
Sec. 28-58. - General conditions of commercial collection. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution or industry or similar commercial establishment shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at such premises, establishment or facility to either a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with state regulations with service by an approved contractor or to a collection center operated by the county; however, the county may direct such owner or occupant not to use the collection center based on the volume generated. Holders of a valid solid waste handling permit from the state department of natural resources shall be exempt from such contracting. 
(b)	The county reserves the right at all times to direct and control the time, place and manner of commercial solid waste handling and disposal. Nothing in this article is intended to abridge the county's right to ownership and control of the wastestream. 
(Code 2003, § 42-80)
Sec. 28-59. - Prohibition against non-customer usage. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone who is not a customer of the solid waste system to use said system for the disposal of solid waste. 
(Code 2003, § 42-81; Res. of 3-14-2006, § 42-81)
Secs. 28-60—28-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering prohibited on public and private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.

Sec. 28-77. - Unlawful; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of garbage, household garbage, solid waste, litter or other waste on any public or private property in the unincorporated areas of the county, unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or by the county for the disposal of garbage, litter or other waste and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property. 
(2)	The garbage, litter and other waste is placed into a proper garbage, litter or waste receptacle, such as covered garbage cans, a dumpster, trash compactors or a designated landfill. 
(Code 2003, § 42-111)
Sec. 28-78. - Collection of litter by depositor. 
In addition to the other penalties authorized by this article, in the sound discretion of the judge of the court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, public right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence, and/or the court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating section 28-77. 
(Code 2003, § 42-112)
Sec. 28-79. - Littering from conveyance. 
Whenever household garbage, litter and other waste is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of section 28-77, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator or owner of the conveyance has violated the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 42-113)
Sec. 28-80. - Tracing litter. 
Except as provided in section 28-77, whenever garbage, litter or other waste which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings, which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Code 2003, § 42-114)
Sec. 28-81. - Waste disposal generally. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposition of garbage and refuse on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter at any place in the county including, without limitation, any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless such litter originates in the county, and: 
(1)	The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)	The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and not otherwise in violation of law. 
(Code 2003, § 42-115)
Sec. 28-82. - Regulation of garbage or litter containers or receptacles. 
The following regulations apply to all garbage or litter containers or receptacles: 
(1)	All garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for garbage and litter disposal. 
(2)	Persons using garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall deposit all authorized garbage and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(3)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any such container or receptacle. 
(4)	No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle.
(5)	No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle.
(6)	No person shall deposit large non-compactable articles in such containers or receptacles such as stoves, refrigerators, bed springs or tires, large tree limbs, air conditioning units, or similar items. 
(7)	No one shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(8)	No person shall disturb or scatter litter in and around such containers or receptacles.
(Code 2003, § 42-116)
Sec. 28-83. - Scavenging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than designated employees in the performance of their normal duties, to rummage through, separate or remove any object placed in or upon such garbage container. 
(Code 2003, § 42-117)
Sec. 28-84. - Defacing containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint upon, deface or in any way cause any damage whatsoever to any garbage container placed upon the premises for the collection of garbage. 
(Code 2003, § 42-118)
Sec. 28-85. - Solid waste; adoption by reference. 
All provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-20 through 12-8-40.3 (Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act) are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully set out in this Code. 
(Res. of 5-12-2003, § 1(N))
Chapter 30 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Tax on insurance businesses. 
There is levied an annual tax upon every insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4), and (5). The term "gross direct premiums" shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 2003, § 46-1; Res. of 8-5-1983, § 1)
State Law reference— County taxes on insurance companies other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 30-2. - Exemptions from ad valorem taxation. 
(a)	The following are declared exempt from ad valorem taxation at the current 60 percent exemption rate: 
(1)	Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production, which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the county. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered, or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing, or production operations in the state. For purposes of this subsection, the cleaning, drying, pest control treatment, or segregation by grade of grain, peanuts or other oil seeds, or cotton shall constitute substantial modification in the course of processing or production operations. For purposes of this subsection, remanufacture of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components shall constitute manufacturing operations in this state. Remanufacture of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components means the substantial overhauling or rebuilding of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components; 
(2)	Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayers' manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured; or 
(3)	Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside of the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside the state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside the state, including foreign merchandise in transit. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in the state. Such period shall be determined based on application of a first-in, first-out method of accounting for the inventory. The official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf where such property is being stored shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such property for which a freeport exemption has been claimed shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of the state and of any political subdivision of the state. 
(b)	All provisions of the freeport exemption as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-48.2 and 48-5-48.6 are incorporated in this section with the freeport exemption rate being established at 60 percent as earlier agreed upon by the county board of commissioners. All other definitions and requirements contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-48.2 and 48-5-48.6 are incorporated and if there is any conflict between state statute and this section, the state statute shall override any other provisions of this section. 
(Code 2003, § 46-2; Res. of 5-5-1998)
Sec. 30-3. - Sales tax. 
There is levied a joint county and municipal sales and use tax at a rate of one percent within the special district in which its boundaries are coterminous with the boundaries of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 46-3; Res. of 11-23-1983)
State Law reference— Authority of county to levy joint sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82. 
Sec. 30-4. - Board of tax assessors appointments. 
All subsequent appointments to the county board of tax assessors shall be for terms of six years, except that in the event of a vacancy, such appointment shall be for the remainder of the term that was vacated. 
(Res. of 1-10-2006)
Sec. 30-5. - Claims of clerical error. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners delegates to the county board of tax assessors the authority to approve or disapprove claims where the sole reason for said claim is based upon an obvious clerical error. 
(b)	The county board of commissioners reserves the right to rescind, repeal and cancel the delegation of said authority at its discretion. 
(Res. of 3-14-2006)
Sec. 30-6. - In rem tax foreclosures. 
The Unified Government of Webster County, by and through its board of commissioners, hereby authorizes the county tax commissioner, on behalf of the county, to use judicial in rem tax foreclosures for the collection of delinquent county ad valorem taxes in accordance with title 48, chapter 4, article 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.). 
(Res. of 11-9-2010)
Secs. 30-7—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts has the same meaning as is ascribed to the term for each such depository financial institution in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Code 2003, § 46-31; Res. of 12-5-1986, § 1)
Sec. 30-32. - Tax levied. 
(a)	Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for each year, upon each state and national bank, each federal savings and loan association, and each state building and loan association located in the county, not exempted by state law, an annual business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each such institution, or $1,000.00, per annum, whichever amount is greater. 
(b)	The taxes levied by subsection (a) of this section for each year shall be levied on the amount of gross receipts received by each such depository financial institution during the immediately preceding calendar year. 
(Code 2003, § 46-32; Res. of 12-5-1986, § 2)
Sec. 30-33. - Returns. 
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file with the county not later than March 1 of each year a return of its gross receipts received by it during the immediately preceding calendar year. The returns shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 2003, § 46-33; Res. of 12-5-1986, § 3)
Sec. 30-34. - When taxes due and payable. 
The taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable on April 1 of each year. 
(Code 2003, § 46-34; Res. of 12-5-1986, § 4)
Secs. 30-35—30-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 30-57. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms "dealer," "local sales and use tax," and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 1)
Sec. 30-58. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111 an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-32. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 2)
Sec. 30-59. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)	Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the county board of commissioners pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)	For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)	For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage,, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)	For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)	On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under state law is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in subsection (b)(1) through (3) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in subsection (b)(4) of this section, notwithstanding the January 1, 2016, limitation in that subsection (b)(4). 
(d)	Rate after phase-in period.
(1)	Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the county board of commissioners shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(2)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 3)
Sec. 30-60. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)	Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)	Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.; 
(3)	A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)	Remitted to the county board of commissioners by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)	A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 4)
Sec. 30-61. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners, or the collection officer appointed under section 30-64, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the state department of revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this article when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 5)
Sec. 30-62. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2012, and shall be due and payable to the county board of commissioners monthly on or before the 20th day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 6)
Sec. 30-63. - Distribution and expenditure of proceeds. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114, the excise tax proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the county, and shall not be subject to any use or expenditure requirements provided for under any of the local sales and use taxes but shall be authorized to be expended in the same manner as otherwise would have been required under such local sales and use taxes or may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 7)
Sec. 30-64. - Administrative provision; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners shall be authorized to designate a collection officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealer collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer or his designee is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012, § 8)
Chapter 32 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, is adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 50-1)
State Law reference— Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 32-2. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this chapter or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
(Code 2003, § 50-2)
Sec. 32-3. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the county may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the sheriff may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate regulations, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 50-3)
Secs. 32-4—32-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-25. - Traffic, speed, zones; signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)	The board of commissioners will designate a person who shall be authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)	Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)	Other safety zones for pedestrians.
(3)	Traffic lanes.
(4)	Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones.
(5)	Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices.
(6)	Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the county. 
(b)	All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this article for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices of the county. 
(c)	The county clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by the board of commissioners and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the county. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the county clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the county clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)	No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)	Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 50-31)
Sec. 32-26. - Covering of loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of the county unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 50-32)
Sec. 32-27. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped, or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)	Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(c)	Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a county ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Code 2003, § 50-33)
Sec. 32-28. - Engine and/or compression braking prohibited. 
The Unified Government of Webster County Board of Commissioners make[s] it unlawful for any person in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to: a truck or a tractor-trailer truck, to use an engine brake or compression brake while traveling along the streets of the city of Preston unless such engine brake or compression brake is used solely to effect an emergency stop of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-15-2014)
Secs. 32-29—32-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-58. - General speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the county at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limit is posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
(Code 2003, § 50-51)
Sec. 32-59. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The board of commissioners may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 32-58 on any street or portion of a street within the county in accordance with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion of a street, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
(Code 2003, § 50-52)
Sec. 32-60. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)	The county is authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the county. 
(b)	Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control, and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
(Code 2003, § 50-53)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
2003 COUNTY CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2003 County Code, as updated through February 14, 2012, which are included herein. Sections of the 2003 County Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Local Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 