CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF EATONTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: November 7, 2000 
Effective: November 7, 2000 
____________ 
Published in 2000 by Order of the Board of Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
EATONTON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
William A. Dabbs 
Mayor 
____________ 
Steve Culberson 
James Gorley 
Powell Griffith 
Bill Haley, Jr. 
John Reid 
Ulysses Rice 
Harvey Walker, Jr. 
Councilmen 
____________ 
Roy Vining 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Chris Huskins 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Audrey S. Hightower 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
EATONTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
John Reid 
Mayor 
____________ 
Harvey Walker, Jr. 
Mayor Pro-tem 
____________ 
Alvin Butts 
Teresa Doster 
James A. Gorley 
Charley R. Haley 
William Mangum 
Alma Stokes 
Harvey Walker, Jr. 
Councilpersons 
____________ 
Martin D. Elmore 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Christopher D. Huskins 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sarah E. Abrams 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Code Attorney, and Leesa Hampton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Audrey S. Hightower, City Clerk, and Mr. Christopher D. Huskins, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eatonton, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 2000. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Eatonton, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Board of Council: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Eatonton," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 16, 1999, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 16, 1999, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective November 7, 2000. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Council this 7 th day of November, 2000. 
By: 

ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Council of the City of Eatonton, Georgia, held on the 7 th day of November, 2000. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this part are selected provisions of the city's Charter as set forth in 1908 Ga. Laws, page 620, relating to operation of the municipal government and authority of the board of council. The section numbers correspond with the original Charter section designations. Amendments to the sections are indicated by parenthetical history notes. Provisions rendered obsolete, inapplicable or archaic because of home rule powers derived from Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II and the Municipal Home Rule Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. as well as provisions which may have been preempted by Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV have been omitted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

Section 1. - Incorporation. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority of the same, that the name of the corporation shall be "City of Eatonton," and by such, its corporate name, it shall have perpetual existence, shall sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and do all other acts relating to its corporate capacity. It shall have and use a common seal, and shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities of the mayor and city council of Eatonton. 
Section 2. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Eatonton shall mean and include the territory described as follows: 
All of that property located in Putnam County, Georgia consisting of twelve thousand five hundred sixty six and thirty six one hundreds (12,566.36) acres more or less and being a circle with a radius of two and one half (2.5) miles and with a center point being located in the center of the courthouse square in the City of Eatonton, Georgia. The center point of the courthouse square is to be found by drawing a line from each corner of said square to the opposite corner of said square. 
Section 3. - Composition of governing authority. 
The municipal government shall consist of a mayor and seven (7) aldermen, elected from the city at large, and such other officers, servants and agents hereinafter enumerated as said mayor and aldermen shall, from time to time, lawfully elect or employ, or as shall be elected as hereinafter provided. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 3236) 
Section 4. - Board of council. 
The mayor and aldermen shall constitute the board of council and shall be the supreme governing body, exercising all the powers herein conferred upon the corporation and not otherwise specifically delegated. The mayor shall receive a salary of not less than $350.00 per month, and the members of council shall receive salaries of $250.00 each per month, payable monthly, and such other actual expenses as they may incur in the performance of their official duties upon authorization or approval by the mayor and council. 
(1952 Ga. Laws, page 2625; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 3518; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 3236) 
Section 5. - Mayor's authority. 
The mayor shall be elected by popular vote, as hereinafter prescribed, and shall hold office for four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall have authority: 
(1)  To preside over any and all meetings of all the board of council, but not to vote therein except in elections and impeachments; 
(2)  To call special meetings of the board of council whenever he may deem same necessary, provided, he shall be required to call a meeting of said board of council whenever three (3) aldermen shall so request in writing; 
(3)  To have general oversight over all executive officers, employees or servants of the city, and in case of misconduct, or neglect of duty on the part of any such officer, employee or servant, he shall have power to suspend him, pending investigation by the board of council; 
(4)  To preside in the municipal court of the said city, and to exercise all of the rights, privileges and powers hereinafter conferred upon the presiding officer of the said court; 
(5)  To pardon offenders against the city ordinances, and to suspend, revoke or vacate any sentence of the municipal court of said city, four of the seven (7) aldermen approving such veto, suspension or reduction, whether imposed by himself, the mayor pro tem, or municipal court judge presiding in said court under the provisions of this act; 
(6)  To exercise all other powers conferred upon him by this act, or which may hereafter be conferred upon him by ordinance of the said board of council not in conflict with this act. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 3236) 
Section 6. - Wards. 
(a)  (I)  For the purpose of electing the aldermen of the City of Eatonton, said City is divided into four wards as follows: 
WARD NUMBER ONE: the boundary of Ward One shall be a line beginning at a point where Georgia Highway 16, which is also known as Sumter Street, crosses the city limits on the East side of Eatonton, Georgia, and running in a western direction along said Highway 16 to a point where Highway 16 intersects with North Jefferson Ave.; thence north along North Jefferson to Imperial Mill Road; thence Northwest on Imperial Mills Road to Imperial Avenue Northwest; thence West to Godfrey Road NW; thence Northwest on Old Godfrey Road to a point where it intersects the City Limits; then in an eastern and Southern direction along the City Limits to a point which is the point of beginning. 
WARD NUMBER TWO: the boundary of Ward Two shall be a line beginning at a point where Georgia Highway 16, which is also known as Sumter Street, crosses the City Limits on the East side of Eatonton, Georgia; then along the City Limits in a Southerly direction to a point where the City Limits intersect with Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue, which is also known as Gholston Road; then in a Northwestern direction along Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue where it intersects with Hogan Boulevard: thence West along Hogan to Jefferson Street; thence North on Jefferson to Pond Street; thence southwest on West Pond Street to Rock Lane; thence north on Rock Lane to Jefferson Avenue; thence North on North Jefferson to Sumter Street; thence East on Sumter Street and Georgia Highway 16 to the point of beginning. 
WARD NUMBER THREE: the boundary line of Ward Three begins at a point where State Highway 16 also known as Marion Street intersects the City Limits on the western side of the City of Eatonton then runs in an eastern direction along said highway to Washington Ave.; thence South on Washington Ave. through Jefferson Ave. and onto Rock Lane until it intersects with W. Pond St.; thence West on Pond Street to Jefferson Street; thence South on Jefferson Street to Hogan Boulevard; thence East on Hogan Boulevard to Martin Luther King Drive; thence Southeast on Martin Luther King Drive to the City Limits; thence West and North along said City Limits to the point of beginning. 
WARD NUMBER FOUR: the boundary line of Ward Four shall begin at a point where State Highway 16 also known as Marion Street intersects the City Limits on the western side of the City of Eatonton then in a Northern and eastern direction along said City Limits to a point where the City Limits intersect the Godfrey Highway; thence South on the Godfrey Highway to Imperial Avenue; thence East along Imperial Avenue to Imperial Mills Road Northwest; thence Southeast to N. Jefferson Ave.; thence south to S. Washington Ave.; thence North on Washington Street to Georgia Highway 16; thence West on Georgia Highway 16 to the City Limits and the point of beginning. 
(II)  For the purposes of this paragraph [subsection] (a), boundary lines shall be the centerlines of the various roads, streets and railways mentioned in the boundary descriptions of the various wards. 
(b)  The mayor and three aldermen elected at the general city election in 1990 shall serve for terms of office which expire December 31, 1995. At the general municipal election in 1995, the following shall be elected: 
(I)  The mayor shall be elected at large by a majority of the qualified voters of the city voting in the election to serve for a four-year term of office which commences on January 1, 1996. The mayor shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified; 
(II)  One alderman shall be elected by a majority of the qualified voters voting in Ward No. 1 and Ward No. 4 to serve for a four-year term of office which commences January 1, 1996. Such alderman elected shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified; 
(III)  One alderman shall be elected by a majority of the qualified voters voting in Ward No. 2 and Ward No. 3 to serve for a four-year term of office which commences January 1, 1996. Such alderman elected shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified; and 
(IV)  One alderman shall be elected at large by a majority of the qualified voters of the city voting in the election to serve for a four-year term of office which commences January 1, 1996. Such aldermen elected shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified. 
Successors to said mayor and aldermen shall be elected at the general municipal election preceding the expiration of their terms of office to serve for terms of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(c)  At the city election to be held on the first Tuesday in August, 1992, one alderman shall be elected from each of the four wards. Each such alderman elected shall be a resident of the ward from which elected and shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified voters residing in the ward and voting in such election. Such aldermen shall serve for terms of office which expire December 31, 1997. Successors to said aldermen elected from wards shall be elected at the general municipal election preceding the expiration of their terms of office to serve for terms of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(d)  The mayor and aldermen shall be elected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1] the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(e)  All vacancies in the offices of mayor and aldermen shall be filled by special elections; and the person elected at such special election shall fill out the remainder of the unexpired term of the officer he succeeds. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2003; Res. of 11-6-2012) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of 1977 Ga. Laws, page 3236 amended the original act by striking in its entirety the first paragraph of section 6. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Charter. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE  ORDINANCES 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Eatonton, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of council: 
Board of council. The term "board of council" means the board of council of Eatonton, Georgia, consisting of a mayor and seven aldermen as defined in section 3 of the Charter. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, City of Eatonton, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county" or "this county" is used it shall refer to Putnam County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean a calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Eatonton" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. Whenever the terms "state," "the state" and "this state" are used, they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section, and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code, are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the board of council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted, as a new Code of Ordinances by the board of council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Eatonton, Georgia, is amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Eatonton, Georgia, is amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation, unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation, unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation, unincorporated association or organization for the violation of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise provided by state law, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months, and to work on the city streets and public works not exceeding 60 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed may be collected by execution. Each day any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-8) 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(13); civil emergencies, ch. 22; courts, ch. 26; administration and enforcement of flood regulations, § 38-36 et seq.; historic preservation commission, § 42-31 et seq.; planning, ch. 50; administration and enforcement of collection and disposal of solid waste, § 54-32; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Location of polling place. 
The polling place for city elections shall be located at the old American Legion Hut, 400 A West Marion Street. 
State Law reference— Duty of superintendent to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265. 
Sec. 2-2. - Departments established. 
The following departments of the city are established: 
(1)  Police; 
(2)  Fire; 
(3)  Street; 
(4)  Gas; 
(5)  Water; 
(6)  Sewer; and 
(7)  Planning. 
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4. 

Sec. 2-31. - Regular meetings. 
The regular meetings of the board of council shall be held on the first Tuesday and third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the city hall or other such place as may be designated by the board of council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-11; Res. of 1-5-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-32. - Agenda. 
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each board of council meeting. Persons who desire to address the members of the board of council at a meeting shall notify the clerk of the board of council by the close of business on the Thursday preceding the next meeting. 
Sec. 2-33. - Parliamentary procedure. 
The proceedings of the board of council shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so far as applicable, and not inconsistent with the special rules of the board of council, the Charter and this Code. 
Secs. 2-34—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The city compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. In addition, the city funds a retirement plan for city employees. Official copies of the personnel manual and retirement plan are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-14(4); animal control officer, § 10-10. 
State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14); Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-66. - Performance bonds of employees. 
The board of council may, by resolution, require a bond of any employee of the city conditioned on faithful performance, payable to the city in an amount set in the resolution. Premiums are to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 2-67. - Fire department. 
(a)  There shall be a fire department, consisting of a chief and not more than 20 volunteer members. The volunteer fire force may be augmented by paid staff with such payments coming from grant proceeds or other sources including general fund proceeds. 
(b)  The city's volunteer firefighters are to be included within the definition of the term "employee" under O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1(2) for the purposes of worker's compensation coverage. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2-1; Amd. of 9-21-2009) 
Secs. 2-68—2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-91. - Appointments and qualifications. 
The city administrator shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the board of council. Such person shall be selected solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his knowledge of and actual experience in municipal management. The city administrator must be a resident of Putnam County, Georgia. 
Sec. 2-92. - Bond and oath. 
Before entering the duties of office, the city administrator shall take an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance of his duties and shall execute a bond payable to the city in a reasonable amount to be determined by the board of council for the faithful accounting of all funds belonging to the city that come into his hands. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 2-93. - Powers and duties. 
The city administrator shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully enforced; 
(2)  Hire and discharge for cause any employee of the city not authorized to be appointed or elected by the board of council, provided that such power to appoint or discharge may be delegated to any other official or employee by the city administrator; 
(3)  Fill all appointive offices of the city, except where otherwise provided by law, and report such appointments or removals to the board of council as soon as possible after the action is taken; 
(4)  Supervise and direct the official conduct of all appointed city officers; 
(5)  Exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions of the city except where otherwise provided by law; 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the board of council with the right to take part, but not vote, in all discussions; 
(7)  Recommend to the board of council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary and expedient; 
(8)  Supervise the purchasing and submit to the board of council prior to the beginning of such fiscal year a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government, and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(9)  Keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the city, including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts; 
(10)  Keep the members of the board of council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(11)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees lawfully employed by him, subject to the approval of the board of council; 
(12)  Examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be party, and sign on behalf of the city any contract authorized by the board of council, excepting where the board of council directs that some other officer may do so; 
(13)  Supervise the performance of all contracts made for work for the city; 
(14)  Supervise, through the purchasing agents, all purchases of supplies, material and equipment for the city and see that they are received as contracted for, provided that if a purchase of unbudgeted items in excess of $500.00 is involved, prior approval of the board of council shall be necessary; 
(15)  Conduct all sales which the board of council may authorize of personal property of the city which has become unnecessary or unfit for the city to use; 
(16)  Keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the city, and its location; 
(17)  See to publication of all notices and documents required by law to be published; 
(18)  Prepare for the election officials all notices, ballots and election supplies necessary in connection with municipal elections; 
(19)  Prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by law to be kept by the city and not by a specific officer; and 
(20)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code, or required by ordinance or resolution of the board of council. 
Sec. 2-94. - Removal from office. 
The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the board of council and may be removed from office at any time by a vote of the majority of the members of the board of council. 
Sec. 2-95. - Grievance. 
Any employee of the city who has a grievance or disagreement with his immediate supervisor or with the policies of the city, shall inform his immediate supervisor of full grievance or disagreement. If such grievance or disagreement is not resolved at that level the employee shall inform the city administrator of such grievance or disagreement. If the dispute is not resolved at that level the employee may inform the personnel and finance committee or the board of council of such grievance or disagreement. 
Secs. 2-96—2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-121. - Office established. 
There is established for the city the office of city attorney. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1984, § 1) 
Sec. 2-122. - Requirements. 
The office of city attorney is to be filled by one person who must reside and be licensed to practice law in the state. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1984, § 2) 
Sec. 2-123. - Term of office. 
The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the board of council for a term not to exceed one year at a time. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1984, § 3) 
Sec. 2-124. - Salary. 
The city attorney shall be paid an annual retainer of not less than $1,200.00 to be paid in equal monthly payments. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1984, § 4) 
Sec. 2-125. - Duties and services. 
The city attorney shall perform the following duties and services: 
(1)  Attend all regular meetings of the board of council. 
(2)  Keep the board of council informed as to all legislation affecting city government. 
(3)  Render legal opinions when requested by the clerk or the board of council. 
(4)  Supply legal advice to all city department heads. 
(5)  Attend designated meetings of boards and committees when requested to do so. 
(6)  Prepare all resolutions and ordinances requested by the city. 
(7)  Review and certify all city contracts, agreements and legal documents. 
(8)  Handle collections not involved in court actions by letter. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1984, § 5) 
Sec. 2-126. - Additional duties. 
The city attorney shall be paid additional compensation agreed upon in advance by the board of council and attorney when assigned to perform the following duties and services: 
(1)  Travel expense incurred on city business conducted outside of the city. 
(2)  Preparation of municipal bond issues. 
(3)  Preparation and promotion of state and federal legislation. 
(4)  Defending or prosecuting actions in court. 
(5)  Appearances and hearings before nonlocal administrative boards or commissions. 
(6)  Any other legal proceedings not listed in section 2-125. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1984, § 6) 
Secs. 2-127—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-151. - Duties. 
The duties of the city clerk shall be to: 
(1)  Attend, in person, all sessions of the municipal court, and keep a correct record of all monies collected by police officers for fines and those turned over to the city clerk; 
(2)  Keep all of the city books; 
(3)  Attend to all the correspondence of the city; 
(4)  Attend, in person, all meetings of the board of council, and keep correct minutes of the proceedings; 
(5)  Collect all taxes, with the help of police officers, and keep a correct record of such taxes collected; 
(6)  Help collect all utility bills due the city, with the help and assistance of the heads of the water and gas departments, and keep a correct record of such collections; 
(7)  Devote himself at such hours as prescribed by the board of council to the city's business, as required by laws and ordinances; 
(8)  Keep the city's books, papers and records so free and easy access can be had to such books, papers and records by the board of council and other officials of the city; 
(9)  Perform all of the duties of the city clerk as required by the board of council, as such duties appear in the laws affecting the city, of this Code and in the ordinances of the city; and 
(10)  Give a performance bond in such amount as required by the board of council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-2) 
Secs. 2-152—2-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-4(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-4(3); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(14); taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-186. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on September 1 and end on August 31 of each year. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-1) 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-187. - Purchasing. 
All purchases shall be made by the purchasing agent of the city who shall: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus city equipment and supplies; 
(2)  Maintain an inventory of all materials, supplies or equipment owned by the city; and 
(3)  Insure that goods, products and supplies which contain post-consumer recycled content are purchased for city use whenever such products meet the minimum standards for the particular function and whenever the cost of such products does not exceed the cost of similar products made from virgin materials. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-2; Ord. of 3-7-2006(1)) 
State Law reference— Acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-188—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-201. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 2-202. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any councilmember of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 2-203. - Prohibitions. 
No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
(7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest. 
Prohibition (2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
Prohibition (5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-204 are made to the board or commission chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-3) 
Sec. 2-204. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-4) 
Sec. 2-205. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-5) 
Sec. 2-206. - Prohibited contracts. 
(a)  The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: the designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(b)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(c)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A., § 16-10-6; 
(d)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
(e)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-6) 
Sec. 2-207. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-7) 
Sec. 2-208. - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-8) 
Sec. 2-209. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics: 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and council members shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 14 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city administrator shall maintain a listing of these 14 qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-9) 
Sec. 2-210. - Service of complaint; hearings; and due process. 
(a)  The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable but no later than ten days after the receipt of such complaint. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-10) 
Sec. 2-211. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  "Public reprimand" shall be defined as a form of public discipline which shall be a written declaration drafted by the city attorney and approved by the mayor (or mayor pro-tem if the mayor is in violation of this article) to be read publicly at the earliest possible regularly scheduled open meeting by the mayor, mayor pro-tem or their designee. Nothing shall prohibit the mayor or mayor pro-tem from publishing said declaration in the legal organ of Putnam County for no more than two consecutive weeks. Said declaration shall be recorded with the city clerk. 
(c)  "Censure" shall be defined as a resolution adopted in a regularly scheduled public meeting officially expressing blame and/or disapproval for the particular conduct of the member to be disciplined herein. A censure need not be in writing nor recorded with the city clerk but shall be reflected in the minutes of the meeting it was adopted. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 2-212. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Putnam County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2006, § 2-5-12) 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARD APPOINTMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of Feb. 2, 2010 enacted provisions intended for use as § 2-213. To preserve the style of this Code and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been designated as Art. VI, § 2-213. 

Sec. 2-213. - Board appointments and boards. 
(a)  General: 
(1)  Notwithstanding board or commission member number, selection criteria or tenure set out by city ordinance or otherwise established by enabling legislation from city, county, state or federal legislative bodies, the number of board members shall be fixed at five members with one member representing each city ward and one member selected by the mayor from all those who have expressed an interest in serving on citizen boards within the City of Eatonton so indicated by the completion of an application to serve on a specific board. No individual may serve on more than one board at any one time. 
(2)  The term of members on any board so established shall be four years unless otherwise provided for in law or in articles of incorporation. Membership is to begin on September 1 of the year in which the term is to begin and will end on August 31 in the year in which the term is to expire unless the board, authority or commission seat is vacated voluntarily or involuntarily under terms set out below. Terms are to run on a city fiscal year and shall be fixed so as to have wards 1 and 2 to be coincidental in even numbered years in which there is no mayoral inauguration to be held. The term of members for wards 3 and 4 and the mayorial appointment are to be coincidental in even numbered years in which a mayoral inauguration is held. The mayor shall put forth to the entire board of council a list of candidates for appointment at the first regular bi-monthly meeting one month in advance of any city council action on board, authority or commission appointments. For example, candidates for appointment that will be voted on at the August city council meeting shall be submitted to city council members at the first July city council meeting. An affirmative vote of the majority of the council is required to appoint an individual to any board, authority or commission seat. The city clerk will notify the appointed candidate in writing of their approved appointment. Board vacancies occurring for any cause shall be filled by the council for the unexpired balance of the term for the seat that is vacant. 
(3)  Members of any board shall be citizens of the city, except in such cases where no qualified citizens of the city expressed an interest, and shall be appointed by the city council. There are no term limits on the service to the city by individuals serving on a board however each term is to be ratified by the city council. 
(4)  Members of a board shall appoint their own officers and shall have at a minimum a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary. All meetings, hearings, records and postings shall be in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. 
(5)  Unless otherwise allowed or required by local ordinance or law, no member of any board shall receive any payment for service. Out of pocket expenditures by board members for travel or other incidental expenses will be reimbursed under the rules used for city employees. 
(6)  Board vacancies are to be advertised in the legal organ for the city and otherwise made public so that interested persons have 30 days to make application and express interest in service. In the event of a resignation, death or other sudden reason causing a board member to leave office the city council shall be authorized to appoint an interim board member to serve while the advertisement process takes place and until a permanent board member is appointed. 
(7)  Board members may resign their appointments at any time for any reason upon presentation to the city clerk a signed letter of resignation stating the board member's name and the effective date of the resignation. Board members may be removed with or without cause upon motion and majority vote of the city council. 
(8)  The city clerk is charged to devise such forms, advertisements and to maintain such records of appointments so that the city council has knowledge of the number of boards, membership and vacancies. 
(9)  The city shall establish such standing boards, commissions and authorities as required by law. The city may establish other such standing and ad hoc boards, commissions and authorities as are permissible or deemed necessary to advise the city council or act for the city council as allowed by ordinance or otherwise perform work the city council deems beneficial. 
(10)  Any person serving on any board to which the city makes appointments must immediately resign such appointment upon the qualifying for any elected position in the city unless otherwise provided for in law, regulation or ordinance. 
(b)  Brief description of standing city boards: 
(1)  Code enforcement board. Five members, four-year terms. 
Duties: Conducts hearings concerning city Code violations and issues orders having the force of law to bring a violation into compliance through the city marshal's office. 
Meetings: Third Tuesday of every month, 7:00 p.m. City Hall. 
(2)  Downtown development authority: Seven members, four-year terms. 
Duties: Has authority to take out loans, make loans, apply for and make grants to businesses inside the defined DDA area. Seeks out and assists businesses to relocate to the defined DDA area. State mandated training required. 
Meetings: Varies. 
(3)  Ethics board: Five members chosen from a pool of 14 city residents to serve a two-year term. 
Duties: To hear ethics complaints against elected officials at city hall. 
Meetings: As necessary. 
(4)  Historic preservation commission: seven members, three-year terms. 
Duties: To be concerned with preservation of the city's history and historic structures. 
Meetings: First Monday of the month, 7:00 p.m. in the police department. 
(5)  Housing authority: Five members from city at large for staggered four-year terms (two years cycle of appointments. Two in years in which there is no mayoral election; three in years in which there is a mayoral election) plus one resident member appointed for an annual term. 
Duties: Acts as a governing body for the city housing authority. Appoints and evaluates housing director. Hears concerns of residents. Advises city on low income housing needs and other low income housing matters. 
Meetings: Monthly at the housing authority on the third Tuesday of each month. 
(6)  Library board: Two members. Six-year terms July to June. 
Meetings: Held on the second Thursday of the following months: January, April, August and October at 2:00 p.m. in the library board room at the times so determined by the board. 
(7)  Local planning board: Five members. 
Duties: Acts in an advisory capacity to city council for updating the comprehensive plan, solid waste plan, land use plan, transportation plan, emergency plan, flood zone map review and amendment requests to such documents. 
(8)  Zoning commission : Five members. 
Duties : Acts in an advisory capacity to the city council in zoning and land use matters such as rezonings, variances and conditional use requests. Site plans and subdivisions may be approved by board if no variances are required. 
Meetings : Second Monday of each month, 6:00 p.m. old American Legion Hut, 400A West Marion Street or other such place as may be designated by the city council. State mandated training required. 
(9)  Tree board: Minimum of five members. 
Duties: Acts in an advisory capacity to the city commission in tree selection and placement. 
Meetings: Varies at city hall. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2010; Res. of 3-19-2012; Res. of 9-17-2012; Amd. of 5-5-2015; Res. of 6-20-2016(1)) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of Dec. 19, 2011, deleted the former Ch. 6, Art. I, Art. II, §§ 6-21—6-36, Art. III, §§ 6-51—6-78, Art. IV, §§ 6-111—6-139, Art. V, §§ 6-161, 6-162, § 6-164, §§ 6-167, 6-168, §§ 6-170, 6-171, §§ 6-173—6-176, §§ 6-179—6-200, § 6-202, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to alcoholic beverages and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 3-4-1, 3-4-2, §§ 9-2-1—9-2-14, §§ 9-2-21—9-2-47, §§ 9-2-61—9-2-88; Ord. of 7-19-2004; Res. of 9-28-2004. For a complete derivation, see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; public drunkenness, § 46-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Sale within corporate limits of City of Eatonton; license a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the corporate limits of the City of Eatonton under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(b)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and state law. 
(c)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
State Law reference— Permit or license from governing authority required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages; due process guidelines; fingerprints, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Banquet hall shall mean a publicly or privately owned commercial or civic or cultural establishment which: (i) regularly provides professional, live musical entertainment or concerts, performed on-site indoors; (ii) regularly serves prepared food, whether catered or prepared on site; and (iii) does not ever provide sexually related adult entertainment. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "non-alcoholic beer" which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than zero point one percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Governing authority means the Eatonton City Council. 
License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer or wholesale dealer. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. Manufacturer also means: in the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; in the case of malt beverage, any brewer. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. Retail package alcoholic beverages shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, limited liability company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasipublic. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Year shall mean calendar year from January 1 through December 31 unless otherwise defined in this article. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provisions of the sections in this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00 for each offense and/or 30 days in the county jail, unless a different penalty is set out in this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-4, which pertained to sale or possession of sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-5. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  The sale of any alcoholic beverage near churches, school buildings, or other sites shall be governed by the distance requirements set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(b)  The term "church building" as used in this section shall mean the property that is tax exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-41. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Amd. of 4-18-2016; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-6. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-7. - Application forms. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city council. All applications shall be subject to the approval by the city council. The city council may advertise the application in the legal organ of Putnam County, Georgia prior to voting on an application and shall be authorized to hear any comments for or against the application before making a vote. It shall be in the discretion of the city council to decide whether granting an application would adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of residents of the city. 
(b)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence address of the partners; if a limited liability company, L.L.C., the name and address of the manager(s) and the name of any person or legal entity owning 20 percent of the L.L.C.; if a corporation, the names of the officers, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process, the name of the manager(s), and the name of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city administrator and the city police department the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility and other records as required by the city council and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(f)  The city council shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this chapter. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-8. - Withdrawal of application. 
Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for investigative and administrative expenses required in this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-9. - Licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, manager(s) and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this subsection. In the case of a partnership the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership. If no partner owns 20 percent of the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. In the case of a limited liability company, the license will be issued jointly to the limited liability company and manager(s). 
(c)  No person, firm, limited liability company or corporation shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city administrator or his designee that such person, manager(s), partners in the firm, or officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to and have been released from parole or probation concerning any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. An applicant's first conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city or county ordinance shall not, by itself, make an applicant ineligible for an alcohol license. Should any applicant, partner, or officer instrumental in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime, the license shall be immediately revoked and cancelled. 
(d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)  The city council may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(h)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, city administrator and shall be in such form as he may prescribe. 
(i)  All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(j)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(k)  Reserved. 
(l)  For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (1968 Ga. Laws, page 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(m)  The city council, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may be favorable or unfavorable to the applicant, application or proposed location of the business. If in the judgment of the city council it is determined that circumstances exist or are likely to exist such that granting of the license would significantly compromise the health, safety or general welfare of the community, such determination may be grounds for denying an application and/or suspending or revoking a permit or license already granted. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
State Law reference— Governing authority shall set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A., § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 6-10. - License fee scale. 
Before a license shall be granted, the applicant therefore shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed, from time to time, by the city council contained in section 6-11 and kept on file in the office of the city administrator. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-11. - Fees enumerated. 
License fees applicable to this chapter are set out as follows and shall be pro-rated to the month for the first year a license is obtained: 
(1)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, $250.00 per year for first fixed bar. 
(2)  Retail dealers of beer to be consumed on the premises, $250.00 per year. 
(3)  Retail dealers of wine to be consumed on the premises, $250.00 per year. 
(4)  Retail dealers of beer and wine to be consumed on the premises, $500.00 per year. 
(5)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, $1,500.00 per year. 
(6)  Retail dealers of beer sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, $250.00 per year. 
(7)  Retail dealers of wine sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, $250.00 per year. 
(8)  Retail dealers of beer and wine sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, $500.00 per year. 
(9)  Wholesale dealers in beer, whose principal place of business is in the city, $100.00 per year. 
(10)  Wholesale dealers in wine, whose principal place of business is in the city, $100.00 per year. 
(11)  Wholesale dealers in beer and wine, whose principal place of business is in the city, $150.00 per year. 
(12)  Any additional fixed bar at any previously licensed location for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises, $500.00 per year. 
(13)  Any movable bar at any previously licensed location for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises, $250.00 per year. 
(14)  Temporary license for special event approved by the city council or nonprofit civic organizations, $25.00 per day, maximum 12 days per year. 
(15)  Nonprofit private club, beer to be consumed on the premises, $25.00 per year. 
(16)  Nonprofit private club, wine to be consumed on the premises, $25.00 per year. 
(17)  Nonprofit private club, beer and wine to be consumed on the premises, $50.00 per year. 
(18)  Nonprofit private club, distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, $50.00 per year. 
(19)  Hotel-motel "in-room service," $200.00 per year. 
(20)  Wholesale dealers in distilled spirits whose principal place of business is in the county, $100.00 per year. 
(21)  Wholesale dealers in alcoholic beverages whose principal place of business is not in the county, $150.00 per year. 
(22)  Brewpub, $250.00 per year. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 1-17-2012; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 6-12. - Collection of fees or taxes sums due. 
If any person shall fail to pay the sum due under this chapter, the city marshal or designee shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-13. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur, provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city administrator. 
(c)  If a license is surrendered or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined by the city administrator to be the date of severance, provided no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made. The application shall indicate that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted in this section. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsections (a) through (d) of this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license pursuant to this chapter automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(f)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and fines and imprisonment pursuant to section 1-12 of this Code of Ordinances. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
(g)  Should a licensee make application to the city council for a transfer of location and should such a transfer of a location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the previous license shall be applied to the new location. Each applicant for a transfer of location shall pay a transfer fee in the amount of $300.00. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 6-14. - Display of license at place of business. 
The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of the business of the licensee. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-15. - Expiration; renewal of license. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-16, which pertained to automatic license forfeiture for nonuse and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-17. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city administrator where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The chief of police, upon notice of this revocation from the city administrator, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of sections 6-31 or 6-37 shall be subject to immediate license revocation. 
(d)  The city administrator shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(e)  The licensing and revenue manager shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(f)  The city administrator may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to him/her. 
(g)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the city administrator determines to his own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of an employee, the city administrator must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(h)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this chapter no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city. 
(i)  Wherever this chapter permits the city administrator to suspend any license issued under this chapter but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the city administrator. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-18. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The city administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his or her order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city administrator may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the city administrator and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00 in the form of a money order or certified check. The city clerk, at his/her discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it's determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing said appeal. The city council may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(c)  The city council shall determine all issues by a majority vote by a quorum present to vote. Should the city council be unable to reach a decision by majority vote, the action taken by city administrator shall be upheld automatically. 
(d)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city administrator unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city administrator. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The city administrator shall have the right to rebut any evidence offered by appellant and to call any witnesses to support said rebuttal. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then appellant shall provide for the same at his or her own expense. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. 
(e)  The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the city administrator within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city administrator to notify the appellant of the action of the city council. 
(f)  The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(g)  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 6-19. - Notice. 
For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-20, which pertained to advertising; location requirements; signs and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-21, which pertained to audits of licenses and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-22. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(b)  The city administrator or his designee may request, from time to time, information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-23. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep any beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-24. - Addition to contents of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any manner. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-25, which pertained to poured alcohol to be transported by employee and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-26. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms; licensee responsible for violations. 
Each alcoholic beverage dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this chapter; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-27. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed under this chapter without written consent from parents or guardian. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-28. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
(a)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served, or permitted to have in his possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. "Identification" in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(b)  Licensee must have written policies and procedures for checking identification and train, instruct and supervise employees to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-29. - Sales to underage person prohibited. 
No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(2)  The prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of distilled spirits to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the distilled spirits are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purposes of this subsection proper identification means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(3)  Sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his employees. 
(4)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(5)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of the establishment or lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in eating establishments, indoor commercial recreational establishments, or private clubs as defined in this chapter without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian and provided further that this section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(6)  The penalty for violation of this section by an individual shall be as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, a minimum fine of $250.00. 
b.  For the second offense and subsequent violations within one year, a minimum fine of $500.00. 
(7)  Any licensed establishment where two or more violations of this section, or [O.C.G.A.] § 3-3-23 of Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Laws and Regulations have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the second offense within any 36-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
b.  For the third and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed one year. 
As to the penalties in this subsection, if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessor(s) if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
State Law reference— Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification; proper identification for sale of 
alcoholic beverages; dispensing, serving, etc., of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment; seller's duty to request proper identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-30. - Purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-31. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-32, which pertained to regulations as to employees and manager and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-33. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-34. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment including any public sidewalk area contiguous thereto. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 6-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-35, which pertained to no consumption outside premises and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-36, which pertained to specifications of premises and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-37. - Noise from establishments prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any establishment licensed under this chapter to make or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in the city, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability from the nearest property line of the business in question. In no event, however, shall any such loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise be made by an establishment licensed under this chapter in violation of section 30-71. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 10-4-2016; Res. of 6-18-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6-38. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department and city marshal. 
Sworn officers of the police department and the city marshal shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverages ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-39. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency. 
The chief of police, or his designee, may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-40. - Sale on election days. 
(a)  Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by Act No. 750 (House Bill No. 247) approved April 10, 1985, amending O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(B), the sale of wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, to wit: distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages, shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(b)  All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
State Law reference— Local governing authority may authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-41, which pertained to bring your own bottle (brown bagging) prohibited and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-42. - Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. 
(a)  Preamble and purpose. 
(1)  Based upon the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Austin, Texas; Seattle and Renton, Washington; New York, New York; Los Angeles, California; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences the city council believes are relevant to the problems faced by the city and based upon the evidence and testimony of the citizens and experts who have appeared before such bodies, the city council takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. 
(2)  Moreover, it is the finding of the city council that public nudity and semi-nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "erotic entertainment" begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude or semi-nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity or semi-nudity. 
(b)  Prohibited activities. Any establishment licensed under the provisions of this chapter is prohibited from permitting or engaging in the following activities: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals; 
(2)  Live entertainment which provides or features nude or semi-nude or erotic dancing, or the performance of obscene acts which simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; 
(3)  The showing of any film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting any of the acts described in subsection (b)(2), above, which are obscene under state law; or 
(4)  The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the above-prohibited conduct. 
(c)  Mainstream activity excluded. Notwithstanding the prohibitions in subsection (b), above, nothing in this chapter shall or is intended to apply to theatrical or motion picture performance houses, museums, or the like where the consumption or service of alcohol is not a primary purpose or mainstream activity of such establishment. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Secs. 6-43—6-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES, WINE, OR DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 6-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution of Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-66, which pertained to type of retail establishment where permitted and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011; a resolution adopted Sept. 16, 2013. 
Sec. 6-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-67, which pertained to license fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-68. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Beer, wine and distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  No beer and/or wine shall be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of beer, wine and distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
Secs. 6-69—6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— License from county or municipality required for wholesale or retail sales of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

Sec. 6-91. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oc.t 4. 2016, repealed § 6-91, which pertained to type of retail establishment where permitted and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-92. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 12:01 a.m. on Monday through Saturday at 12:00 midnight and from 12:30 pm until 11:30 pm on Sundays. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale of beer and/or wine. 
(b)  Retail package beer and/or wine shall not be sold at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 6-93. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-93, which pertained to use of tags or labels to indicate prices and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-94. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-94, which pertained to quantity sale requirements and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-95, which pertained to license fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-96. - Eligibility for issuance of a special event Georgia Farm Winery temporary retail site sales license. 
A temporary, special event retail site sales license may be issued to a licensed Georgia Farm Winery that fulfills the meaning set forth and further defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(a)(1). Such temporary license shall not exceed twelve days in any one year, for special events as approved by the city council. A Georgia Farm Winery may conduct all of the lawful activities permitted unto it by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, et. seq. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Georgia Farm Winery may sell at retail unopened packages and bottles of its wine and of any other Georgia Farm Winery licensee and sell at retail or otherwise provide samples of its wine and samples of wine of any other Georgia Farm Winery licensee in tasting rooms on the premises of and/or within the boundaries of the temporary Georgia Farm Winery site. The Georgia Farm Winery must make application and pay the fee that may be required by the ordinances. 
(Res. of 1-17-2012) 
Secs. 6-97—6-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 6-116. - Type of retail establishment where permitted. 
No distilled spirits shall be sold at retail except in establishments located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use. The only items which may be offered for sale on the same premises as distilled spirits are: malt beverages and wine as defined in article I of this chapter, ice and non-alcoholic beverages commonly used to dilute distilled sprits. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-117. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverage except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. 
(b)  Retail package sales of alcoholic beverages shall not be sold at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-118. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-118, which pertained to use of tags or labels to indicate prices and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-119. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-119, which pertained to quantity sale requirements and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Sec. 6-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-120, which pertained to license fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application and derived from a resolution adopted Dec. 19, 2011. 
Secs. 6-121—6-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE CLUBS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Has at least 50 regular dues paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: 
a.  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(Res. of 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 6-167. - Regulation of sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Res. of 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 6-168. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed § 6-168, which pertained to certain organizations exempt from food establishment requirements and derived from a resolution adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 6-169. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 4, 2017, repealed § 6-169, which pertained to investigative and administrative costs and derived from a resolution adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 6-170. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(Res. of 1-17-2012; Res. of 10-4-2016(1)) 
Sec. 6-171. - Eligibility for issuance of a temporary special event license. 
(a)  A temporary license may be issued to any person, firm or corporation, for a period not to exceed 12 days in any one year, for an approved special event. The person, firm or corporation must make application and pay the fee that may be required by the ordinances and shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption on the premises with the exception of the full service kitchen requirement. 
(b)  The special event must meet the following criterion prior to the issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The special event must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(2)  The special event must receive approval from the city police department on crowd control and security measures. 
(3)  The special event must receive approval from the city council 
(4)  The location at which the special event is to take place must be properly zoned and approved by the city planning and development department. 
(5)  The premises at which the special event is to take place must be approved by the city administrator. 
(c)  Any employee or volunteer of the special event licensee, working the special event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages shall not be required to obtain a pouring permit for the special event. 
(d)  The chief of police or his designee may immediately revoke any temporary license for a special event if it is determined continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(e)  As a condition on the issuance of a temporary special event license, the licensee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from claims, demand or cause of action which may arise from activities associated with the special event. 
(f)  The city council in its discretion may require the licensee to obtain insurance for the event, pay an administrative fee to offset or defray costs for traffic and/or crowd control, and set the time when alcohol is to be served or not served. 
(g)  The Eatonton-Putnam Chamber of Commerce, Eatonton-Putnam Arts Foundation and Eatonton Main Street shall be exempt from obtaining a special event license at the discretion of the city administrator for any event under the operation and control of those entities on any property owned by either the City of Eatonton, or the downtown development authority. 
(h)  For purposes of this section and in connection with section 6-2 Definitions the Plaza Arts Center located on N. Madison Ave. and Church St., the city water works property located at 457B East Sumter Street and the stage and parking lot located between Willie Bailey Dr. as its northern boundary and E. Marion St. as its southern boundary including and grounds contiguous thereto shall qualify as a "banquet hall". 
(i)  The city administrator is hereby authorized to require the applicant to provide at the applicant's expense any personnel he deems necessary in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Res. of 1-17-2012; Res. of 1-17-2012; Res. of 10-4-2016) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; dangerous dog control law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-9; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abuse or cruelty to animals or fowl means knowing and willful failure by an owner, or any other person charged with an animal's or fowl's care, to care for that animal or fowl in a humane manner, or, by act, omission or neglect, causing or inflicting unjustified physical suffering, pain, harm or death to an animal or fowl. 
Animal means any and all types of animals, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural. 
Animal control officer means an individual selected by the board of commissioners of the county in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, animal auction, kennel, performing animal exhibition or animal shelter, except this term shall not include veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities, facilities operated by government agencies or licensed animal dealers regulated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the board of commissioners of the county for the purpose of impounding and/or caring for animals. 
At large means off the premises and not under the immediate control of the owner or custodian of the animal. 
Board of commissioners or board means the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being, domesticated animal or domesticated fowl, without provocation at any time after March 31, 1989; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans, domesticated animals or domesticated fowl, without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Domesticated fowl means any and all birds, male and female, singular and plural, kept as pets or kept, maintained, bred or harvested for agricultural purposes. 
Fowl means any and all birds, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural. 
Guard dog or attack dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal approval command, and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected by the owner to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Humane manner means care of an animal to include at least adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and clean water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling or boarding more than three dogs or three cats, except litters of animals of not more than six months of age, for commercial purposes, or engaging in training of dogs or cats for commercial purposes. 
Licensing authority means the county agency or designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this chapter. 
Neutered/spayed means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. 
Nuisance means a dog or cat which: 
(1)  Damages, soils or defecates on private property other than the owner's, or on public walks and recreation areas, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; 
(2)  Causes a disturbance or annoyance to others by excessive barking or other noisemaking, or offensive odors; 
(3)  Chases vehicles or molests, attacks or interferes with persons, domestic animals or domesticated fowl. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the county, or who knowingly permits a dog or other animal to be harbored or kept, or has a dog or other animal in his care, or who permits a dog or other animal to remain on or about the premises. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog, which without provocation, bites a human being, domesticated animal or domesticated fowl at any time after March 31, 1989. No dog shall be deemed to be a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog solely on incidents in which the dog: 
(1)  Inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer in connection with the law enforcement officer's official duties; and 
(2)  Inflicts an injury if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was attacking the dog's owner or owner's family member, committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog confined in a manner suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping. A proper enclosure shall have secure sides and a secure top; and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. All gates shall be constructed so that they are self-closing and self-latching. A proper enclosure also shall provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any county or municipal animal control agency, county board of health, federal, state or local court, or an animal control officer as provided in this chapter or by the laws of the state. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones, death, cosmetic surgery or lacerations requiring medical treatment. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person that does anything prohibited by this chapter as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who fails to do anything required by this chapter as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation, shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. Prosecution of violations of any provision of this chapter shall be pursuant to and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - City established as bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3-1) 
Sec. 10-4. - Molesting birds and nests prohibited; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner, any bird or wild fowl, or to rob or molest birds' nests or wild fowl nests, within the city; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health and property in the opinion of the city authorities, then the city authorities shall meet with representatives of the audubon society, bird club, garden club, humane society or any such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days' notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of such clubs. If as a result of the meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the city authorities under the supervision of the police chief. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3-2) 
Sec. 10-5. - Fowl or livestock prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in control of any domestic fowl or livestock to have or keep any domestic fowl or livestock within the corporate limits of the city except for those owners or persons keeping said fowl or livestock on properties specifically zoned for that use. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3-3; Res. of 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 10-6. - Keeping of hogs. 
No person shall have or keep any hog or pig in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3-4) 
Sec. 10-7. - Sales or permitting exposure of animals with, or having been exposed to infectious disease. 
Whoever within the corporate limits of the city, being the owner, or having the charge of any animal, knowing such animal to have any contagious or infectious disease, or to have been recently exposed thereto, sells, barters or disposes of the animal without first disclosing to the person to whom the animal is sold, bartered or disposed of, that the animal is so diseased, has been exposed or knowingly permits the animal to run at large, or knowing the animal to be diseased, knowingly allows the animal to come into contact with any such animal of another person without his knowledge or permission, shall be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3-5) 
Sec. 10-8. - Setting out poison. 
Whoever within the corporate limits of the city, leaves or deposits any poison or any substance containing poison, in any common street, lane or thoroughfare of any kind, or in any yard or enclosure other than the yard or enclosure occupied or owned by that person, shall be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3-6) 
Sec. 10-9. - Permitting vicious animals to run at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping any vicious or dangerous animal to allow or permit the animal to run at large in the city. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense punishable as prescribed by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3-7) 
Sec. 10-10. - Animal control officer; animal control board. 
The city council may appoint an animal control officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The animal control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the council. Primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control officer. The council shall be authorized to create an "animal control board" which shall consist of residents of the city to serve without compensation for terms concurrent with those of the city council. The members shall be selected so that each of the ward districts is represented on the board by a resident of that district and one member shall be elected to represent the county at-large. So long as the Oconee Regional Humane Society, by whatever name it may be known, exists, at least one of its officers may be a member of the animal control board and shall serve as the at-large member. The animal control board shall have the authority granted to it by this section, by the city council and by state law. The city council shall have the authority to remove any member of the animal control board for cause and following a public hearing. In no event shall any member of the animal control board serve more than two consecutive four-year terms. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-3; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-3) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-66 et seq. 
Sec. 10-11. - Rabies vaccination required. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the county unless such dog or cat is vaccinated for rabies. 
(b)  All dogs and cats shall have a current vaccination for rabies by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  A certificate of vaccination for rabies shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated, along with a vaccination tag indicating the year in which it was issued. 
(d)  Proof of current vaccination shall rest with the owner. The rabies tag shall be secured to a collar on dogs in a manner that it cannot easily be removed or lost. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-4; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-4) 
Sec. 10-12. - Animals at large. 
A person owning or having animals in his custody and control shall at all times control such animals so as to prevent the animals from going at large to the injury, nuisance or endangerment to the safety of others. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-5; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-5) 
Sec. 10-13. - Impoundment by animal control officer. 
The animal control officer shall be authorized but not required to impound animals not on the owner's or custodian's property. In lieu of impoundment, the animal control officer may issue a citation for violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-6; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-6) 
Sec. 10-14. - Impoundment by property owner or injured party. 
Any person finding any animal upon his property may contact the animal control officer to impound said animal. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-7; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-7) 
Sec. 10-15. - Impoundment—Liability for costs. 
The owner of an animal impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for the cost of maintenance of such animal during such impoundment. Such costs shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be payable upon redemption of such animal. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-8; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-8) 
Sec. 10-16. - Same—Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
Any animal impounded under this chapter or otherwise in the control of the animal control officer and not redeemed within seven days following the date of its impoundment, in the case of an animal without indicia of ownership, or within five days after the owner is notified, in the case of an animal with indicia of ownership, may be disposed of by adoption or by euthanasia. An exception may be made when: 
(1)  An animal is injured or sick and in the judgment of a licensed veterinarian employed by or under the control of the city council, cannot recover; 
(2)  An animal has a condition that is highly contagious; or 
(3)  When the cost of treating such animal would be prohibitive. 
In those events, the veterinarian may decide immediate euthanasia is necessary. The animal control officer shall make a prompt and reasonable effort to locate and notify an impounded animal's owner in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The animal control officer will make every reasonable effort to find an acceptable adoptive home for animals in his control before considering euthanasia. No impounded animal shall be adopted until it has been given all appropriate shots and has been neutered or spayed in the case of an adult animal. An impounded animal who is available for adoption and is too young to be neutered or spayed may be adopted once it has been given all appropriate shots and the adoptive owner has agreed in writing to have the animal neutered or spayed within six months. Veterinarian charges shall be paid by the adoptive owner and such charges shall be set out in the fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be payable upon adoption of such animal. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-9; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-9) 
Sec. 10-17. - Abandonment or abuse of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone knowingly to abandon, abuse or fail to keep any domesticated animal or domesticated fowl in a humane manner within the city. Each animal so abandoned or abused, and each day the violation of this chapter exists, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-10; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-10) 
Secs. 10-18—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Secs. 10-36. - State law incorporated by reference. 
OCGA §§ 4-8-22 through 4-8-30 is incorporated herein by reference thereto, except as set out in this article. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-41; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-41) 
Sec. 10-37. - Notice to public of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant, or custodian of an enclosure or building within which a guard or attack dog, a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located to conspicuously post a notice on the outside of the enclosure or building. Said notice shall have six inch red or black letters on a white background and shall contain the following information: "WARNING: GUARD DOG", "WARNING: ATTACK DOG", "WARNING: DANGEROUS DOG" or "WARNING: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG". In the case of a building, such notices shall be posted conspicuously upon such enclosure at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart as well as upon each and every entrance and exit. In the case of apartments, condominiums or businesses located within a larger building where the guard or attack dog is located within the apartment or building solely, this notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about every doorway. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-42; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-42) 
Sec. 10-38. - Financial responsibility. 
In addition to the requirements of OCGA § 4-8-25, the owner of a dangerous dog, guard dog or attack dog shall register said animals with the county clerk and present to the county clerk evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state and insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $50,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state and payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(3)  Dogs owned by or used by law enforcement agencies are exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 8-16-1999, § 14-43; Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-43) 
Sec. 10-39. - Effective date; jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon its enactment and passage by the city council. This chapter shall only apply to the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Res. of 11-21-2000, § 14-43) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 20, 2006, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety. Former Ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, § 5-1-3 and an ordinance adopted Nov. 4, 2003. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; collection and disposal of solid waste for construction sites and demolition sites, § 54-41; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Numbering of houses and buildings. 
Each occupant, whether owner or tenant, of each business or residential building located with the boundaries of the city, is required to place upon his house or building, within two feet of the front door or door stoop, or mail box the house number assigned to such lot. The numbers may be painted or made of any material and shall be of such size that they are easily visible from the centerline of the street. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1); Amd. of 7-8-2008) 
Secs. 14-2—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 14-31. - Adoption by reference. 
The following technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  International Building Code (International Code Congress); 
(2)  National Electrical Code; 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(4)  International Mechanical Code; 
(5)  International Plumbing Code; 
(6)  International Residential Code; 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code; 
(8)  International Fire Code; 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code; 
(10)  International Existing Buildings Code. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1); Amd. of 7-8-2008) 
Secs. 14-32—14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance adopted Nov. 4, 2003, repealed art. III, §§ 14-66, 14-67, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, art. III pertained to Unsafe Buildings and derived from an ordinance adopted May 4, 1999, §§ 4-3—4-5. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. 

Sec. 14-66. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance or the minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Municipality means the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building or structure. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the city administrator, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1)) 
Sec. 14-67. - Duties of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable federal, state and local codes in force within the city, or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds and plant growth in excess of 12 inches except for trees, shrubs and cultivated gardens and flower beds. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1); Ord. of 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 14-68. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is made to the public officer charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation or disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(4)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(5)  Uncleanliness; and 
(6)  Whether or not the complaint was anonymous. 
(b)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe condition, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property; or 
(3)  If the court finds there is a condition or use of real estate other than addressed above, which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation and the court further finds that such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use, the court may order the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure, and the order may require the abatement of the public health hazard or general nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or be vacated and closed, or demolished, the public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a [placard] with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  In the case of an historic, notable or otherwise viable building, the city (or its designee) shall first pursue repair procedures over demolition based on documented sound advice as to the viability of repair of the structure. The city may seek consultancy for such advice. If other organizations are willing to partner with the city to obtain grant or loan funding to save the property, regardless of the ruling on reasonable cost, the city will give this due consideration and demolition will be considered only as a last resort. 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, plus a ten percent penalty shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(h)  The lien provided for in subsection (g) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (b). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48. ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1); Res. of 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 14-69. - Powers of city administrator or his designee. 
In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city administrator or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists; 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys; 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1)) 
Sec. 14-70. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Complaints shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties arc residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by article to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A tit. 48, ch. 4, art. 5; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any other party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this Code section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1)) 
Sec. 14-71. - Prior ordinances relating to repair, closing, or demolition of unfit buildings or structures. 
Ordinances and Code sections of this Code relating to the subject matter of this article and in effect prior to December 1, 2003, being the effective date of this article, shall continue in force and effect for actions commenced thereunder and have the same force and effect after said date as this article. All new actions commenced on or after December 1, 2003 shall be brought pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(1)) 
Secs. 14-72—14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 

Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Blighted, as applied to a piece of property, means that property is being maintained in a blighted condition. 
Millage rate means only the general millage rate for city maintenance and operations. 
Public officer means the building inspector, city marshal, city administrator, police officer or any other city official who is authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other employee, officer or officers designated by the city administrator for purposes of this section. 
(Res. of 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 14-102. - Blighted condition designation. 
For the property in question to be subject to official identification as blighted and subject to increased taxation, the property must be determined to be: 
(1)  Unfit for human habitation or unfit for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or 
(2)  Vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes or other criminal activity; or 
(3)  Constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety because of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; and 
(4)  Not a dwelling house, which is being used as the primary residence of one or more persons. 
(Res. of 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 14-103. - Procedure for identification of property as blighted. 
The procedure for official identification of real property as blighted includes: 
(1)  A request from a public officer or at least five residents of the city charging that any building, structure or property meets criteria described in section 14-102. 
(2)  An investigation or inspection by a public officer and determination that the property in question meets the criteria described in section 14-102. 
(3)  A public officer's issuance of a complaint in rem against the property. The complaint shall state which condition(s) under section 14-102 exist(s) on the property and what steps should be taken to remediate the property. 
(4)  A public officer's causing a summons and a copy of the complaint to be mailed via certified mail to the owner of the property. The owner is anyone revealed by a certification of title to the real property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court of the city (hereinafter "municipal court") or Superior Court of Putnam County (hereinafter "superior court") at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(5)  If after such notice and hearing, the municipal court or superior court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question meets the criteria in section 14-102, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause its written findings to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order. 
(6)  No property shall be designated as blighted unless the municipal court or superior court enters an order that finds the property in question meets the criteria described in section 14-102(1), (2) or (3). This order constitutes official identification of real property as maintained in a blighted condition. 
(7)  If the municipal court or superior court finds that the property is blighted, it shall, in the same order, list what must be done to remove the blighted condition designation, and give the owner a deadline in which to finish the work. 
(Res. of 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 14-104. - Imposition of increased tax rate. 
Property, which has been officially designated as blighted, shall be subject to an increased rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to seven times the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of the issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. The increased rate continues to be applied to all subsequent tax bills until the property's designation as maintained in a blighted condition is removed as provided in this section. This increased rate of taxation and the official identification of the property as blighted remain with the property if transferred to another owner. 
(Res. of 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 14-105. - Revenue segregated. 
Revenue collected from increases in rate of ad valorem taxation may be segregated and applied to community redevelopment purposes. 
(Res. of 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 14-106. - Remediation. 
The property in question may be rehabilitated at any time through remedial actions or redevelopment that conforms with the municipal court or superior court order setting forth what must be done to remove the identification of the property as maintained in a blighted condition. Owner may request removal of the property's designation as blighted from the city administrator or from the municipal court or superior court upon proper proof, including an inspection by a public officer, that the property has been remediated and now conforms with the court order listing what must be done to remove the identification of the property as blighted. The city administrator shall be notified in writing ten days before any hearing in the municipal court or superior court. 
(Res. of 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 14-107. - Remediation property tax rate. 
Property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed as provided in this section will become eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to 50 percent of the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. This decreased rate is applied to three years' tax bills. 
(Res. of 11-6-2017) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; commercial establishments for the collection and disposal of solid waste, § 54-38; utilities, ch. 70; vehicles for hire, ch. 74; taxicabs, § 74-31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 9-4-1 through 9-4-4 of the 1982 Code on the subject of peddling, soliciting and canvassing are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 18-2. - Garage sales, yard sales, and rummage sales. 
Sales commonly known as garage sales, yard sales, or rummage sales, conducted on residential property, shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Such sales shall be conducted only by the owner or tenant of the residential property used or with the express written permission of the property owner. 
(2)  Such sales shall be allowed a maximum of three times during a calendar year on one residential lot. No individual sale shall be conducted for a longer period than 72 hours consecutively. 
(3)  Any and all items related to such sales shall be promptly removed from the sale site and from areas that are viewable by the public within 24 hours of the conclusion of a sale. 
(4)  No wares, goods, or merchandise shall be advertised or offered for sale, or swap, or given away, except goods, wares, and merchandise previously owned by the sellers. 
(5)  No goods, wares, or merchandise shall be purchased by the owner or tenant for the purpose of selling, swapping, or giving away same at such a sale. 
(6)  Any person desiring to conduct such a sale shall notify the city clerk no later than 12:00 noon of the day preceding the sale. The city clerk, or designated agent, shall issue a permit to the person to conduct a sale upon the payment of a permit fee as fixed from time to time by the city council if the applicant otherwise meets the requirements of this section. This fee shall be in lieu of any other fees or business taxes in this Code. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale, yard sale, or rummage sale without first obtaining a permit as described herein, or in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of this section, and the city administrator, or his/her designee, is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(8)  Religious and charitable organizations exempt from federal taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code may conduct yard sales on the property of the organization or at other locations within the city with the express written permission of the property owner without obtaining a permit required by paragraph (7) of this section. 
(9)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished as prescribed by section 1-12. 
(10)  Each day's violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Res. of 9-5-2017) 
Secs. 18-3—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES, ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
(a)  Administrative fee is the component of the occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handing and processing the occupation tax. 
(b)  City means the City of Eatonton. 
(c)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, "Employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of an employer who withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(2)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner that issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
(d)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or vehicle or used for sales or delivery by a business of practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
(e)  Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business in the city. 
(f)  Practitioners of professions and occupations does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(g)  Regulatory fee means a fee that approximates the costs of regulatory activity by the city. 
(h)  Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-32. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee of $30.00 is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002; Res. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 18-33. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth below must pay a non-refundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth therewith: 

 
If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(b)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate shall be shown to any police officer, code enforcement officer, or other person charged with enforcing this article upon request. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-34. - Occupation tax levied; occupation tax schedule; limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon a flat rate is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations if the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city; or 
(2)  Is an out-of-state business or practitioners with no location or office in the city but: 
a.  Has employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients within the corporate limits of the city; or 
b.  Owns personal or real property which generates income and is located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The occupational tax upon any business shall be $50.00, unless the same is identified in the following schedule, whereupon it shall be levied in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(c)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(d)  Restrictions: 
(1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(2)  A business or practitioner that is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
a.  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
b.  A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  Real estate brokers who sell property within the city are subject to occupation tax even if their offices are located outside of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002; Res. of 12-19-2011; Res. of 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-35. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  A flat rate of $200.00; or 
(2)  A fee of $50.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 5 of each year. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-36 - Specific requirements for attorneys. 
No provision of this article shall be construed to require attorneys to pay an occupation tax or otherwise register with the city as a precondition to practice law, including the requirement that their certificate be posed on their office wall. Also any criminal sanctions against attorneys for non-payment of this tax shall not include imprisonment but shall be limited only to a fine. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-37. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A tit. 46, ch. 3; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Non-profit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carrier pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States; 
(11)  Those businesses operating under Eatonton Main Street's Briar Patch pop-up business program. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002; Amd. of 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-38. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-39. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Before an occupational tax certificate can be issued to a new business, or a change in type of business or a change in the ownership of a business located within the city, a building must have a current inspection and approval from the Putnam County Planning and Development Department. All buildings must meet SBCCI standards. Business owners or operators are responsible for making the inspection request to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department and submitting the Putnam County Planning and Development Certificate of Occupancy along with this application to the city clerk. For the purposes of this section, an inspection will only be required if a building has been vacant for longer than 180 days. Vacant means that there is no provable use of utilities other than those necessary for reasonable security, no occupational tax certificate has been issued to such site for 180 days, no verifiable inventory sale or purchase has occurred during the time or other verifiable business activity has occurred during the 180 days prior to the application for the occupational tax certificate. 
(b)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(c)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002; Res. of 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 18-40. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available to the city such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee(s). 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-41. - Date due: penalty and interest. 
(a)  Any occupation tax due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually within 30 days after January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, 100 percent of the occupational tax shall be due prior to the commencing or initially engaging said business unless it commences on July 1 or later that year whereon 50 percent of said tax shall be due in said business. 
(b)  Any regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually within 30 days of January 1 for the current calendar year. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, 100 percent of the regulatory fee shall be due prior to the commencing or initially engaging said business unless it commences on July 1 or later that year whereon 50 percent of said tax shall be due in said business. 
(c)  Regulatory fees authorized by this article shall be paid before commencing business or the practice of a profession as a condition precedent for transacting business, or practicing a profession. 
(d)  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health and safety of one or more individuals: 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(e)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 60 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-12 (general penalties) of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-42. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk, Eatonton Police Department, code enforcement officer and building inspector to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk, Eatonton Police Department, code enforcement officer and building inspector may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes or fees which are due and owing; any penalty imposed by section 1-12. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to provisions of 1-12 or may be referred to the district attorneys' office for violating O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. 
(c)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business for such person, business or practitioner shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain the required certificate or make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-43. - Public hearings. 
(a)  After January 1, 2003, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in this chapter. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city may hold one (1) public hearing(s) as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(c)  The city clerk, city police department, code enforcement officer and building inspector shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes or fees which are due and owing, penalties, or interest. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time of the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by city clerk, city police department, code enforcement officer and building inspector of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to, in addition to the penalty provisions of 1-12, a fine not to exceed $500.00 pursuant to the contempt powers of the recorder's court. 
Sec. 18-44. - Prior ordinance. 
To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-45. - Severability. 
In the event any portion of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the city council of the city that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally part of the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-46. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinance in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 18-47. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective January 1, 2003. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002) 
Secs. 18-48—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUG-FREE COMMERCIAL ZONE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Exhibits A, B, C and D have been omitted from this codification. Official copies of such exhibits are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-61. - Findings. 
(a)  The board of council desires to combat drug related crime in commercial areas of the community to better provide a safe working environment for businesses to flourish and citizens to obtain goods and services. 
(b)  Law enforcement has documented, as reported in the attached Exhibit A, a high rate of drug related crime in that certain area described in more detail in the attached Exhibit B, which law enforcement believes will be curbed by criminal punishment for convictions of any person for manufacturing, distributing, dispensing or possessing with intent to distribute controlled substances or marijuana in, on or within a drug-free commercial zone. 
(c)  The General Assembly, in 1996, enacted legislation providing local governments with the authority to create drug-free commercial zones, subject to the procedures contained within such legislation, whereupon conviction of any person for such felony offense will allow increased criminal punishment. 
(d)  The board of council now desires to enact a drug-free commercial zone, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6 et seq., with the boundaries as described in Exhibit B and shown in Exhibit C. 
Sec. 18-62. - Created. 
There is created, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6 et seq., a drug-free commercial zone to be located within the corporate limits of the city with such drug-free commercial zone being more fully described and shown in the attached Exhibits B and C, respectively, excluding any and all areas contained within such boundaries which have not previously been zoned commercial and those areas which are not residential areas contiguous to such commercially zoned area which is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth, and consisting of previously zoned commercial property pursuant to the jurisdiction's planning and zoning powers and residential property contiguous to such commercially zoned area extending not more than one-half mile from the external boundary of any portion of the commercially zoned area, as certified in Exhibit D. 
Sec. 18-63. - Signs to be posted. 
The city is authorized to do everything necessary to ensure the posting of the required signage in prominent and conspicuous places on the boundaries of and throughout any portion of the drug-free commercial zone. 
Sec. 18-64. - Adoption by general assembly; annual reports. 
The city is authorized to do everything necessary to file the required documentation of the drug-free commercial zone with the department of community affairs, to obtain the required adoption of the zone by the General Assembly, and to provide the department of community affairs with the mandated annual reports, all pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6 et seq. 
Secs. 18-65—18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses, including but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot defacto approach prohibition. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interest: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-101. - Definition. 
The following terms, [phrases, words when] used in this article, defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means: 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; and 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and 
(3)  Any other business or establishment which offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devises are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or motives to other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion, or an assembly or person united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified sexual activities means to include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral/anal copulations, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling to other sexual contact with an animal by human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Specified anatomical areas means to include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breast below a point, immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01; Res. of 5-16-2011) 
Sec. 18-102. - Alcoholic beverage—Prohibitions, exceptions. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under sections 18-100—18-103 of this article shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption of any intoxicating liquor, beer, wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performances of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license, which derives less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sell of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The word "premises" is hereby defined as the building for which or upon a license is issued hereunder and "premise" and "building" are further defined as a structure or edifice enclosing a space within its exterior walls and covered with a roof or outside top covering of a building or connected or attached or joined with or by a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway. Any structure or structures of any nature that share a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway shall be considered a single premises and building for the purposes of this Code should suffice. No building may be subdivided for the purpose of creating more than one premisses for the purposes of this Code. In addition, the word "premises" shall include the land and real estate as well as its appurtenances, including the entire parcel together with the boundaries thereof, upon which the licensed premises sits as well as the area of land surrounding said premises. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-103. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in the article, without a valid adult entertainment occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to the article. 
(b)  No later than March 1st of each year an adult entertainment establishment applicant shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the applicant's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment applicant shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to the article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article, shall be closed between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and from 12:00 a.m. Sunday to 9:00 a.m. Monday. 
(g)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any person and no person shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(h)  If any portion, or subsection, of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-104. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion or person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-105. - Occupation tax certificate required. 
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments, defined in this article, without an occupation tax certificate to do so. No occupation tax certificate so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. Except as otherwise provided herein, all applicants must comply with the business license provisions at the city. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-106. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid occupation tax certificate or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which occupation tax certificate shall to be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-107. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-108. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, to any minor any services, material, devise, or things sold or offered for sale by and adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-109. - Location. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of the drug free commercial zone as designated in chapter 18, article III of this Code. 
(5)  Within any zoning category other than Commercial (C-1), Industrial (Ind-1), Industrial (Ind-2) not located within 1,000 feet of the designated drug free commercial zone. 
(6)  Within the drug free commercial zone. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-110. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualification. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, a drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult use establishments employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term convicted shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty. The terms employed as an adult licensed premises shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in provision subsection (a) of this section. The city shall have 15 days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the city clerk shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed within ten days thereafter to city council who shall issue such order as is required. The decision of the city council may thereafter be appealed within ten days thereafter to city council who shall issue such order as is required. The decision of the city council may thereafter be appealed within 30 days, to the county superior court. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension; revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or applicant of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-111. - Application for occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  Any person, association, partners or corporation desiring to obtain an occupation tax certificate to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager, or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable processing fee of $6,000.00 shall be paid to the business license manager to defray, in part the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The business license manager shall issue a receipt showing that such processing fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of carrying on of or any entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-112. - Same—Contents. 
(a)  The applicant's full true name. 
(b)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(d)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation. 
(e)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or occupation tax certificate for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(f)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporation shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(g)  If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(h)  If applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(i)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individuals shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the occupation tax certificate is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The office of the city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(j)  Address of the premises to be regulated. 
(k)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(l)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 18-109 which provide that no adult business or use restricted shall be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family use or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; with 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; within the central business district of the city; within any zoning category other than heavy industrial, light industrial, general commercial, or within the commercial drug free zone. 
(m)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; and 
(4)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-113. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-114. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have up to 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit at its next regular meeting if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  Application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. 
(6)  Applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which an occupation tax certificate is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is in compliance with those location restrictions as set out in section 18-109 of this article. 
(12)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 18-109 of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-115. - Persons prohibited as applicants. 
(a)  No occupation tax certificate provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property tax; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character; and 
(5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-116. - Occupation tax certificate—Refusal, appeal. 
If the city following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirement as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall within ten days, notify applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an occupation tax certificate may appeal such denial to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk. A hearing before the mayor and council shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-117. - Same—Renewal fee. 
Occupation tax certificates for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the applicants continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. Renewal applications shall be due by January 1st of the year for which such permit is requested. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-118. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permitted, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the applicant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such occupation tax certificate, and in such case, the occupation tax certificate upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an occupation tax certificate is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-119. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its occupation tax certificate until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the mayor and council for the city. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's codes, have been met. 
(b)  No applicant shall operate, conduct manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his occupation tax certificate. 
(c)  Any application for an extension of expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-120. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The applicant shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-121. - Appeal—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law, If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-122. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appointment before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council shall sustain, over-rule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-123. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedures set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-124. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in a hearing conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-125. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. 
(b)  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and chief of police. 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-126. - Same—Action by council. 
The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-127. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-128. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violator of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-129. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an occupation tax certificate, the chief of police shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at lease five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate in the event of any one or more of the following: 
1.  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
2.  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
3.  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
4.  An applicant has violated any provision of this adult entertainment article; 
5.  An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and 
6.  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other taxing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any occupation tax certificate hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. No applicant may apply for an occupation tax certificate during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of either. 
(d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council for the city by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and council for the city within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the mayor and city council, city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be to the superior court of the county filed within 30 days to the final action of mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-130. - Occupation tax certificate and annual renewal fees. 
The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax and any renewal fee for such occupation tax certificate shall be based on the gross receipts schedule pursuant to the ordinance providing for the issuance of such occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Sec. 18-131. - Change of location. 
There is established an administrative fee of $10.00 to apply for a change of location for an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-01-01) 
Secs. 18-132—18-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING PERMIT 

Sec. 18-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 or as may be thereafter amended. 
Secure impoundment facility means an impoundment facility with a minimum fencing of six feet high encompassing the area to store vehicles which is lighted and equipped with a lock or is otherwise an enclosed building equipped with a lock. 
Wrecker service means any business authorized by the State of Georgia to engage in the practice of towing for a business and in fact has applied for and obtained a business permit from the city. 
(Res. of 11-15-2004) 
Sec. 18-151. - Permit application. 
In lieu of obtaining a non-consensual towing permit from the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety, a wrecker service may obtain on an annual basis a non-consensual towing permit from the city by completing the application provided by the city. A non-consensual towing permit shall be valid through December 31 of the year it is issued. A new permit shall be required beginning January 1 for that calendar year. 
(Res. of 11-15-2004) 
Sec. 18-152. - Annual fee. 
Any wrecker service applying for a non-consensual towing permit from the city shall pay an annual fee of no less than $150.00 in order to obtain said license. The city council is authorized to reduce this rate prior to December 31, 2004. Thereafter, the city council may raise this fee at any time. 
(Res. of 11-15-2004) 
Sec. 18-153. - Rules and regulations. 
Any wrecker service licensed in the city to hold a non-consensual towing permit must also abide by the following rules and regulations, or the same is subject to being revoked by the city council: 
(1)  No storage fees may be charged for the first 24-hour period beginning at the time the vehicle is removed from the property. 
(2)  Wrecker services that perform non-consensual towing must have a secure impoundment facility. 
(3)  Wrecker services shall not remove any vehicle from a property, except residential property having no more than four residential units, unless said property has signage conspicuously posted stating that trespassing vehicles will be removed at the owner's expense. 
(4)  Rates charged by wrecker services for towing and storage must be reasonable as compared with other wrecker services of the same size and are subject by the city council. 
(5)  Wrecker services may only remove vehicles at the express consent of the property owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Res. of 11-15-2004) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the functions listed in this section. 
(Ord. of 8-21-1995, § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-32. - Office of the county emergency management director. 
It is the desire and intent of the board of council that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency. The chairman of the county commissioners of the county, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 22-31. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities in such county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by the governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of the governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials, to the state emergency management agency. 
(Ord. of 8-21-1995, § II) 
Sec. 22-33. - County emergency management agency. 
The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in section 22-31 are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of city departments listed in the table in this section are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local emergency operations plan for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. of 8-21-1995, § III) 
Sec. 22-34. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the board of council separately, or jointly with the chairman, county commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county, and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary, to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-21-1995, § IV) 
Sec. 22-35. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 8-21-1995, § V) 
Sec. 22-36. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 8-21-1995, § VI) 
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

Sec. 26-31. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 2-3-1 through 2-3-6 of the 1982 Code relating to the municipal court are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; unsafe buildings, § 14-66 et seq.; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means and includes: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent upon the premises, which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1982, § 11-2-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Jurisdiction to try and abate, punish. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 11-2-2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist, by adopting a motion to that effect, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession of, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the municipal court judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate such complaints and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Code 1982, § 11-2-3) 
Sec. 30-34. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the municipal court judge that it must be immediately abated, the municipal court judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and costs of abating such nuisance, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 11-2-4) 
Sec. 30-35. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the board of council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1982, § 11-2-5) 
Sec. 30-36. - Offense; penalty. 
It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 11-2-6) 
Secs. 30-37—30-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 30-71. - Noise; creating unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in the disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or hash sound or the sounding of such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sundays—Thursdays or 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Fridays, Saturdays, or state holidays, as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this subsection shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sundays—Thursdays or 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Fridays, Saturdays, or state holidays, or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises from such engine or vehicle. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Animals, birds. The keeping of an animal or bird which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(c)  None of the terms or prohibitions in this section shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; and 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; nor shall it apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor. 
(d)  The prohibitions of this section shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or cause to be operated any loudspeaker or public address system, or other device for the amplification and dissemination of sound, on the streets, alleys or private premises within the corporate limits of the city, from any parked or moving vehicle or from any building or enclosure or other fixed or movable foundation, by which sound or noise is emitted or transmitted by amplification outside such building or enclosure, vehicle or other fixed or movable foundation, provided, this section shall not be construed to prohibit normal use of public address systems or loudspeakers in public meetings, parades, athletic activities or other similar affairs, of noncommercial and public interest character; nor to emergencies, police, fire or other warning or public announcement situations; nor to any other event or activity for which a permit has been obtained from the board of council for the use of such devices. Any person convicted of violation of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-3; Res. of 6-18-2018(2)) 
Secs. 30-72—30-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of June 21, 2010, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 30-101—30-107, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. of 10-6-1997, §§ II—VIII; Ord. of 3-7-2006(2). 

Sec. 30-101. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth in this section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Agricultural operations. Means raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, ratites, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board. The board of natural resources. 
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
City council. The mayor and city council of the City of Eatonton. 
Coastal marshlands. Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to an excavated surface, also known as excavation. 
Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District. The Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division. The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 30-103(c) of this article. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscaped areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 30-102(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall. The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and of [O.C.G.A.] § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010; Res. of 11-19-2018, Exh. A) 
Sec. 30-102. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities other prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 30-103(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or the state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010; Res. of 11-19-2018, Exh. A) 
Sec. 30-103. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed or maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15), (16), and (17) of this section, [in] light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments onsite or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) and (17) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, O.C.G.A., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and an aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured form the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 or Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulk heads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water-detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01 (r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010; Res. of 11-19-2018, Exh. A) 
Sec. 30-104. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules and regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the county planning and development department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county planning and development department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 30-103(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7.10. 
(3)  Local permitting fees shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area based on the chart below. 
Land Disturbance Permit Application Fee Schedule 

 
Examples: 
1. For 14 acres of disturbed land the fee is calculated as such:  5 × ($100.00) + 5 × ($60.00) + 4 × ($20.00) = $880.00 
2. For 7 acres of disturbed land the fee is calculated as such:  5 × ($100.00) + 2 × ($60.00) = $620.00 
In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 30-103(c)(15), (16), and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond, in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof, to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 30-103(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 30-103(c)(15), (16), and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010; Res. of 11-19-2018, Exh. A) 
Sec. 30-105. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The county planning and development department shall periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state a time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The county planning and development department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be necessary to carry out his duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010) 
Sec. 30-106. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 30-104(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Civil monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of its ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010) 
Sec. 30-107. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010) 
Sec. 30-108. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the county planning and development department of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010) 
Sec. 30-109. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the first day of July, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law or impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Amd. of 6-21-2010) 
Secs. 30-110—30-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREES 

Sec. 30-141. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, through proper care and policy, the existing urban forest in Eatonton, Georgia by regulating and controlling the planting, preservation, and replacement of trees and shrubbery on public lands within the city and all trees and other woody vegetation thereon are and shall remain the sole and exclusive property of all for the citizens of this community for their use and enjoyment, to preserve and protect said public lands and vegetation from destruction, damage, conversion or abuse for the benefit present and future generations. Also, to encourage the citizens of the community to preserve and respect our urban forests and to encourage the replacement of trees on public and private lands in order to maintain this valuable resource as an integral part of this community's environment. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 1) 
Sec. 30-142. - Definitions. 
Administrative guidelines are defined as the written guidelines incorporated into this article by reference, as may be adopted, amended, altered or revised hereafter which constitutes the rules for implementation of this article. 
City means the City of Eatonton, a municipal corporation wholly located within Putnam County, Georgia. 
DBH is defined as tree diameter at breast height, usually taken at 4½ feet above the ground. 
Permit means that written authorization or certificate issued by the city manager to allow an applicant to plant, cut, prune, or remove trees on public property. (Not to be confused with business license or occupation registration to perform such operations on a contract basis.) 
Person is herein defined as any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity including public entities other than the city or any department thereof. 
Planting plan is defined as a written drawn plan with drawings by the applicant or his agent with details of tree locations, tree removals, tree replanting, with each tree designated as to species or common name on each parcel to be developed. Plan shall comply with this tree article and shall include inventory of existing guidelines. 
Private lands are defined as all real properties lying within the city limits less and except lands hereinafter designated and defined as "public lands". 
Public lands are defined as real properties lying between the property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways with the city, all lands owned by the city, and all lands to which the public has free access. 
Tree city board is defined as that body established by this article to administer and amend said ordinance (Ord. of 11-6-01, § 1) from time to time as deemed necessary. 
Tree protection is defined as barriers constructed around trees at construction sites sufficient to prevent damage or injury to tree trunks, limbs, and roots. 
Trees are defined as woody perennial plants, generally with a single stem or axis, commonly exceeding ten feet in height at maturity; shrubs or bushes, and all other woody vegetation on lands lying within the city limits, regardless of size. 
Replacement trees are defined as trees, which are planted pursuant to this article to replace trees which are removed for any reason. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 2) 
Sec. 30-143. - Creation and establishment of a tree city board. 
There is hereby created and established a tree city board for the City of Eatonton, Georgia which shall consist of the following: 
(a)  Compensation: Members of the tree city board shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities: It shall be the responsibility of the tree city board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update; and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs on public lands within the city. The tree city board shall also examine plans submitted pursuant to the administrative guidelines and monitor compliance therewith. The tree city board, when requested by the city manager shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the tree city board shall have the right, upon proper notice to the tree city board, to request a hearing before the city council who shall be the ultimate arbiter as to the interpretation and application of this article and the administrative guidelines. 
(c)  Operation: The tree city board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. The secretary shall maintain official minutes of all meetings and proceedings. The tree city board shall meet as often as necessary in regular or special meetings. Meetings shall be called and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law. A majority of its members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 3) 
Sec. 30-144. - Adoption of administrative guidelines. 
Annually, no later than March 1st of each year, the tree city board shall draft and recommend administrative guidelines for tree preservation and planting within the city. Said administrative guidelines shall be submitted to the city council for its approval. A public hearing shall be held prior to approval and before any final action on future amendments to this article. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be published in the local newspaper at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
Said administrative guidelines shall provide for the preservation and planting of trees on public lands within the city and all matters relating thereto including but not limited to the requirements for planting and maintaining trees within the city, limitations on paving public lands for driveways or parking, use of pesticides, and applications for grading, building and change of use permitting, and development and similar matters affecting the city's urban forest. The administrative guidelines when approved as provided for herein shall be considered as a part of the article and be enforceable as such. Upon the failure of the tree city board to submit to the city council a new set of administrative guidelines by March 1 of each year, the existing administrative guidelines shall be considered as the proposed guidelines for the current year. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 4) 
Sec. 30-145. - Tree surgeon and landscaping license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing trees, for profit, within the city, without first applying for and procuring an occupation registration. No occupation registration shall be issued until the applicant first files evidence of liability insurance coverage in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 dollars for bodily injury and $100,000.00 dollars property damage resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors where workers' compensation coverage is required by state law, the failure to have and maintain such coverage shall be grounds for denial or revocation of such license. If a person, business or other legal entity possesses an occupation registration in another city or county, the city will accept reciprocity from the other legal jurisdiction. The city may maintain trees under the supervision of the tree city board. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 5) 
Sec. 30-146. - Permits. 
Before any person, corporation, or association removes, destroys, cuts, sprays, prunes or plants any tree on public land or performs any work or function which results in disturbing, digging into, compaction or displacing said property, or contracts with another person or corporation to perform such acts, a permit must be obtained from the city. Such permit shall be in addition to all other permits, authorizations, and procedures required by law for work within in disturbing, digging into, compacting or displacing said property, or contracts with another or along public rights of way, including the state highway system. A written plan for the planting, pruning, cutting, removal or spraying of trees or trenching on public lands must be submitted to the city manager prior to any work being performed. All such plans shall conform to the administrative guidelines. Failure to submit such a plan and/or commencing work on public lands without the aforesaid permit shall be considered a violation of this article. If the plan, as submitted, shall be approved by the tree city board, the city manager or his designee shall issue the permit. The city may impose such permit fees as approved from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 6) 
Sec. 30-147. - Permits for city or public utilities. 
Individual permits shall not be required for the city, other licensed public utilities, or the Georgia Department of Transportation as long as the same adopt and adhere to the preservation and the tree city ordinance (Ord. of 11-6-01, § 1). Public and private utilities which maintain and install overhead and underground utilities, including CATV, water, serer, etc., shall be required to accomplish all such work on public lands subject to this as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the trees. Trees under utility wires or other obstructions should be reported to the city for corrective action. Likewise, it shall be a violation of this article for any person to attach to any trees on public land any rope, wire, chain, sign, or other device whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 7) 
Sec. 30-148. - Stumps. 
All stumps of trees on public lands should be removed below the surface of the ground by the city or other authorized entities so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 8) 
Sec. 30-149. - Use of chemicals and herbicides. 
Use of toxic chemicals or herbicides to kill or retard plant growth under concrete or asphalt paving or within ten feet of any tree on public lands is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 9) 
Sec. 30-150. - Administrative review by city council. 
Any person may appeal any adverse ruling or order to the city manager. If the city manager and these people cannot come to an agreement, then it is to be resolved by the city council who shall hear the matter and make a final decision. Any ruling not appealed within ten days shall be deemed final. 
Appeals shall be commenced in writing filed with the city council setting forth in sufficient detail the ruling objection to and the basis for objection. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be published in the local paper at least ten days prior thereto. Hearings shall be conducted in conformance with minimum due process requirements. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 10) 
Sec. 30-151. - Violations and enforcement. 
Violation for the provisions of this article shall be an offense against the city and punishable in the manner provided therefore by citation to the municipal court. In addition to any fine imposed, any person or firm violating the same shall: 
(1)  Bear the costs of replacement, maintenance, and incidentals for the planting of a replacement tree(s) of equal value. Maintenance may be required for two years. 
The type of tree(s), the location of said tree(s) and the time of planting should be in conformity with a plan submitted to the tree city board and approved by it. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 11) 
Sec. 30-152. - Application of article to private property. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to private property; however, in addition to landscaping requirements imposed by the zoning ordinance, developers and owners of private property are strongly encouraged to promote, develop and protect the existing urban forest within the city and to use the administrative guidelines in the landscaping of their properties. 
For those properties abutting the public right-of-way of any street, it is encouraged that plantings be made no closer that 12.5 feet (at maturity) of the right-of-way or any utility easements. Planting is discouraged in areas reserved for drainage easements, if such planting would alter or impede the flow of surface waters. For properties abutting upon the intersection of two or more rights-of-way, considerations should be given to planting which may obstruct the vision of motorists entering such intersection. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 12) 
Sec. 30-153. - Utilities. 
The person planting trees or doing any other work as herein described on public lands shall be responsible for determining in advance the location of all underground utilities in the immediate area, including compliance with the "Call Before You Dig Law." When the permitted work is performed, care shall be taken to avoid damaging or breaking any underground or above ground utility lines. If damage is done to any utility line, the person to whom the permit was issued shall be solely responsible for its repair. No tree shall be planted under or near overhead utility lines which will, when fully grown and mature, conflict with those overhead lines and as a consequence require pruning. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 13) 
Sec. 30-154. - Minimum requirements for planting. 
Plans for planting required by the Tree City Ordinance shall provide for: 
(1)  Planting holes which are two times the diameter of the root ball or container and 1¼ the depth of the root ball or container height; 
(2)  Trees staked if less than two inches caliper BBH; 
(3)  Planting surrounded by a two inch soil saucer at the ground line and covered with a minimum of two inches of mulch or appropriate landscaping material; 
(4)  The mature size or species shall be considered and in no case shall planting be closer than 50 feet for large trees, forth 40 feet for medium size trees, and 30 feet for small trees. 
(Ord. of 11-6-01, § 14) 
Sec. 30-155. - Public tree care. 
The city may plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, shrubs or other plantings on public lands, as necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public lands. The city will work with the tree city board on this. 
The city shall remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is damaging sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with these guidelines. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § 15) 
Secs. 30-156—30-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER RESOURCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-166. - Purpose, repealer, severability. 
The governing authority of the city to maintain and enhance the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to preserve environmentally sensitive water resources, to preserve water quality, and to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment within the county, does hereby adopt this water resource district article and hereby repeals all ordinances or portions thereof which are in conflict with this article. Provisions of the zoning ordinance, which are not identical with a provision of this article shall not be considered to be conflicting. This article and the zoning ordinance shall be considered in pari materia and the more stringent provisions shall apply. The maps and overlays referred to in this article are incorporated herein and made a part hereof by said reference and shall be supplements to the maps which are a part of the zoning ordinance. Every provision of this article shall be severable from all other provisions. A finding by any court of the illegality or unenforceability of any provision or provisions hereof shall not operate to void this article but, instead, all provisions not specifically and explicitly held to be illegal or unenforceable shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 1-21-2003(1); Ord. of 3-7-2006(2)) 
Sec. 30-167. - Establishment of water resource districts; applicability and effect. 
No person shall begin any building or land development activity or process within the unincorporated area of Putnam County unless it is in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this article. The effect of this article, as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
(1)  To establish and delineate ground-water recharge districts, wetlands districts, and water supply watershed districts, (collectively referred to as water resource districts) which supplement all districts designated in the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  To establish criteria to protect significant ground-water recharge areas from pollution form spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections, and other development pressures; 
(3)  To establish criteria to promote the wise use of wetlands and to protect them from alterations, which would significantly affect or reduce their primary characteristics and functions which affect water quality, flood plain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; 
(4)  To establish criteria to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future public water supply for residents, minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to said water supply, and to maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds; 
(5)  To prohibit building and land development activities not expressly permitted by this article; and 
(6)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-21-2003(1); Ord. of 3-7-2006(2)) 
Sec. 30-168. - Interpretations and definitions. 
All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only. In this article, words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth in this section, and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas within other setback areas required by section 30-171 of this article. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035 The drastic methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility. 
DNR. means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Hazardous waste means any waste which, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. The EPA has developed a list of hazardous wastes based on corrosiveness, reactivity, and toxicity, the current edition of which is hereby incorporated herein. 
High pollution susceptibility area. An area with a DRASTIC rating of more than 181 and so designated by DNR's Ground-Water Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 20, as supplemented by the City of Eatonton Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map. 
Impervious surface means a man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC § 1344, as amended. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad Map. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, and applications of chemicals, injections, and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility map means maps showing the relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, using the drastic methodology, and characterizing land areas as having high, medium, and low potential susceptibility for pollution of groundwater. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will or which may be reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
River/stream bank means the rising ground bordering a river or stream that confines the water to its natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Significant recharge area means those areas designated as such by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in the map titled "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrologic Atlas 18" (Current Edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type, thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant recharge areas are generally as follows in the Piedmont area of Georgia, which includes the City of Eatonton, Putnam County: Rocks have little primary porosity, with most groundwater being stored in the overlying soils. The significant recharge areas are those with thicker soils. Thick soils in the Piedmont area are generally characterized by two or more geologic contacts per four square miles and slopes of less than eight percent. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater drainage systems, railroads, or similar installations and activities. 
Water resource district means an area in which this article imposes a set of requirements governing the use of land in said district in addition to those requirements imposed by the zoning district. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally-owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally-owned public drinking water systems, but excluding the multi-purpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally-owned public drinking water intake. A small water supply watershed is a water supply watershed less than 100 square miles in size. A large water supply watershed is a water supply watershed more than 100 square miles in size. 
Wetland means those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration which support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions involving a source of water that causes soil saturation. 
Zoning ordinance means any ordinance properly adopted by the governing authority of the city that delineates various zoning districts in the city of and which restricts land use within said zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 1-21-2003(1); Ord. of 3-7-2006(2)) 
Sec. 30-169. - Groundwater recharge area protection district. 
Groundwater recharge areas are vulnerable to residential and commercial development activities and agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste, and septic tank effluents contribute to a deterioration in groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually causes an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in groundwater recharge areas can alter or impair the recharge characteristics thereby decreasing the groundwater supplies. 
(1)  District delineation. The groundwater recharge area districts in the City of Eatonton, Putnam County are shown on and identified as such on the Georgia Department of Natural Resources "Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia Hydrologic Atlas 18 (Current Edition), as supplemented by the City of Eatonton, Putnam County Groundwater Recharge Areas Map". At the time of adoption of this article, all of Putnam County has been designated as an area with low pollution susceptibility on the Department of Natural Resources Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20. 
(2)  Limitations on land use. In addition to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, limitations on land use within groundwater recharge areas shall be as follows: 
a.  There shall be no landfills. 
b.  There shall be no new permits for the land disposal of hazardous waste. 
c.  Facilities permitted or to be permitted to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste shall perform such operations on an impermeable pad having a spill and leak collection system. 
d.  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons or more, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
e.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
1.  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet in capacity; or 
3.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet in capacity. 
Any liner required by this subsection shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of at least one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5×10- 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by U.S. Soil Conservation Service. The average size of existing agricultural waste impoundments in Putnam County is about 15 acre-feet. The recommended vertical hydraulic conductivity in clay can be compacted by the use of sheep's-foot rollers or pans with heavy rubber tires. 
f.  New homes served by septic tank/drain field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources Manual for on-site sewage management systems DHR Table MT-1). These minimum lot sizes may be increased based on consideration of other factors as set out in sections A—F of the DHR manual. 
1.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
3.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
g.  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitation as identified on Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources (DHR) Manual for on-site sewage management systems (DHR Table MT-2). These minimum lot sizes may be increased based on consideration of other factors as set out in sections A—F of the DHR manual. 
1.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
3.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
h.  If the applicable zoning ordinance requires a larger lot size than that required by subsections f. and g., the larger lot size shall be used. 
i.  Any lot of record on the date of the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from the lot size standards required by subsections f. and g. 
j.  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual and the lot size standards required by subsections f. and g. 
k.  Facilities which handle hazardous materials, of the types (listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in accordance with any applicable federal or state spill prevention requirements and any state or local fire prevention code requirements. 
l.  The design of any new facility for the spray irrigation of wastewater sludge in any high pollution susceptibility area shall comply with DNR's Criteria For Slow Rate Land Treatment (current edition), as amended, and other technical publications, as well as site-specific information submitted by a registered professional engineer for each such project. 
m.  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
n.  Exclusive of mining settling basins, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in any high pollution susceptibility area. 
TABLE MT-1 
NEW HOMES  MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS AND MAXIMUM  ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW FOR THE TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 

 
* In this context, "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** Gpad = gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
TABLE MT-2 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS  MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS AND MAXIMUM  ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW FOR THE TYPE OF  WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 

 
* In this context, "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** Gpad = gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
Notes to tables 
Section A. The above minimum lot sizes are for the typical size home (3 or 4-bedroom) with basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees and water supply line. If larger homes, swimming pools, tennis courts or outbuildings, etc. are proposed for construction or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the Putnam County Board of Health will require larger lots to assure usable soil area. 
Section B. The Putnam County Board of Health may also require larger lot sizes when physical factors indicate the need to do so. These factors include, but are not limited to, the availability of sufficient unobstructed land areas for an approved on-site sewage management system and approved replacement system, slope greater than five percent, percolation rates higher than 45 minutes per inch, need for subsurface drainage or adverse topographic features. 
Section C. Lots shall be a minimum width of 100 feet or 150 feet measured within the area where an approved on-site sewage management system and replacement system are to be located when served by a public water supply system or nonpublic water supply system, respectively. 
Section D. The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size: rights-of-way of roads, easements (such as power line or pipe line) that exclude installation of an on-site sewage management system, bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetland or other bodies of water and similar limiting factors. 
Section E. There must be an unobstructed area on each lot for installation of an approved on-site sewage management system and an area equal in size for a conventional system or larger area, as appropriate, for an approved replacement system; this will include sufficient area for necessary site modifications for installation of both the initial system and a replacement system. All pertinent county zoning setbacks and other space requirements must also be met. 
Section F. The maximum daily sewage flow for each lot or parcel of land shall not exceed 600 gpad when served by nonpublic or individual water supply system or 1,200 gpad when served by public water supply system. When sewage flows exceed these quantities (600 or 1,200 gpad as indicated) for a given dwelling structure, the minimum lot size or parcel of land shall be increased proportionally. Example: Assume a public water supply exists (so 1,200 gpad maximum sewage flow allowed per minimum required land area of 21,780 square feet), and there is a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd. To determine the square footage of the lot needed, X, use the following formula: 
X = 5,000 gal/day / 1,200 gal/acre/day 
= 4.17 acres 
= 4.17 acres × 43,560 ft 2 /acre 
= 181,500 ft 2 area of land needed. 
Likewise, for a nonpublic (individual) water supply, to determine the square footage of the lot needed, Y, for a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd, use the following formula: 
Y = 5,000 gal/day / 600 gal/acre/day 
= 8.33 acres 
= 8.33 acres × 43,560 ft 2 /acre 
= 363,000 ft 2 area of land needed. 
[(b)]  Exemptions. Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in subsection (a)(2)f and g. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(1); Ord. of 3-7-2006(2)) 
Sec. 30-170. - Wetlands district. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources and in which development activities are significantly restrained because of flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation, water quality maintenance and pollution control, water pollution control, flood control, natural resource education, opportunity for scientific study, and recreation. 
The following categories of freshwater wetlands and aquatic habitats have been defined, identified, and mapped by DNR: 
(1)  Open water. Areas of open water, primarily reservoirs, ponds, lakes, rivers, and estuaries. 
(2)  Non-forested emergent wetlands. Freshwater marshes dominated by a variety of grasses, sedges, rushes, and broad-leaved aquatics associated with streams, pond areas, and tidally influenced non-saline waters. 
(3)  Scrub/shrub wetlands. Non-forested areas dominated by woody shrubs, seedlings, and saplings averaging less than 20 feet in height; these wetlands may integrate with forested wetlands, non-forested emergent wetlands, and open water. 
(4)  Forested wetlands. Natural or planted forested areas having a dominant tree crown closure of hardwoods, pines, gums, cypress, or any combination of these types. These areas are usually in stream or river floodplains, isolated depressions, and drain-ways, and contain standing or flowing water for a portion of the year. Subcategories are: 
a.  Hardwood floodplain forests; 
b.  Coniferous floodplain forests; 
c.  Mixed floodplain forests; 
d.  Non-alluvial forested wetlands. 
(5)  Altered wetlands. Areas with hydric soils that have been denuded of natural vegetation and put to other uses, such as pasture, row crops, etc., but that otherwise retain certain wetlands functions and values. 
(b)  District delineation. The wetlands area districts in the city are shown on and identified as such on the Little River Watershed and Wetland Delineation Map. Said overlay map is a generalized wetlands map and shows the general location of wetlands according to the 1987 National Wetlands Inventory and should be consulted by persons considering development activities in or near wetlands. However, this map does not necessarily represent the exact boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and shall not serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(c)  Permit coordination process. In order to assure that all applicable federal and state requirements in regard to wetlands are met, the local issuing authority of the city shall compare all requests for subdivision, rezoning, development, construction, demolition, or land disturbance to the generalized wetlands map. This review is simply a coordination process and is not an additional wetlands permitting process. No action by the city or its employees shall relieve a landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. This review shall result in one of two actions by the local issuing authority: 
(1)  He shall issue a local permit pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city or the city land disturbance ordinance without requiring a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the Corps of Engineers if either of the following two conditions exists: 
a.  The request does not involve an activity which would cause alteration of wetlands; or 
b.  The request involves a location, which is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the generalized wetlands map. 
(2)  He shall not issue a local permit but shall defer issuing any local permit pending a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the Corps of Engineers and shall issue such a permit only after either a letter of permission or a Section 404 permit is issued by the Corps of Engineers whenever his review determines that the request appears to involve land which contains wetlands or is located near wetlands so as to have a potential to alter them. 
(d)  Limitations on land use. In addition to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, limitations on land use within wetlands districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  No landfills shall be allowed. 
(2)  No receiving areas or transfer points for toxic waste, hazardous waste, or other potential contaminants shall be allowed. 
(3)  No permit for construction or development within the wetlands districts shall issue without action by the chief local issuing authority, the planning and zoning commission and the governing authority of the city, which shall consider the following factors and issue written findings in regard thereto before issuing such a permit: 
a.  Whether impacts to an area would adversely affect the public health safety, welfare, or the property of others. 
b.  Whether the area is unique or significant in the conservation of flora and fauna including threatened, rare, or endangered species. 
c.  Whether alteration or impacts to wetlands will adversely affect the function including the flow or quality of water, cause erosion or shoaling, or impact navigation. 
d.  Whether impacts or modification by a project would adversely affect fishing or recreational use of wetlands. 
e.  Whether an alteration or impact would be temporary in nature. 
f.  Whether the project contains significant state historical and archaeological resources, defined as "Properties On or Eligible for the National Register of Historic Places". 
g.  Whether alteration of wetlands would have measurable adverse impacts on adjacent sensitive natural areas. 
h.  Where wetlands have been created for mitigation purposes under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, such wetlands shall be considered for protection. 
(e)  Permitted uses. Unless otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance, the following uses shall be permitted by right within the wetlands district: 
(1)  Forestry activities that comply with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and to include road construction best management practices which comply with Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Passive outdoor recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(4)  Normal agricultural activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock, subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006(2)) 
Sec. 30-171. - Water supply watershed protection district. 
In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate, safe drinking water is essential. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff is threatened by both residential and commercial development. Land-disturbing activities can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. Stormwater runoff, from impervious surfaces can introduce toxins, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and making the resulting sewage more dangerous to humans and wildlife. To control and alleviate these problems and to protect public water supplies, water supply watershed districts shall be created as prescribed herein. 
(1)  District delineation. The water supply watershed districts in the City of Eatonton, Putnam County are shown on and identified as such on the Little River Watershed and Wetland Delineation Map. These districts are defined as that area surrounded by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds upstream of a reservoir or government-owned water system intake and are divided for regulatory purposes by the arc formed by a radius seven miles upstream of each respective public water supply intake. 
(2)  Limitations on land use. In addition to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, limitations on land use within water supply watershed districts shall be as follows: 
a.  No landfills shall be allowed. 
b.  The corridors of all perennial streams in a large water supply watershed tributary to a water supply reservoir within a seven-mile radius of the reservoir boundary shall be protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields shall be prohibited in the setback area of subsection 2., above. 
c.  A tributary to the water supply intake in a large water supply watershed shall have no specified minimum criteria for protection, except that new facilities, located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir and which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
d.  The perennial stream corridors of a small water supply watershed within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmental-owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir shall be protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
e.  The perennial stream corridors within a small water supply watershed and outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
f.  The following criteria apply at all locations in a small water supply watershed: 
1.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities shall be prohibited. 
2.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent of the total area. 
3.  Facilities, which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on an impermeable surface having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
g.  The owner of any water supply reservoir shall develop a reservoir management plan for approval of the governing authority of Putnam County and the department of natural resources. Said reservoir management plan shall address the recreational use of the reservoir and the maintenance of a buffer around the reservoir. Prohibitions or restrictions on all or some of the following recreational uses shall be addressed in the reservoir management plan to protect the water quality of the reservoir for drinking purposes while optimizing its recreational benefits: swimming, fishing, boating, docks, and public access. Furthermore, said plan shall mandate that a buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary. The allowable buffer vegetation and disturbance shall be specified in the reservoir management plan. Reservoir owners, upon consideration of ground slopes and soil types, may adopt buffers of differing sizes only upon approval of the governing authority of the city and the department of natural resources. 
(3)  Partial exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided that the conditions described herein have been met: 
a.  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this article. 
b.  Mining activities permitted by the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
c.  Utilities shall be exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas and if the following conditions are met: 
1.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
2.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
3.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
d.  Forestry and agricultural activities shall be exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of this article provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
2.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(1); Ord. of 3-7-2006(2)) 
Sec. 30-172. - Enforcement. 
The local issuing authority and his designees shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this article by withholding building and development permits for any activity prohibited by this article, by initiating court action to enjoin proposed violations or to abate activities in violation, and by issuing citations for violations hereof. Violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor and may be punished by 60 days confinement, a fine of $500.00, or both. Each day's violation comprises a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006(2)) 
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR WATERING 

Sec. 30-173. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the incorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 30-174. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in [this article]. 
(b)  The city marshal shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Any violation of this [article] may be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code and as set out in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 30-175. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 30-176. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of Eatonton, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 4-2-23 of the 1982 Code on the subject of open burning is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 34-2—34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 7, 2006,, supplied provisions to be added to the Code as §§ 35-1—35-16. At the discretion of the editor, with the concurrence of the city, these provisions have been included as §§ 34-21—34-36 to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 34-21. - In general. 
No person shall cause suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area within the city limits until first obtaining a permit from the city marshal. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-22. - Allowances. 
After obtaining said permit, open burning will be allowed for the following purposes: 
(1)  Reduction of leaves on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises. 
(2)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for the production or harvesting of crops. (Agricultural zoning only) 
(3)  Fires set for purposes of training fire-fighting personnel when all state agency guidelines are met. 
(4)  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage. 
(5)  For weed abatement, disease and pest prevention. 
(6)  Open burning in other than predominantly residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction or right-of-way maintenance provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population; 
b.  The location of the burning is at least 1,000 feet from any dwelling located in a predominantly residential area; 
c.  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimized; 
d.  Heavy oils, asphalt materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any materials other than plant growth are not being burned; and 
e.  No more than one pile 60 feet by 60 feet, or equivalent, is being burned within a nine-acre area at one time. 
(7)  Disposal of all packing materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with U. S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations. 
[(8)  Reserved.] 
(9)  Open burning of vegetative material; for the purpose of land clearing using an air curtain destructor provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Authorization for such burning is received from the state forestry office; 
b.  The location of the air curtain destructor is at least 300 feet from any occupied structure or public road. Air curtain destructors used solely for utility line clearing or road clearing may be located at lesser distance upon approval by the EPA and DNR divisions; 
c.  No more than one air curtain destructor is operated within a ten-acre area at one time or there must be at least 1,000 feet between any two air curtain destructors; 
d.  Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps which are relatively free of soil are burned in the air curtain destructor; 
e.  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic based or impregnated materials are not used to start or maintain the operation of the air destructors; 
f.  The air curtain destructor is constructed, installed and operated in a manner consistent with good air pollution control practice for minimizing emissions of fly ash and smoke; and 
g.  The cleaning out the air curtain destructor pit is performed in a manner to prevent fugitive duct. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-23. - Authority to put out fires. 
The city marshal, fire chief, police chief, or city administrator shall have the authority to order any fire put out if it determined there is a danger to public safety, a nuisance or significant environmental harm. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-24. - Time of permitted burning. 
All permitted burning shall be carried out between dawn and dusk and all fires shall extinguished by sunset. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-25. - Location of permitted burning. 
All burning shall be located on private property so as not to interfere with traffic on streets or sidewalks. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-26. - Certain organizations exempt. 
Organizations such as fire departments, churches, and groups organized for the training and education of children (such as Boys Scouts, Girl Scouts, and Schools) may obtain a permit without complying with section 34-23. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-27. - Safety measures. 
During any open burning, a competent person at least 18 years of age shall be present during the entire burning process and control such burning. Such person shall have a hose connected to a water source or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-28. - No burn days. 
No burning of any kind shall be allowed within the city on a no burn day declared by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-29. - Conditions of permit. 
All permits are issued on a daily basis and are good only for the of issue and while weather conditions support a safe burn. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-30. - Amount of fires. 
Only one fire may be in progress at any time except as noted in subsection 34-22(9)c. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-31. - Refusal of permit. 
A permit may be refused if the product can more safely be removed than it can be burned, or other services are reasonably available which could remove or take the product. The decision of the city is final. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-32. - Distances of burns. 
No fire may be burned closer than 50 feet to any building, structure or any other improvement to the subject real property. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-33. - No burning certain items. 
The following items may not be burned: tires, any item which may emit gaseous vapors or odors, any items where odors are likely to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare, any hazardous materials as the same are defined by the state and/or federal laws, statutes and regulations. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the burning of non-treated wood. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec 34-34. - Authority of officials. 
The city marshal, fire chief, police chief, city administrator, U.S. Forestry Service or Georgia Forestry Commission has the authority to enter any property to inspect items to be burned, and to return to inspect progress of burning and to insure the fire is out. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-35. - Allowed burning without a permit. 
The following are allowed burning by the state without obtaining a permit: 
(1)  For the purposes of cooking food, such as grilling. 
(2)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measured are used and state guideline are followed. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-36. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, as provided in section 1-12 and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a not more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation is committed to continue shall be deemed as a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by the violation. The violation of any provision of this chapter may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings in the courts of competent jurisdiction in the state. Equitable proceedings for restraining order or injunction in the superior court may be maintained, notwithstanding the facts that the violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding the other adequate of law may exist. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Chapter 38 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 17, 2008, amended Art. II in its entirety, in effect deleting Art. II and enacting a new Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted May 10, 1992, Arts. 1—5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-21. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of Eatonton, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-1) 
Sec. 38-22. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundations which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-2) 
Sec. 38-23. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-3) 
Sec. 38-24. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-4) 
Sec. 38-25. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Eatonton, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-5) 
Sec. 38-26. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated June 19, 1989, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated June 19, 1989, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Putnam County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City Clerk's Office, Eatonton City Hall. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-6) 
Sec. 38-27. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-7) 
Sec. 38-28. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-8) 
Sec. 38-29. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This articlee is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-9) 
Sec. 38-30. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-10) 
Sec. 38-31. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Eatonton, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-11) 
Sec. 38-32. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-12) 
Sec. 38-33. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 38-26. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before April 20, 1992 [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 20, 1992. [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after April 20, 1992 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [* i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 20, 1992 [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-23) 
Secs. 38-34—38-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 38-51. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The Putnam County Director of Planning and Development is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-13) 
Sec. 38-52. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 38-67(2). 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-14) 
Sec. 38-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 38-26, then the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 38-52(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 38-52(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 38-52(1)(c) and 38-67(B)(2) or 38-69(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-15) 
Secs. 38-54—38-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 38-66. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-16) 
Sec. 38-67. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-66(4), "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot have the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 38-53(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 38-66(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a. and c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-26, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. 
Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-17) 
Sec. 38-68. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-26, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 38-26, then the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-66(4) "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-18) 
Sec. 38-69. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-26, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-66(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 38-52(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-19) 
Sec. 38-70. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-20) 
Sec. 38-71. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-21) 
Secs. 38-72—38-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 38-81. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Eatonton Zoning Board as established by City Council of Eatonton, Georgia shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Putnam County Director of Planning and Development in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Putnam County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Putnam County Director of Planning and Development shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 38-22) 
Chapter 42 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; planning, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; fire safety requirements for historic buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for the repairs on facilities of historic value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24; historic landmark or district designation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26; certificates of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; certification as rehabilitated historic property for purposes of preferential assessment, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.2; landmark historic property for purposes of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—43-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 42-31. - Purpose. 
The Eatonton City Council, hereinafter board of council, declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article and as follows: 
(1)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets, and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
(3)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
(4)  In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do such. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § I; Amd. of 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 42-32. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. This section is intended to define terms frequently used throughout this chapter. It is not intended to be exhaustive, and definitions also may appear in chapter 75 (the permitted use regulations). Words not specifically defined in this section shall be construed to have the customary or preferred meaning given by Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, latest edition published. 
(b)  Use and interpretation. The following shall apply to the use of all words in this chapter: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(4)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(5)  The noun "district" has the same meaning and refer to any historic preservation district established by this chapter. 
(6)  The noun "use" shall mean the manner in which a structure, building or parcel of land actually is occupied. 
(7)  The noun "map" means an official historic preservation district map located within the boundaries of Eatonton, Georgia, adopted in and amended from time to time as permitted in this chapter. 
(8)  The word "structure" includes, but is not limited to, the word "building." 
(9)  The word "lot" shall include the words "piece," "plot," and "parcel." 
(10)  The word "should" is suggested but not mandatory. 
(11)  The word "constructed" includes the word "erected", "built", "altered", "rebuilt", and "repaired". 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the board of council of a recommendation by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to such structure. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the board of council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 42-34(b). 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, designated by the board of council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 42-34(c). 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of an historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements or other appurtenant features. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § II; Amd. of 1-22-2009; Res. of 3-20-2017, Exh. A) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-33. - Creation of historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Commission established. There is created a commission whose title shall be the Eatonton Historic Preservation Commission, hereinafter known as commission. 
(b)  Position within the city government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Members; number, appointment, terms and compensation. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed and ratified by the board of council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related disciplines. 
(2)  Members shall have three-year terms and may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: 
a.  One member for one year; 
b.  Two members for two years; 
c.  Two members for three years; and 
d.  A member whose term has expired may continue to serve until the vacancy is filled. Solicitation for qualified members shall be in the official legal organ of Putnam County, Georgia. 
(3)  Organization and meetings of commission. 
a.  Officers. The commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman (who shall be acting chairman in the absence of the chairman) on an annual basis. Any officer may succeed himself. The chairman (or in his absence the vice-chairman) shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the preservation commission and decide all points of order or procedure. The chairman shall appoint any committees that may be found necessary. A secretary (who need not be a member of the planning and zoning commission) shall be designated by the commission and shall conduct all correspondence of the commission; keep a minutes book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; and keep records of examination and hearing and other official action; and shall carry out such other duties as may be assigned by the commission. The commission shall have the right to request interpretation of this chapter by the city attorney, in writing through the chair of the zoning committee of the board of council, the mayor of the city or the city administrator. 
Minutes of meetings shall be kept and may be electronic but shall be on file with the city clerk and subject to an open records request. 
The commission may appoint one of its members as treasurer but is not required to. 
b.  Rules. The following shall be the rules as to how and where meetings of the commission shall be held: 
1.  The regular meeting of the commission shall be held the second Monday of the month at 7:00 p.m., unless there is no cause for holding such meeting. If there is no reason to have a regular meeting, the secretary or chairman shall inform the members of the commission at least five days in advance of a meeting or cancellation if possible. 
2.  Special meetings may be called by the chairman, provided that at least 24 hours' notice of such meeting is given each member and that such public notice as required by law is provided. 
3.  Four members shall constitute a quorum to conduct all business. 
4.  Neither the secretary, the building inspector, the code enforcement officer nor any member of the commission shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the commission. No member of the commission shall hear or vote upon an appeal in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial way. 
5.  The order of business at each meeting shall be as follows: 
i.  Roll call. 
ii.  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
iii.  Report of committees, if any. 
iv.  Unfinished business. 
v.  Hearing of applications for certificates of appropriateness cases. 
vi.  Other or new business. 
6.  Failure to attend three consecutive meetings or more shall be considered automatic resignation from the commission, and upon resignation or other vacancies occurring in office, the chairman shall notify the board of council in writing of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the board of council may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
7.  All meetings shall be held in a governmentally owned or leased facility. The regular meeting place will be in the meeting room of the city hall, 201 North Jefferson Avenue or such other place designated by the commission. Any change in meeting place will be advertised as required by law. 
8.  The commission shall be free to adopt such additional bylaws not inconsistent with this section or those procedural rules elsewhere contained in this section to govern further the conduct of its meetings. 
(d)  Authority to initiate amendments. Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend part or the entire official historic preservation district map. An application to amend the text of this chapter may be initiated by the commission by the board of council on its own motion or by application to the commission by any person owning property or a business in the city. Any application to amend the official historic preservation map or the text of the ordinance submitted by a private party shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee established by the board of council. Unless initiated by the board of council or the commission, all applications to amend the official historic preservation district map must be submitted by the owner of the affected property or the authorized agent of the owner. Such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application for an amendment to the official historic preservation district map affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, such interval to begin with the date of final decision by the board of council. The board of council in its discretion and by unanimous vote may reduce or waive the 12-month time intervals to amend the such maps affecting the same property; however, in the case of an application to amend the maps that were not approved by the board of council, the interval between the disapproved application and the subsequent application affecting the same property shall be at least six months. The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications initiated by the board of council or the commission, except for amendments to the map that were denied by the board of council, in which case the interval required for the subsequent application shall be at least six months. However, an application to alter conditions as contemplated in subsection (h) of this section may be submitted at any time. 
(e)  Application, process and standards. Each application to amend this chapter or the official historic preservation district map shall be filed with the city clerk. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Text amendment applications. Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of applicant. 
b.  Current provisions of text to be affected by amendment. 
c.  Proposed wording of text change. 
d.  Reason for amendment request. 
(2)  Map amendment applications. Map amendment applications shall include the following: 
a.  A legal description of the tracts to be considered, as well as its acreage, street address (if any) or location with respect to nearby public roads; and the subdivision (if any) in which it is located. 
b.  Five copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow; land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of that tract and adjacent properties; existence of structures of intermediate regional floodplain on the property; and the current zoning of the tract; prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. His seal shall be affixed to the plat, which also shall be signed by him. 
c.  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any. If an agent is proceeding on behalf of the property owner, the owner must provide a written authorization to this effect that is witnessed by a notary public. 
d.  A letter of intent detailing the manner in which the property is to be used if approved. 
(f)  Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(g)  Statement of powers. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the board of council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and recommend to the board of council that it grant or deny such in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the board of council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, object or works of art as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the board of council or the commission itself may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the board of council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons if necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property on behalf of the city. The commission shall not obligate the city and shall hand over to the city any donations, grants, funds or gifts received; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the board of council enter into agreements to do such. 
(h)  Power to adopt rules and standards. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. 
(i)  Conflict of interest. At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(j)  Authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations payable to the city and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(k)  Records of meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(l)  Jurisdiction of chapter. This chapter shall apply only to a historic district as designated by the city. 
The Eatonton Plaza Historic District shall include the following: 
All tract and parcels (or subparcels) of land lying and being within the City of Eatonton, Georgia, and bounded as follows and as indicated on the official zoning map: 
Starting at the northern extremity, the boundary encompasses the property line of the Old Jenkins estate at the north end of N. Madison Ave. (E005 009); it then proceeds south down N. Madison Ave., including all property boundaries in N. Madison Ave. ending just prior to the commercial district (Blackwell Furniture Stores). The final two properties at the south end of N. Madison are the Baptist Church (E006 061) and the Bronson House (E006 068). 
At the intersection of N. Madison and Dogwood Lane, the boundary proceeds west along the rear property lines of all properties on Church Street and includes those lots with a Church Street address that do not touch Church Street until (and including) the lot on the corner of Grove Street and Church Street (E005 060). At Grove Street, the boundary crosses Church Street behind the property lines on N. Lafayette Street. It proceeds south down [ N.] Lafayette Street until (and including) the property at E004 041. At this juncture the boundary turns east along the rear property lines on the south side of Wayne Street, until it meets N. Madison Ave. The boundary proceeds south down N. Madison Ave., ending at the Baptist Church on the left and the Bronson House on the right. Only the main lot (E006 061) of the Baptist Church is included. 
A list of properties in the Eatonton Plaza Historic District, as created, and the owners thereof is by this reference incorporated and made part of this article in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as through set out in full in this section. This list is on file at city hall with the city clerk and with the planning and development department. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § III; Amd. of 1-22-2009; Res. of 3-20-2017, Exh. A) 
Sec. 42-34. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Power to recommend districts and buildings to the board of council for designation. The commission shall present to the board of council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of an historic district or historic property to the board of council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, non-historic, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art, or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in this article or in a separate ordinance designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-historic (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section); 
c.  Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section). 
(c)  Designation of an historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the state or local region, for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, the state or the region; or 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county, state or region. 
(2)  Boundary description. Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the board of council, the commission or: 
a.  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings. The commission and the board of council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the U.S. mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll and a notice sent via U.S. mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city. 
(5)  Board of council action on commission recommendation. Following the receipt of the commission's recommendation, the board of council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary or reject the ordinance. 
(6)  Notification of historic preservation section. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report required in subsection (a)(3) of this section to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the board of council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the board of council which notice shall apprise such owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the U.S. mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll, and a notice sent via U.S. mail to the address of the property, to the attention of the occupant, shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property until action by the board of council. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § IV; Amd. of 1-22-2009; Res. of 3-20-2017, Exh. A) 
Sec. 42-35. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of alterations or new construction in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district by the board of council, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to the commission and approved by the board of council. 
(b)  Approval of new construction within designated districts. The commission shall recommend to the board of council the issuance of certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping, to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
(c)  Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. When considering applications for certificate of appropriateness to existing buildings, the secretary of the interior's standards for historic preservation projects, including the secretary's standards for rehabilitation, shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. 
(d)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(e)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall recommend approval of the application and issuance of a certificate of appropriateness to the board of council if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design, arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)  The commission shall recommend denial of a certificate of appropriateness to the board of council if it finds that the proposed material changes in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(f)  Public hearings on applications for certificate of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. Notification may be made by erecting a sign on the affected property similar to the signage used when properties are to be rezoned. 
(g)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(h)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(i)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall recommend to the board of council approval or denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art located within an historic district. Evidence of approval of the commission's recommendation by the board of council shall be recorded in the minutes of the board of council's official meetings and shall authorize the commission to issue a certificate of appropriateness. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by U.S. mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(j)  Necessary actions to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  If the commission recommends to the board of council denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. If the applicant so desires, he may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the board of council based on a recommendation by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(k)  Undue hardship. By reason of unusual circumstances, where the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(1)  Requirements of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
a.  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If work is not performed in accordance with such certificate, the board of council, or its designee, shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
b.  The board of council may institute any legal proceedings it deems appropriate to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(m)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(n)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificate of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with such application. 
(o)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the board of council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise, of the property or any interest in such property. 
(p)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the recommendation to the board of council of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the board of council. Any such appeal must be filed with the board of council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (i)(1) of this section or, in the case of failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of expiration of the 45-day period allowed for commission action in subsection (i)(1) of this section. Appeals from decisions of the board of council may be taken to the county superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § V; Amd. of 1-22-2009; Res. of 3-20-2017, Exh. A) 
Sec. 42-36. - Demolition or relocation of a historic property within a historic district. 
(a)  Applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. The commission shall recommend to the board of council certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(b)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(c)  Consideration of post-demolition or post-relocation plans. The commission shall not recommend to the board of council certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(d)  Demolition/relocation criteria. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the commission shall use the criteria described in section 42-35(e) to determine whether to recommend to the board of council that they deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § VI; Amd. of 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 42-37. - Maintenance of historic properties; building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on an historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions include but are not limited to broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, any deterioration to the structural integrity of the property, visible rotting and any condition demmed by the building inspector, city marshal, or city administrator as posing a threat to the safety or welfare to any person or animal. The deterioration of exterior architectural features or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  If the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the city marshal and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The city marshal shall notify the owner of such property will have 30 days in which to remedy such condition. 
(3)  If the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner of such property shall be punished as provided in section 42-38 and, at the direction of the board of council, the board of council may authorize the commission to perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § VII; Amd. of 1-22-2009; Res. of 3-20-2017, Exh. A) 
Sec. 42-38. - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly-enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-18-1988, § VIII; Amd. of 1-22-2009) 
Chapter 44 - MEDIA PRODUCTION PERMIT 

Sec. 44-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be titled the "Eatonton-Putnam County Media Production Permit Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely dicta. 
Applicant. Applicant includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or any association of joint stock or ownership. 
Charitable or student film. Charitable or student film means any filming by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization or done on behalf of an accredited educational institution. 
City administrator. City administrator means the city administrator of Eatonton or his/her designee. 
City equipment. City equipment means and includes any tangible property, other than real property, owned or controlled by the city. 
County equipment. County equipment means and includes any tangible property, other than real property, owned or controlled by the county. 
County manager. County manager means the county manager of Putnam County or his/her designee. 
High impact media production. High impact media production activities are those activities having an intended duration of 15 or more consecutive days and will disrupt normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses, including but not limited to any filming involving automobile crashes or chases, gunfire (including simulated gunfire), fire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft (including drones and similar remotely controlled aircraft), stunts, non-domestic animals and similar activities. 
Low impact media production. Low impact media production involves an on-location production crew of three or fewer persons and three or fewer on-location production vehicles and is conducted entirely on private property and has no impact on public right-of-ways and is in compliance with all local ordinances including, but not limited to noise, light and littering. (Examples of impacts on the public right-of-way include, but are not limited to on-street parking; street closures; interruption of vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow; placement of production equipment on public property.) Low-impact activities are those activities having an intended duration of no more than 14 consecutive days, with little or no disruption to normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. 
Media production. Media production (filming) means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting moving or still images including, but not limited to, movies, motion pictures, film or video in any format, television shows or programs, video series, feature films and documentaries, commercial advertisements, music videos, commercial still photography, infomercials and public service announcements, computer-based programs, digital photography or videography, or other visual reproduction technology now known or hereafter created whether the media product is intended for commercial use or not and regardless of the media outlet upon which the product is displayed or intended for display, regardless of the format in or upon which the media product is stored and regardless of the manner in which the media product is distributed for consumption. The period of filming includes the set-up, strike and time of photography, and any pre-production and post-production activities on said film. 
Permit. Permit means the media production permit required by this chapter. 
Permittee. Permittee means any applicant to whom a media production permit is issued by the county. 
Portrait photography. Portrait photography shall mean all activity related to professional photography of a subject lasting less than two hours which involves set-up and tear down time of less than ten minutes. 
Production crew. Production crew means any and all persons who are in any way involved with or engaged in shooting moving or still images, including, but not limited to, all who will or who customarily receive credit of any sort either during opening or closing credit sequence of a completed film. 
Production equipment. Production equipment means and includes any and all equipment utilized during filming which shall include, but not be limited to cameras, video recording devices, sound recording devices, lighting equipment, sound equipment, tracking, scaffolding, cranes, and temporary vending or other equipment used for providing food and beverages to the production crew. 
Production location. Production location means any information at which filming is to take place. 
Production vehicles. Production vehicles means and includes any and all vehicles which are in any way utilized during filming including transporting the production crew to and from the production location which may include, but is not limited to campers, mobile homes, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, boats and aircraft (including drones and other remotely controlled aircraft), regardless of ownership. 
Public property. Public property means and includes any public street, sidewalk, park, recreational facility, cemetery, building, lake or other water body or real property owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city, county, or other local government entity. 
Temporary structure. Temporary structure means and includes anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground assembled on or near a production location for the purpose of filming. A single structure encompasses all manmade materials which are tightly integrated to form the whole. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-3. - Application of ordinance; filming locations. 
(a)  Permit required; exception. Subject to the exemptions listed in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any media production activity in the City of Eatonton and the unincorporated areas of Putnam County, without having obtained a valid permit for such production, except that any media production or portrait photography activity which occurs solely on private property with no impact to public property, equipment, facilities, or services shall be allowed without a permit. 
(b)  Filming on private property. Filming on private property shall require written permission of the property owner, or their agent, in addition to the requirement of a permit, however, there shall be no more than four media production permits granted for the use of any single family resident during a given calendar year. Further, there shall be no more than 12 media production permits granted for the use of any residentially zoned property not used as a residence during a given calendar year. 
(c)  Filming on streets and right-of-way. Filming on streets and right-of-way shall require a permit. No public highway, street or road shall have its public access restricted or limited except by a permit issued pursuant to this division. Any filming activity that may disrupt the normal flow of traffic shall require the hiring of off-duty, POST-certified (Peace Officer Standards and Training) law enforcement officers by the applicant. Any costs for the hiring of off-duty, POST-certified law enforcement officers shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(d)  Filming on public property. Filming on public property, including, but not limited to, publicly owned parks and facilities, and use of city or county equipment may require the payment of fees to the local government for use thereof. The need for city or county personnel and equipment, including POST-certified law enforcement officers, shall be determined through the application review process. The hiring of and any costs associated with the hiring of off-duty, POST-certified law enforcement officers shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-4. - Exemptions. 
The following media production activities are exempt from the permitting requirements found in section 44-3 of this chapter: 
(1)  Broadcast studios. Any commercial motion picture, television or videotaping studio or photography studio operating at its established or fixed place of business in the county. 
(2)  Current news. Reporters, photographers, soundpersons, crew, vehicles or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, television station or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting or recording of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences in the news and of general public interest. 
(3)  Personal-family use. Any noncommercial media production or videotaping of motion pictures which are solely for personal-family use. 
(4)  County direction. Any media productions which are conducted by or at the direction of the county. 
(5)  Training, educational and public service use. Any industrial, corporate, charitable, public service, public service announcements or not-for-profit media production intended for in-house training or educational purposes, including productions which are conducted by students as part of a class project. 
(6)  Non-commercial private events. Any private events recorded or photographed for non-commercial purposes, such as private parties or weddings. 
(7)  Low impact media production. Any low impact media production. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-5. - Permit application. 
(a)  Applications. Any person seeking the issuance of a media production permit shall complete the written application form provided by the county and shall provide all information therein, and file that written application with the county not less than three business days before the proposed media production activity, and not more than 180 days before the commencement of media production, unless otherwise agreed to by the county. The application must be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant and meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The application shall contain a detailed narrative of the scope of production activities, and include drawings, maps, or aerial photos to illustrate production locations, property boundaries, existing conditions, planned temporary improvements, curb cuts and driveways, adjoining streets, traffic patterns, and similar information helpful to assess the impact of the proposed activity. 
(2)  The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: automobile crashes or chases, gunfire (including simulated gunfire), fire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft (including drones and similar remotely controlled aircraft), stunts, non-domestic animals, and similar activities. In addition, the application shall list the person in charge (pilot, technician, operator, handler, or other qualified individual) of special effects, together with his/her qualifications and licensure by the applicable federal and state agencies. 
(3)  The applicant shall submit a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur; if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted, certification to that effect is required. Detours shall be determined and approved by the jurisdiction which owns affected roads or infrastructure; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(4)  The application for a media production permit shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and/or city from all damages, suits, actions or liabilities, including all attorneys' fees, resulting from acts of the media production company or its agents during the media production activity or occurring as a result of the use of media production locations by the media production company. A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the county and city attorney, shall accompany the application, together with a certificate of insurance naming the county and/or city as an additional insured, as well as proof of coverages as required by this division. 
(5)  Proof of general liability insurance coverage in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per incident or occurrence. The county manager and/or city administrator may require a larger amount of insurance and/or that the county and/or city be named as an additional insured if it is determined that the nature of the proposed media production activity necessitates such action. 
(6)  Proof of worker's compensation insurance coverage for each and every employee in any way involved with the media production, as required under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(7)  A comprehensive list of on-location non-computerized special effects to be utilized, the proposed date and site for performance of each special effect or use of explosive devices, accompanied by proof of an amount of additional insurance as set by the county and/or city, if any, per incident or occurrence of liability insurance therefore, naming the county as additional insured. 
(8)  The applicant shall provide a signed copy of the notice to be provided to all businesses and residents affected by the proposed media production activity. 
(9)  All applications shall be filed with the county manager, who may require such additional information as needed to assess the proposed extent and intensity of the production within the county and/or city. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-6. - Administrative review. 
(a)  All applications under these ordinances shall be submitted to the county manager, or in the event application for a permit within the city limits is filed, as the city administrator may otherwise designate. Upon receipt of an application, the county manager shall, within three business days, either make a determination regarding the requested permit if the request is to allow only media production as defined in this chapter, or provide notice to the applicant that the requested permit includes high impact media production as defined by this chapter. In the event the requested permit seeks to allow high impact media production, the county manager shall make a determination regarding the request permit within ten business days. 
(b)  Prior to making application for a permit, it shall be incumbent on the applicant to meet with the county manager to review production locations and the general scope of activities planned during the production. 
(c)  The manager shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the manager determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the manager in facilitating the event and services required. 
(d)  All applications shall be approved with specific terms and conditions, or denied, by the county manager in writing. For applications requesting a permit for media production activity within the city limits, the county manager shall notify and coordinate with the city administrator regarding review of the application. If approved, the county shall issue a permit to the applicant, in writing, with all terms and conditions clearly set forth therein. If the application is denied, the county manager shall state, in writing, the reason(s) for denial. An aggrieved applicant whose application requests a permit to allow media production activity within the city may appeal to the city council at the next regular meeting or, if the application request a permit to allow media production activity within the unincorporated areas of the county may appeal to the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting, by filing a written notice of appeal with the appropriate local government. In the event the requested permit seeks to allow media production activity within both jurisdictions, the applicant may appeal to either or both jurisdictions, though neither jurisdiction may allow the permit to issue over the other party's objection. 
(e)  Denial of the application is not limited to, but may be denied upon the following: 
(1)  The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(2)  Traffic impacts will occur, but no acceptable mitigation plan is provided. Examples of traffic impacts include, but are not limited to street closures, on-street parking and interruption of vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow. 
(3)  The media production requires approval of any component activities subject to concurrent jurisdictional approval and that approval was not granted by the concurrent jurisdictional authority. 
(4)  The media production fails to comply with any of the criteria designated under this article for issuance of the media production permit or rules and regulations governing the production. 
(5)  If the application is for extension of a media production permit or a subsequent permit, the applicant has violated conditions of the initial or previous permit or has violated ordinances or regulations of the county in the conduct of the media production. 
(6)  Permits may be denied, in whole or in part, due to prior scheduled events or activities sanctioned or permitted by the county under other provisions of this code. 
(7)  The county manager or city administrator determines the production in any way adversely affects the public health, safety or general welfare of the citizenry, community and environment of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-7. - Permit conditions. 
(a)  Each department of either government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the manager may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this chapter. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The application for a media production permit shall constitute a covenant between the applicant and the county and/or city, specifying that the applicant will halt or interrupt media production upon instruction from the county manager and/or city administrator, with respect to each jurisdiction, or upon violation of any state law, local ordinance or fire code. The county and/or city covenants not to instruct that media production be halted or interrupted unless in its discretion it perceives that the media production activities shall cause or coincide with interference with traffic movement, disturbance of the peace, destruction of property, violation of the law or a threat to the public peace, health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  The application for a media production permit shall constitute an agreement by the applicant to pay for county and/or city personnel expenses and extraordinary services provided by the county and city, including all repairs, and restoration or replacement which is necessitated by virtue of renovations and landscaping the production, unless another agreement to fix all damages to public property caused by the production is agreed upon by the applicant and the county and/or city. 
(d)  Any alterations created by the laying of cabling, placement of equipment or ancillary items related to the production of any filming on any sidewalks, curb ramps or other sloped surfaces in the county and/or city where ADA access is provided shall be properly clear of such obstructions. Where such obstructions are necessary for the production of filming, suitable temporary ramps to sidewalks or ADA cable ramps shall be placed to allow for the uninterrupted flow of all ADA traffic. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-8. - Fees and waivers. 
(a)  An application fee of $200.00 shall be tendered with any permit application. 
(b)  Upon approval of application, a permit fee shall be paid prior to granting of the permit. The fee for a permit under this chapter shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of production, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the permittee shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than 72 hours prior to the date of the event. 
(d)  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. 
(e)  Fees for use of county and/or city services or facilities may be reduced or waived for charitable or non-profit organizations holding § 501(c) status from the IRS, or for other governmental agencies. All waivers shall require approval of the county manager. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-9. - Revocation. 
The county manager, or city administrator in the event the media production activity takes place within the city limits, shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued under this chapter. Prior to suspension or revocation of a media production permit, the permittee shall be notified in writing of the grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit, and a hearing shall be held before the revoking governing body, whichever is applicable. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the permittee at least three days prior to the hearing, unless the conduct or activity of the permittee creates an imminent peril to the environment or the public health, safety or welfare, the specific activities which create such peril may summarily suspended upon notice to the permittee until such time as the permittee is able to demonstrate to the county manager or city administrator that the peril has been eliminated. A media production permit may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A material false statement contained in the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with federal, state or local laws and regulations; 
(3)  Failure to comply with any conditions imposed within the media production permit; 
(4)  Failure to operate the media production in accordance with such ordinances, laws, orders, rules and regulations as may be applicable; or 
(5)  Conducting the media production business or activity in a fraudulent or disorderly manner or in a manner which endangers the public health, safety, welfare or in any manner which disrupts the public peace. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-10. - Notification of affected businesses and residents. 
(a)  The media production company shall notify in writing the county manager and all known occupied residences adjacent to the permitted locations for the proposed activity. The county manager shall place signage consistent with planning and zoning procedures at the permitted location for three business days following receipt an application and shall also cause notice of the application to be placed on the county and/or city website. No permit shall be issued until such notices are provided and a response period of three business days after the notice date has expired. For the purposes of meeting this requirement, the county manager must be served with notification in the same manner and at the same time as the businesses and residents. 
(b)  Notice shall be provided to an adult occupant of a dwelling unit or business facility located wholly or partially within a distance of 300 feet of the property on which the media production activity will occur. Based upon the nature of the activity, the county manager shall have the discretion to specify a wider area of notification as a condition of issuance of the permit. 
(c)  In the event the application request closure of any public right of way, the applicant shall coordinate with affected property owners regarding access to affected property and parking areas. 
(d)  Notification shall include all available information concerning the location and duration of the media production, prep and wrap activities, the times of day required for each location, proposed parking restrictions and restrictions on public streets, proposed location for all support facilities, as well as specifics regarding the use of lights, noise and any special effects or extraordinary equipment. The notification shall also contain the media production company's production office telephone number and inform that any concerns, objections or complaints pertaining to the planned activity must be registered in writing with the office of the county manager by a specific date that is three calendar days after the notice date. 
(e)  After commencement of the media production activity, the media production company shall provide written notification to the affected businesses and residents of any subsequent changes to the information provided in the original notification and of any additional variances, permits or extensions granted to the media production company. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-11. - General standards. 
The following general standards shall apply to all low impact media production, media production, and high impact media production: 
(1)  All media production activity shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., unless otherwise agreed to within the permit. 
(2)  All temporary structures, including, but not limited to, tents, temporary sanitary facilities, trash collection, or food service facilities shall be located in accordance with requirements for accessory structures as set forth in this Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Temporary structures may require a separate building permit from the county and/or city; any food preparation or food service provided at the location shall require a food service permit from the county health department, or evidence of exemption. 
(4)  Lighting for filming should be oriented away from adjacent or nearby properties as much as possible and shall not interfere with the safe movement of vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Temporary signage must be approved in writing, in advance, prior to erection, by the development director, or his/her designee; approval of temporary signage is conditioned restoration of permanent signage by the permittee following completion of the media production activity. 
(6)  No regulatory traffic control signage within a public right-of-way shall be removed or modified without the prior written consent of the applicable jurisdiction. 
(7)  No modification to any existing traffic signage, street light, traffic control device or other officially-installed facility or improvement shall be made without prior written consent of the applicable jurisdiction. 
(8)  No street, road, alley, or sidewalk shall be closed, barricaded or other obstruction erected within a public right-of-way, and no access shall be denied or restricted to public or private property or facilities unless the closure or restriction is approved as a condition of the permit or amendment thereto by the respective governing authority having jurisdiction over each affected road or infrastructure; reasonable alternative access shall be arranged whenever possible. 
(9)  No trees, vegetation (including grasses), or ornamental shrubs shall be cut or removed from public property without prior written consent of the county in the permit, based upon an agreed landscape restoration plan. A land disturbance permit may be separately required depending upon the nature and extent of the activity. 
(10)  The applicant shall submit a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur; if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted, certification to that effect is required. Detours shall be determined and approved by the jurisdiction which owns affected roads or infrastructure; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant; where applicable, the plan shall be submitted for review and approval/denial to the appropriate local government department. 
(11)  Putnam County and the City of Eatonton shall be listed, separately, in the production credits for all permits required. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-12. - High impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a high impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(1)  No permit shall issue for a term of less than 15 consecutive days from its date of issuance; the duration of the permit shall be based upon an agreed production schedule submitted by the applicant. Permits may be extended, for reasonable cause. A single application shall include all production locations for the same production within the county. Application shall be made no less than ten business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available displayed, on location, at all times while activity is occurring and made available to county and/or city inspectors upon request. 
(2)  Normal hours of high impact media production activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Street closure(s), obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall be detailed in the application, including any use of on-street parking spaces and/or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)  The county and/or city shall not intervene on behalf of any permittee or negotiate access rights to private property with property owners; the permittee is expected to deal directly with private property owners for required permission and consent. 
(5)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required state or local government permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(6)  Based upon the proposed scope of production activity and in consideration of any potential danger to the safety, health and welfare of the community, particularly private property and residents near the production location, the sheriff of Putnam County, director of public safety for the city, and/or county fire department/marshal may require on-site security (qualified private security or use of off-duty law enforcement officers) and/or may require personnel and equipment be placed on standby for portions of the high-impact activity at the expense of the applicant. The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: automobile crashes or chases, gunfire (including simulated gunfire), fire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft (including drones and similar remotely controlled aircraft), stunts, non-domestic animals, and similar activities. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-13. - Special effects, explosives and similar devices. 
(a)  No media production which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire or other special effects which involve flames or incendiary devices may be undertaken unless all required federal, state and local permits have been obtained. 
(b)  Use of public water by way of hydrant hookup shall require coordination with the Eatonton-Putnam Water and Sewer Authority. Payment for any such water consumed shall be the responsibility of the applicant and be coordinated with the Eatonton-Putnam Water and Sewer Authority. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 44-14. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances and section 1-12 of the City of Eatonton Code of Ordinances. In addition to the aforementioned fines, the court may impose court costs for each offense of may combine the court costs upon the discretion of the court if any multiple violations occur at or about the same date. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Public drunkenness. 
Any person who shall, while intoxicated, be or appear upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or park, or shall enter, be or remain in any pool room, skating rink, bowling alley, opera house, schoolhouse, church or other like public place, or any private premises other than his own, without permission of the occupant, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as prescribed by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-2) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-2. - Throwing or discharge of rocks and missiles. 
Any person who shall throw any ball, rock or other missile, or who shall use any slingshot or like device, upon the streets, sidewalks or public grounds in the city, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as prescribed by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-4) 
Sec. 46-3. - Weapons; discharge in city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including pistol, rifle, or shotgun, within the city within 300 yards as to any pistol or rifle and 100 yards for any shotgun of any house, public road, place of worship or place where children congregate. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to discharge a firearm, including pistol, rifle or shotgun on any tract of property unless it is zoned agricultural and contains at least 50 acres in said tract and the person has express permission from the property owner and abides by all other federal, state, and local laws. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-5; Amd. of 2-20-2006(2); Amd. of 10-16-2006; Amd. of 11-7-2008) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 
Sec. 46-4. - Additional penalty for violating state law. 
Any person convicted in the municipal court of violating the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-3-391 on the subject of driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other intoxicating substances shall be fined as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-3-391, and in addition, shall have the sum of $50.00 assessed as an additional fee if the offense was committed within the city limits. This fee shall be set aside and shall be used to promote drug and alcohol abuse awareness. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1996; Ord. of 2-20-2006(2)) 
Sec. 46-5. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 11-1-1 of the 1982 Code on the subject of disorderly conduct is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 46-6—46-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUVENILE CURFEW 

Sec. 46-36. - Curfew; penalties for violation. 
It shall be a violation of the ordinances of the city for a parent or guardian of a child 15 years of age or younger to allow such child to be about or upon the streets or other public places, to include, but not be limited to, parking lots, businesses, sidewalks and any other places, other than a private residence in the city, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day with the exception of Friday and Saturday, and on Friday and Saturday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be a violation of the ordinances of the city for a parent or guardian of a child 16 or 17 years of age to allow such child to be about or upon the streets or other public places, to include parking lots, businesses, sidewalks and any other places other than a private residence in the city, between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day with the exception of the hour of 1:00 a.m. of the following morning on Friday and Saturday, unless the child is with a parent, guardian, brother or sister of the child, if such brother or sister is older than the age of 21. Anyone found guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, the child shall be detained by the city police and transported to the home of his parents or guardian, if such home is in the county. The child is to be turned over to his parents or guardian at which time the parents or guardian are to be given a warning ticket. If the home of the parents or guardian is not located in the county, the child is to be detained and his parents or guardian are to be notified by telephone, if possible, and told to come get the child at which time the parents are to be given a warning ticket. If the home of the parents or guardian is out of the state or is too far away to make it feasible to hold the child, the child shall be turned over to the county department of family and children services as a deprived child. 
(2)  For the second and all subsequent offenses, the child shall be detained by the city police and turned over to the county department of family and children services as a deprived child and the parents or guardian of the child shall be fined up to the sum of $500.00 and/or imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. If the child is over the age of 14 years, the child shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(2)) 
Secs. 46-37—46-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DAMAGE TO PROPERTY OF PUBLIC UTILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 

Sec. 46-71. - Unlawful use of services; injury to, interference with property of utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner thereof, injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, pole, lamp, manhole cover, fire plug or any accessories thereto, belonging to the city, or any other public or private utility (hereinafter termed "owner") engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, the furnishing of sanitary sewer services or other public services, without the intent to pay the fair cost of repair or replacement thereof; 
(2)  Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner to utilize any such service, or consume any such service or product with intent not to pay the regular charge therefor to the owner, but with the intent to deprive the owner thereof; 
(3)  Intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from registering the quantity of such service or product supplied with the intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor; 
(4)  In any way interfere with the proper action of any such owner with intent to divert any service or product so as to deprive the owner of the regular charge therefor; 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the consent of such owner, any product or service furnished, manufactured, sold or distributed by such owner with intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefore; or 
(6)  If utility has been terminated, it is unlawful to remove or tamper with the locking device. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section, or proof that a person knowingly received the benefit of such acts, or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) of this section were done on the premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person is responsible for such prohibited acts. 
(Ord. of 4-21-1986, § 1; Ord. of 2-20-2006(2)) 
Sec. 46-72. - Penalty upon conviction. 
Every person convicted in the municipal court of a violation of any provision of section 46-71 shall be punished as provided by section 1-12 and in addition will be fine a penalty up to the amount of $2,000.00. 
(Ord. of 4-21-1986, § 2; Ord. of 2-20-2006(2)) 
Secs. 46-73—46-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 46-106. - Accumulation of junk. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city, other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer, to permit the accumulation on such property of any dilapidated furniture and/or appliances, machinery and equipment, new or used construction materials and including automobiles, motorcycles, lawnmowers and boats which are either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, unless they are completely enclosed within a building. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other designated public officer to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which junk is permitted to accumulate in violation of this section, that such material must be removed within ten days from the date of the notice. 
(c)  Whenever a complaint is made to the public officer, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection regarding the complaint and make a written report of his findings including whether or not the complaint was anonymous. Depending on the validity of the complaint, this may serve as justification for the chief of police, marshal or other designated public officer to begin notification procedure promptly. 
(d)  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove such junk within the designated time period, the superintendent for sanitation is authorized and empowered to arrange for the removal of such material by the city or by a private individual or firm through contract with the city. 
(e)  The actual cost of such junk removal shall be assessed against the property owner from whose premises the junk is removed, and if the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-6; Ord. of 2-20-2006(2); Res. of 12-16-2013) 
Secs. 46-107—46-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 46-150. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding citizens under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in loitering within the city. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Immediate concern for the safety of persons or property may arise from observing a person or persons remaining idle in essentially one location, whether within or without a motor vehicle, having no obvious purpose or intent. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel an alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence or conduct. 
(d)  This section shall not preclude a police officer form arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on public or private property after being lawfully notified by the officer to depart. 
(e)  Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(1)  City parks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, lie down, to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. 
(2)  Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, to reside, to store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any sidewalk. 
(3)  Other public property; blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodation purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(4)  Other public property; urban camping. It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodation purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(5)  Private property; urban camping without owner's permission. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner, a leaseholder, an employee, or other rightful occupant to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie down, outside on any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. 
(6)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
a.  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
b.  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks, or other public places; 
c.  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
d.  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
e.  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
f.  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
g.  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
h.  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; or 
i.  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(g)  Severability. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this regulation if for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this regulation. 
(Ord. of 1-21-2003(2); Amd. of 7-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Amd. of July 13, 2010, changed the title of § 46-150 from loitering around railroad tracks or shops; swinging onto trains to loitering. 
Sec. 46-151. - Gathering near detention facility, jail or courthouse; furnishing items to incarcerated persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any reason to gather in or about the station house, jail, detention facility, courthouse or other city-owned property in violation of the rules and policies of the facility or for the purpose of violating the law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone other than persons duly authorized by the office of corrections to provide, transmit, deliver, give or furnish to anyone held or incarcerated as a defendant, prisoner, arrested person or one being interviewed in connection with a violation of the law at any city jail or detention facility any item, whatsoever, without first obtaining the approval of the person in charge at such facility. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-152. - Registering under assumed name. 
No person shall register at any hotel, motel or other place of lodging requiring registration in the city under an assumed name, or any name other than that by which such person is commonly known. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-153. - Smoking in all enclosed public places. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Smoke and smoking mean and include the carrying or possession of any form of burning tobacco. 
(b)  In accordance with the Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005, smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places in the State of Georgia, with certain listed exceptions 
(1)  As stated in O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1. Said exceptions are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as articulated in O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 or as it may be amended in the future. 
(2)  All outdoor areas shall be designated smoking areas unless safety regulations require otherwise. However, cigarette ends or related materials must not be discarded in any public place except trash receptacles and must be completely extinguished before disposal. 
(c)  Violation. It shall be a violation of this section to smoke in any area designated a non-smoking area under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Priority. The public health consideration for breathing smoke-free air shall take priority in situations of confusion or ambiguity. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2); Ord. of 2-20-2006(2)) 
Cross reference— Similar subject matter, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A. 
Sec. 46-154. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 20, 2006, deleted § 46-154 in its entirety. Former § 46-154 pertained to distribution of free tobacco products in public places prohibited and derived from an ordinance adopted Jan. 21, 2003(2). 
Sec. 46-155. - Use of drinking water reservoir prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person not employed by, or authorized to act on behalf of, the city, to use any drinking water reservoir or water treatment structure operated or maintained by the city for swimming, bathing, or otherwise immersing a person or such person's clothing. 
(b)  Violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in jail for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-156. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  City parks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, to lie down, to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. 
(b)  Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, to reside, to store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any sidewalk. 
(c)  Other public property - blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to sleep, to reside, to store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from buildings. 
(d)  Other public property - urban camping. It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodations purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(e)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this Code section to the contrary, this Code section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks, or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; or 
(9)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-157. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Amd. of Feb 21, 2011 repealed § 46-157, which pertained to theft by shoplifting and derived from Ord. of 1-21-03(2). 
Sec. 46-158. - Destruction of property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy, mar or deface any property of the city, or of another. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with, to open, or to paint any equipment of the departments and bureaus of the city, including fire hydrants and water mains. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-159. - Defacing buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, or draw upon, to carve any letter, word or design upon or to mutilate or deface in any way any wall, fence, public building, private dwelling, place or institution of learning, place of worship, statue or monument, now or hereafter erected in the city. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-160. - Injuring or interfering with public service property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company, or to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, or other public services, or intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of the service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the company or the city, intentionally to divert any services of the company or the city or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company or city, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the company or the city. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts referred to in subsection (a) of this section and/or the person who with knowledge of the violation receives the benefit of the service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-161. - Unauthorized persons entering vacant buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or to remain in a vacant or unoccupied building on any portion of vacant land upon which such vacant building is located unless with the permission of an authorized agent of such property, provided such building or vacant property is prominently marked by a posted notice, attached to a copy of this article section as exhibit A which is easily seen from a distance of at least 50 feet that informs the public such property is vacant or unoccupied and unauthorized persons are prohibited from entering. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to be on such property lines that are prominently marked by a fence, chain, or other means and by a posted notice that communicates to the public that unauthorized persons are not allowed on such premises. Contemporaneously with the posting of such notice, a sworn authorization, attached to a copy of this article section as exhibit B, must be filed with the city police department stating that persons without written permission are not allowed on the property at a specified address, and any such trespasser will be prosecuted by the police as the property's own agent. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-162. - Unauthorized interference or attempted interference with parked vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl on any property which is used to park vehicles, including parking lots for vehicles and public rights-of-way, if said person has been observed: 
(1)  Attempting entry into vehicles, or 
(2)  Tampering with the vehicle of another, which shall mean any unauthorized interference with a vehicle or any part or accessory thereof, any contents therein, or 
(3)  Otherwise acting in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person opens or attempts to open the doors, trunk, windows, or hood of the vehicle; takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object that may be utilized for entry into an automobile or is otherwise prohibited by law; removes or attempts to remove anything of value from the vehicle; or otherwise causes damage to the vehicle. 
(c)  A law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Code section: 
(1)  Unless the law enforcement officer complies with the foregoing procedure; and 
(2)  Unless the trier of fact determines beyond a reasonable doubt under all circumstances of the case that the explanation was not true or would not, if believed by the officer at the time, have dispelled the officer's alarm or immediate concern. 
(d)  Upon conviction of violation of this section, a person may be sentenced to imprisonment or public work for six months, a fine or both, with a minimum of 60 days to serve in the city jail or working on the public streets or on the public works of the city, the remainder of the time to be probated. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-163. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to engage in any conduct described in the following subsections; provided, however, that no person shall be convicted of any of the following sections upon a showing that the predominant intent of such conduct was to exercise a constitutional right: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of, or with the intent to, engage in gaming; 
(5)  Be in or about any place, alone with another or others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing; or to aid or abet any person or persons in doing so; 
(6)  Be in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages; 
(7)  Direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to indicate an immediate breach of the peace; 
(8)  Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and fail to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)  Stand or remain in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass on a public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and fail to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(11)  Disrupt by actions which tend to incite a breach of the peace, the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital, surgi-center, or home for the elderly; or 
(12)  Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles or any other debris on public property. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
State Law reference— Riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30; affray, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; obscene, vulgar or profane language, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; obstructing public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 46-164. - Unauthorized persons entering school buildings. 
No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session, or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions, who is not a regular enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and been identified to the principal or the principal's agent and received written permission to remain on the premises or were specifically authorized by said school's principal to be on said school property at the specific date, time and place. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-165. - Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings when requested to leave. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any private or parochial school or on surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or designated agent. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 46-166. - Creating a disturbance at schools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any private or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds lawfully used for school activities when such recreational areas are in use or other activities are in progress thereon. A disturbance shall be defined as any act which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-167. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his/her person, or upon property in his/her immediate possession. 
(2)  Ask, beg or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
(3)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  Exception. Except when performed in the manner and location set forth in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2), (c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), (c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(9), (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)  Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property. 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automatic teller machine is located within an automatic teller facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automatic teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)  Within 15 feet of any valid vendor location, as defined in the City Code. 
(8)  From any person(s) who are waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility; or 
(9)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(d)  Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  By accosting another; or 
(2)  By forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(e)  Who may press charges. Persons who may press charges under this Code include not only the victim of the prohibited solicitation, but also any person who witnesses such conduct, including, but not limited to, police officers, mayor and council members, security officers, hotel personnel, and bystanders. Evidence to support conviction for violation of this Code section may include, but is not limited to, the testimony of such witness or witnesses, video tape evidence of the violation, and/or other admissible evidence. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-168. - License to make music on streets, making such for purpose of begging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make music on the streets of the city without first obtaining a license or permit; and it shall be further unlawful for any person, with or without a license or permit, to make music on the streets of the city for the purpose of begging, or to call the attention of passersby to some personal deformity or infirmity of the person making the music or some person accompanying the one making the music. 
(b)  Upon the conviction of any person of the violation of the acts prohibited in this section, such conviction shall have the effect of revoking any license or permit previously issued to that person and a fine not to exceed $1000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-169. - Criminal impersonation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Intent to defraud means the use of deception with the intention to acquire another's property interest which has economic value. 
(b)  Intent. A person is guilty of criminal impersonation if such person: 
(1)  Assumes a false identity and does not act in such person's assumed character with the intent to defraud another; or 
(2)  Pretends to be a representative of some person or organization and does an act in such person's pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-170. - Indecency. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An act, or simulated act, of sexual intercourse; or 
(2)  An exposure of one's genitals, or of one's breasts, if female; or 
(3)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the genitals of either sex, or the breast of a female. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2); Ord. of 2-20-2006(2)) 
State Law reference— Public indecency O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 46-171. - Defecating or urinating on public property or in areas in public view. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevators of public or commercials buildings, or on any property open to the public view in the city. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-172. - Spitting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon the sidewalks, or upon the floors of places of worship, buses, public halls, theaters or other public buildings. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-173. - Model glue. 
(a)  Sale or retail dealers. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler or merchandiser to sell or transfer any quantity of model glue to any person whatsoever who is not or does not represent a recognized bona fide retail dealer in merchandise customarily handling such product in the ordinary course of such person's business at a fixed location. 
(b)  Retail sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the retail sale of model glue unless such person is a recognized bond fide retail dealer at a fixed location in merchandise, customarily handling such product in the ordinary course of such person's business. 
(c)  Sale of more than one tube. It shall be unlawful for any bona fide recognized retail dealer, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, to sell more than one tube, or other minimum-size container, of model glue to any one customer within any 24-hour period; provided that the provisions of this subsection do not apply to the sale of model glue together with a hobby or model kit. 
(d)  Keeping or displaying. It shall be unlawful for any bona fide recognized retail dealer, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, to keep, maintain or prominently display in such dealer's business establishment any stock or supply of model glue in such a manner or place as to make the same accessible to customers or other members of the public, without actually receiving the same directly from the retailer, or such dealer's bona fide authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
State Law reference— Model glue O.C.G.A. § 16-13-90. 
Sec. 46-174. - Spray paint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale spray paint containing halogenated hydrocarbons for the purpose of intoxication. 
(b)  Any person guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00, or imprisonment for not more than 25 days, or both, for such violations. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-175. - Frequenting of dancehalls. 
No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to enter or remain in any dancehall or place where dances are given, or where dancing is taught and where paid admissions are charged thereto, during the time a dance or exhibitions is in progress or during the preparation for a dance, exhibition or instruction, without being accompanied by either a parent or guardian, or without written consent of a parent or guardian; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the holding under proper chaperone of private or semipublic dances, scripted dances among students, or dances given by known and recognized fraternal organizations, or dancing exhibitions put on by regular theaters in the city which complied with existing regulations, and provided further that this shall not include dances held exclusively for minors provided that there is compliance with existing regulations, nor shall this section apply to dance classes or recitals for persons under 18 years of age provided no other regulation or law has been violated. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-176. - City employees prohibited from carrying weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of the city to have on such employee's person, either concealed or unconcealed, or in such employee's immediate possession, or to bring onto any premises of the city any of the following implements: 
(1)  Any firearms, guns, pistols or other instruments of like kind or similar character; 
(2)  Any sword or dirk, spear or sword-in-a-cane; 
(3)  Any knife which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than four inches; 
(4)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than four inches; 
(5)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches; this is intended to include all knives, such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close; 
(6)  Any straight razors; 
(7)  Any ice picks or similar device having a sharp point; 
(8)  Any knucks; 
(9)  Any explosives; 
(10)  Any articles or combination of articles likely to be made into so as to produce an explosive, including but not limited to gas, fire or water; 
(11)  Slingshots, bows and arrows, cannon, artillery or fireworks; 
(12)  Gas bombs, fire bombs, water bombs or similar type bombs or like in kind likely to produce harm either to the person or property of the city; or any or all other instruments, implements, objects or device that would or could produce harm or injury to any person or property of the city or of another. 
(b)  The following employees or special employees of the city are authorized to carry pistols or other weapons or equipment when such is lawfully issued to them: 
(1)  Police; 
(2)  Park police; 
(3)  Airport police; 
(4)  Security guards employed by the city; 
(5)  Court bailiffs; 
(6)  Probation officers; 
(7)  Special officers employed by the city; 
(8)  Specially deputized citizens or employees of the city; 
(9)  Personnel employed by the office of corrections. 
(c)  Any violation of this section or any subsection thereof shall be considered an offense and any person convicted of violating the terms of this section or any subsection thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
State Law reference— Carrying deadly weapons to or at public gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127; concealed revolver of pistol licenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-128. 
Sec. 46-177. - Disorderly to police officer. 
A person who gives a false name, address, social security number, driver's license number, or date of birth to a law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties with the intent of misleading the officer as to his identity or birth date is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-178. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (b) of this Code section, a person who knowingly and willfully obstructs or hinders any law enforcement officer, in the lawful discharge of their official duties is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-179. - Interfering with police officers, medical, firemen, any other city officials performing their official duties. 
(a)  As used in this Code section, the term "firefighter" means: 
(1)  Any person who is employed as a professional firefighter on a full-time basis for at least 40 hours per week by any county, municipal, or state fire department when such person has responsibility for preventing and suppressing fires, protecting life and property, enforcing municipal, county, or state for preventing and suppressing fires, protecting life and property, enforcing municipal, county, and state fire prevention codes, or enforcing any law or ordinance pertaining to the prevention or control of fires; 
(2)  Any volunteer fireman as the term (volunteer fireman) is defined by O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-23 and 47-7-1; or 
(3)  Any person employed as a professional firefighter on a full time basis for at least 40 hours per week by a person or corporation which has a contract with a municipality or county to provide fire prevention and fire fighting services for such municipality or county when such person has responsibility for preventing, suppressing fires, protecting life and property, enforcing municipal or county fire prevention codes or enforcing any municipal or county ordinances pertaining to the prevention and control of fires. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this Code section a person who knowingly and willfully obstructs or hinders any firefighter in the lawful discharge of the firefighter official duties is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-180. - Interfering with or destruction of government property. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of interference with government property when he destroys or defaces government property and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment not to exceed 12 months or a fine not to exceed $1000.00 or both and shall be ordered to pay restitution to the city for repairing said damage. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of interference with government property when he forcibly interferes with or obstructs the passage into or from government property and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-181. - Drinking in public. 
(a)  As used in this Code, the term: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage means: 
a.  Beer, ale, porter, stout and other similar fermented beverage, including sake or similar products, of any name or description containing one half of 1 percent or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute therefore; 
b.  Wine of not less than one half of one percent of alcohol by volume; and 
c.  Distilled spirits which is that substance known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol, or spirits of wine in any form, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
d.  Open alcoholic beverage container means any bottle, can, or other receptacle that: 
1.  Contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and 
2.  Is open, has a broken seal; or 
3.  The contents of which are partially removed. 
(2)  Passenger area means the areas designated to seat the driver and passengers while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in his or her seating position provided, however, that such term does not include any locked glove compartment or, in a passenger car not equipped with a trunk, any area behind the rearmost upright seat or not normally occupied by the driver or passengers. 
(b)  A person shall not: 
(1)  Consume any alcoholic beverage container in the passenger area of any motor vehicle which is on the roadway or shoulder of any public highway. 
(2)  The provision of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply to any passenger in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation or in the living quarters of a recreational vehicle designed for camping or living whether motorized or towed behind a vehicle. 
(3)  Only a person who consumes an alcoholic beverage or possesses an open alcoholic beverage container in violation of this Code section shall be charged with such offense; provided, however, that an operator of a motor vehicle who is alone in the passenger area of such motor vehicle shall be deemed to be in possession of any open alcoholic beverage container in such passenger area. 
(c)  Any person who violates this Code section is subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(d)  Under this Code drinking any alcoholic beverage on the sidewalk, streets or any area viewed by the public is in violation of this article unless the same is on private property. 
(e)  Excluded from this section is the area commonly known as "the plaza" and the property owned by the city shown as parcels "A", "B-1" and "B-2" on that certain plat of survey recorded in cabinet "D", book 27, slide 33, page 219 in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Putnam County, but only when an event sanctioned or approved by the plaza events committee or city takes place and only for the time periods said event takes place. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as the city, its agents or employees condoning the irresponsible or illegal use or consumption of alcohol. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Sec. 46-182. - Improperly parked. 
(a)  No person shall, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer, or any authorized agent of the property owner, park or stand on an unoccupied parking area or unoccupied motor vehicle in a parking area or repeatedly drive a motor vehicle through or within parking area located on privately owned property provided by a merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other facility for customer if: 
(1)  The parking area is identified by at least one sign as specified in this paragraph, or if the parking area contains more than 150 parking spaces, then by at least one such sign at each entrance to the parking area, each such sign containing the following information in easy to read printing: 
a.  Notice of this Code section; 
b.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customers use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; and 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller, or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
c.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or 
d.  Carrying out any activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof; shall be punished by a fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first such offense; 
(2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second such offense; 
(3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third subsequent such offense. 
(c)  The governing authority of any municipal corporation by ordinance may adopt by reference the provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section with out publishing or posting in full the provisions thereof. Any person violating any such ordinance shall be subject to a monetary fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second such violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third or subsequent such violation. 
Any vehicle that is parked on the sidewalk or on the wrong side of the roadway when designated for parking or any vehicle parked on the yellow curbing can be sited under this Code section for being improperly parked, this Code section will fall under rules of the road O.C.G.A. tit. 40 Motor Vehicle and Traffic. 
(Ord. of 1-21-03(2)) 
Chapter 50 - PLANNING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-4(10); any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-4(11); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 50-1. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq., the Eatonton/Putnam County Comprehensive Plan 1992—2012 including the inventory, assessment and five-year shortterm work program is adopted. 
Chapter 53 - SOLAR ENERGY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 53-1. - Purpose. 
An ordinance to update the Code of the City of Eatonton, adding a chapter to permit solar energy systems as permitted, conditional, and special exception uses in any zoning district, and to add requisite definitions therein. 
This chapter aims to promote the accommodation of distributed, on-site residential and non-residential solar energy systems installed to reduce on-site energy consumption and associated equipment, as well as adequate access to sunlight necessary for such systems. 
This chapter permits, depending on zoning district, solar energy systems, while protecting the safety and welfare of adjacent and surrounding land uses through appropriate zoning and land-use controls. 
A solar energy system shall be permitted in any zoning district as an accessory use, subject to specific criteria as set forth below. Where general standards and specific criteria overlap, specific criteria shall supersede general standards. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-2. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Accessory use. A subordinate building or use which is customarily incidental to the principal use or building, and which is located on the same lot with the principal use or building, as defined in section 75-4(c) of this Code. 
Battery back-up. A battery system that stores electrical energy from a solar PV system, making the electricity available for future use. Battery back-up systems are common in off-grid systems and hybrid systems. 
Combiner or junction box. Combines the inputs (electrical flows) from multiple strings of solar panels (or micro-inverters) into one output circuit. 
Crystalline silicon cells. Solar photovoltaic cells fashioned from either mono-crystalline, multi-crystalline, or ribbon silicon capable of converting sunlight into electricity. Crystalline silicon solar PV panels are the most commonly used and are generally the most efficient. 
Distributed solar. For the purposes of this chapter, distributed solar refers to solar energy systems located on-site and designed to provide solar thermal energy or solar PV electricity to a property owner, occupant, and/or facilities. 
Grid-tied solar. A solar PV system that is interconnected with the utility grid via net metering and interconnection agreements with the utility. 
Electricity generation (a.k.a. production, output ). The amount of electric energy produced by transforming other forms of energy, commonly expressed in kilowatt-hours (kWh) or megawatt-hours (MWh). 
Electrical equipment. Any device associated with a solar energy system, such as an outdoor electrical unit/control box, that transfers the energy from the solar energy system to the intended on-site structure. 
Grid-tied solar photovoltaic systems (a.k.a. grid-tied PV, on-grid, grid-connected, utility-interactive, grid-intertied , or grid-direct ). Solar photovoltaic electricity generation systems designed to serve the electricity needs of the building to which it is connected, thus offsetting a home's or business's electricity usage. Any excess electricity generated is sent to the electric utility grid, credited via a customer's net metering agreement with their local utility. Grid-tied are typically installed without a battery back-up system to store electricity. As such, these systems provide no power during an outage. Typical system components: PV panels, inverter(s), and required electrical safety gear. 
Ground-mount system. A solar energy system that is directly installed on specialized solar racking systems, which are attached to an anchor in the ground and wired to connect to an adjacent home or building. Ground-mount systems may be applicable when insufficient space, structural and shading issues, or other restrictions prohibit rooftop solar. 
Hybrid solar photovoltaic systems (a.k.a. grid-tied PV with battery back-up ). Solar photovoltaic electricity generation systems designed to serve the electricity needs of the building to which it is connected, thus offsetting a home's or business's electricity usage, while also utilizing a battery back-up in the event of a power outage. This is the only system that provides the ability to have power when the utility grid is down. Typical system components include: PV panels, inverter(s), and required electrical safety gear, battery bank, and a charge controller. 
International Residential Code (IRC). Part of the International Building Code (IBC), the IRC sets buildings standards for residential structures. 
Inverter. A device that converts the direct current (DC) electricity produced by a solar photovoltaic system to useable alternating current (AC). 
Kilowatt (kW). Equal to 1,000 watts; a measure of the use of electrical power. 
Kilowatt-hour (kWh). A unit of energy equivalent to one kilowatt of power expended for one hour of time. 
Mounting. The manner in which a solar PV system is affixed to the roof or ground (i.e. roof mount, ground mount, pole mount). 
Megawatt (MW). Equal to 1,000 kilowatts; a measure of the use of electrical power. 
Megawatt-hour (MWh). A unit of energy equivalent to one megawatt of power expended for one hour of time. 
National Electrical Code (NEC). Sets standards and best practices for wiring and electrical systems. 
Net meter. On-grid solar PV systems connected to the utility grid use a net meter; typically provided and installed by the local utility, to measure the flow of electricity from the solar system for the purposes of net metering. 
Net metering. A billing arrangement that allows customers with grid-connected solar electricity systems to receive credit for any excess electricity generated on-site and provided to the utility grid. 
Off-grid solar photovoltaic systems with battery back-up. Solar photovoltaic electricity systems designed to operate independently from the local utility grid and provide electricity to a home, building, boat, RV (or remote agricultural pumps, gates, traffic signs, etc.). These systems typically require a battery bank to store the solar electricity for use during nighttime or cloudy weather (and/or other back-up generation). Typical system components include: PV panels, battery bank, a charge controller, inverter(s), required disconnects, and associated electrical safety gear. 
Orientation (or azimuth ). In the northern hemisphere, true solar south is the optimal direction for maximizing the power output of solar PV. Although, systems can be oriented east, southeast, southwest, and west, while still providing 75—85 percent of maximum production, depending on the tilt. Proper orientation and access to sun are critical for achieving maximum energy production potential (ideally, the orientation of the solar energy system ensures that solar access is not obstructed by other buildings, shade trees, chimneys, HVAC systems, or other equipment). 
Passive solar. Techniques, design, and materials designed to take advantage of the sun's position (and the local climate) throughout the year to heat, cool, and light a building with the sun. Passive solar incorporates the following elements strategically to maximize the solar potential of any home or building (namely, maximizing solar heat gain in winter months and minimizing solar heat gain in summer months to reduce heating/cooling demand; and maximizing the use of daylighting to reduce demand for electricity for lighting): strategic design and architecture, building materials, east-west and building lot orientation, windows, landscaping, awnings, ventilation. 
Photovoltaic (PV) system. A solar energy system that produces electricity by the use of semiconductor devices, called photovoltaic cells, which generate electricity when exposed to sunlight. A PV system may be roof-mounted, ground-mounted, or pole-mounted. 
Pole-mount systems. A solar energy system that is directly installed on specialized solar racking systems, which are attached to a pole, anchored and firmly affixed to a concrete foundation in the ground, and wired underground to an attachment point at the building's meter. Unlike ground-mount systems, pole-mount systems are elevated from the ground. Pole-mounted systems can be designed to track the sun (with single-axis or dual-axis tracking motors) and maximize solar output throughout the year. 
Power. The rate at which work is performed (the rate of producing, transferring, or using energy). Power is measured in watts (W), kilowatts (kW), megawatts (MW), etc. 
Public utility. Any utility regulated by and under the jurisdiction of the public service commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et. seq. 
PV-direct systems. The simplest of solar photovoltaic electric systems with the fewest components (no battery back-up and not interconnected with the utility) designed to only provide electricity when the sun is shining. Typical system components include: PV panels, required electrical safety gear, and wiring. 
Racking. Solar energy systems are attached securely and anchored to structural sections of the roof-mounted or pole-mounted systems. Specially designed metal plates called flashings prevent leaks and are placed under shingles and over bolts to create a water-tight seal. 
Roof-mount system (a.k.a. rooftop mounted, building mounted ). A solar energy system consisting of solar panels are installed directly on the roof of a home, commercial building, and/or an accessory structure, such as a garage, pergola, and/or shed. Solar panels are mounted and secured using racking systems specifically designed to minimize the impact on the roof and prevent any leaks or structural damage. Roof-mount systems can be mounted flush with the roof or tilted toward the sun at an angle. 
Solar access. The ability of one property to continue to receive sunlight across property lines without obstruction from another's property (buildings, foliage or other impediment). 
Solar array. Multiple solar panels combined together to create one system. 
Solar collector. A solar PV cell, panel, or array, or solar thermal collector device, that relies upon solar radiation as an energy source for the generation of electricity or transfer of stored heat. 
Solar easement. An easement recorded pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 44-9-20—44-9-24, the purpose of which is to secure the right to receive sunlight across the real property of another for the continued access to sunlight necessary to operate a solar energy system. According to Georgia law, parties may voluntarily enter into written solar easement contracts that are enforceable by law. An easement must be created in writing and filed, duly recorded and indexed in the office of the recorder of the county in which the easement is granted. A solar easement, once created, runs with the land and does not terminate unless specified by conditions of the easement. 
Solar energy system. A system capable of collecting and converting solar radiation into heat or mechanical or electrical energy and transferring these forms of energy by a separate apparatus to storage or to point of use, including, but not limited to, water heating, space heating or cooling, electric energy generation, or mechanical energy generation. This definition shall include solar thermal, photovoltaic, and passive solar systems. 
Solar energy system, small-scale. An active solar energy system that occupies 1,750 square feet of surface area or less (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about ten kW DC or less). 
Solar energy system, medium-scale. An active solar energy system that occupies more than 1,750 but less than 40,000 square feet of surface area (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 10—250 kW DC). 
Solar energy system, large-scale. An active solar energy system that occupies more than 40,000 square feet of surface area (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 250 kW DC or greater). 
Solar farm. A large-scale utility and/or commercial solar energy system, the full size of which is six acres or more. 
Solar glare. The potential for solar panels to reflect sunlight, with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Solar photovoltaic (solar PV) system. Solar systems consisting of photovoltaic cells, made with semiconducting materials, that produce electricity (in the form of direct current (DC)) when they are exposed to sunlight. A typical PV system consists of PV panels (or modules) that combine to form an array; other system components may include mountain racks and hardware, wiring for electrical connections, and power conditioning equipment, such as an inverter and/or batteries. 
Solar panel (or module). A device for the direct conversion of sunlight into useable solar energy (including electricity or heat). 
Solar process heat. Technologies that provide industrial specific applications, including ventilation air preheating, solar process heating, and solar cooling. 
Solar-ready. The concept of planning and building with the purpose of enabling future use of solar energy generation systems. Solar-ready buildings, lots, and developments make it easier and more cost-effective to utilize passive solar techniques and adopt active solar technologies in the future. Solar-ready buildings are built anticipating future installation of active solar energy systems (including structural reinforcement, pre-wiring or plumbing for solar, and east-west building orientation). Solar-ready lots are oriented to take maximal advantage of a location's solar resource. Solar-ready developments expand this concept to entire subdivisions. 
Solar thermal system (a.k.a. solar hot water or solar heating systems ). A solar energy system that directly heats water, or other liquid using sunlight. Systems generally consist of a series of tubes that concentrate light to heat either water or a heat-transfer fluid (such as food-grade propylene glycol, a non-toxic substance) in one of two types of collectors (flat-plate collectors and evacuated tube collectors). The heated liquid is used for such purposes as space heating and cooling, domestic hot water, and heating pool water. 
Thin film solar PV. Capable of generating electricity from the sun, thin film solar PV cells consist of layers of semiconductor materials (made from amorphous silicon, cadmium telluride, copper indium gallium diselenide, among other materials) a few micrometers thick, which allow for greater flexibility. Thin film is made by depositing one or more thin layers of photovoltaic material on a substrate; products include rooftop shingles and tiles, building facades, the glazing for skylights, and other building integrated materials. 
Tilt. The angle of the solar panels and/or solar collector relative to their latitude. The optimal tilt to maximize solar production is perpendicular, or 90 degrees, to the sun's rays at true solar noon. 
True solar noon. When the sun is at its highest during its daily east-west path across the sky (this is also known as 0° azimuth). Solar energy systems can be manually or automatically adjusted throughout the year. Alternatively, fixed-tilt systems remain at a static tilt year-round. 
Watts (W). A measure of the use of electrical power (power (watts) = voltage (volts) X current (amps). 
Wiring. Specified by electrical codes, solar PV system wires are routed from the panels or micro-inverters through conduit into the inverter and buildings meter. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter applies to all distributed solar systems installed and constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. For purposes of this chapter, "solar energy system" means a distributed solar energy system as defined herein. 
(b)  Solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  All solar energy systems shall be designed, erected, and installed in accordance with applicable local, state, utility, and national codes, regulations, and standards. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-4. - Placement by zoning district. 
Solar energy systems shall be authorized in the zoning districts of the City of Eatonton as follows: 

 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-5. - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  To the extent practicable, and in accordance with Georgia law, the accommodation of solar energy systems and associated electrical equipment, shall be encouraged in the application of the various review and approval provisions of the Eatonton Code. 
(b)  Solar energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts as noted in section 53-4 of this chapter. 
(c)  A solar energy system may provide power for the principal use and/or accessory use of the property on which the solar energy system is located, but is not required to do so. 
(d)  The installation and construction of a roof-mount solar energy system shall be subject to the following development and design standards: 
(1)  A roof or building-mounted solar energy system may be mounted on a principal or accessory building. 
(2)  Any height limitations of the Eatonton Code shall not be applicable to solar collectors, provided that such structures are erected only to such height as is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they are intended to serve. 
(3)  Placement of solar collectors on flat roofs shall be allowed by right, provided that panels do not extend horizontally past the roofline. 
(e)  The installation and construction of a ground-mount or pole-mount solar energy system shall be subject to the following development and design standards: 
(1)  The height of the solar collector and any mounts shall not exceed 20 feet when oriented at maximum tilt. 
(2)  The surface area of a ground- or pole-mounted system, regardless of the mounted angle, shall be calculated as part of the overall lot coverage. 
(3)  The minimum solar energy system setback distance from the property lines shall be equivalent to the building setback or accessory building setback requirement of the underlying zoning district. 
(4)  All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted solar energy system to any building or other structure shall, when practicable, be located underground and/or in accordance with the building electrical code as appropriate. 
(f)  The installation and construction of a solar farm or utility-grade solar energy system shall be subject to the following development and design standards. 
(1)  A minimum setback distance of 50 feet from all property boundaries shall be required, with the exception of property boundaries of adjoining parcels that are a part of a single solar farm project, as shown on the site plan. These property boundaries shall not be subject to this setback requirement. In such excepted case, a written waiver approved by the city and signed by the property owner(s) of all adjoining parcels included in the project shall be required. 
(2)  Power inverters and other sound producing equipment shall be no less than 150 feet from any dwelling unit at the time of construction/installation. 
(3)  All solar energy systems shall be completely enclosed with a minimum of six feet high chain link or security fencing as measured from the natural grade of the fencing perimeter. 
(4)  Solar farms shall be constructed with evergreen vegetative screening where existing buffers do not obscure solar energy system perimeters from dwelling units on adjacent parcels. At maturity, required vegetative screening shall not be less than 15 feet tall, regardless of line-of-sight. 
(5)  Permits for solar farms will include a contingent decommissioning plan, as specified in section 53-7 of this chapter. 
(g)  All electrical equipment associated with, and necessary for the operation of solar energy systems shall comply with the following: 
Electrical equipment shall comply with the setbacks specified for accessory structures in the underlying zoning district. 
(h)  Solar panels are designed to absorb (not reflect) sunlight; and, as such, solar panels are generally less reflective than other varnished or glass exterior housing pieces. However, solar panel placement should be prioritized to minimize or negate any solar glare onto nearby properties or roadways, without unduly impacting the functionality or efficiency of the solar system. 
(i)  A solar energy system shall not be used to display permanent or temporary advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, banners or similar materials. The manufacturers and equipment information, warning, or indication of ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the solar energy system provided they comply with the prevailing sign regulations. 
(j)  A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a building/zoning permit has been approved and issued. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-6. - Safety and inspections. 
(a)  The design of the solar energy system shall conform to applicable local, state and national solar codes and standards. A building permit, reviewed by department staff, shall be obtained for a solar energy system. All design and installation work shall comply with all applicable provisions in the National Electric Code (NEC), the International Residential Code (IRC), International Commercial Building Code, State Fire Code, and any additional requirements set forth by the local utility (for any grid-connected solar systems). 
(b)  Emergency access. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be located in such a manner as to ensure emergency access to the roof, provide pathways to specific areas of the roof, provide for smoke ventilation opportunities, and provide emergency egress from the roof. 
(1)  For buildings with pitched roofs, solar collectors shall be located in a manner that provides a minimum of one three-foot wide clear access pathway from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where solar energy systems are located, as well as one three-foot smoke ventilation buffer along the ridge. 
(2)  Residential rooftops that are flat shall have a minimum three-foot wide clear perimeter, and commercial buildings that are flat shall have a minimum four-foot wide clear perimeter between a solar energy system and the roofline, as well as a three-foot wide clear perimeter around roof-mounted equipment such as HVAC units. 
(3)  To the extent practicable, the access pathway shall be located at a structurally strong location on the building (such as a load-bearing wall). 
(c)  The solar energy system shall comply with all applicable City of Eatonton Ordinances and Codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such solar energy system. The existing roof structure and the weight of the solar energy system shall be taken into consideration when applying for a solar energy system permit. 
(d)  Prior to operation, electrical connections must be inspected by an appropriate electrical inspection person or agency, as determined by the City of Eatonton. 
(e)  Any connection to the public utility grid must be approved by the appropriate public utility. 
(f)  If solar storage batteries are included as part of the solar collector system, they must be installed according to all requirements set forth in the National Electric Code and State Fire Code when in operation. When no longer in operation, the batteries shall be disposed of in accordance with the laws and regulations of the City of Eatonton and any other applicable laws and regulations relating to hazardous waste disposal. 
(g)  Unless otherwise specified through a contract or agreement, the property owner of record will be presumed to be the responsible party for owning and maintaining the solar energy system. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-7. - Abandonment and removal. 
(a)  If a ground-mounted solar energy system is removed, any earth disturbance as a result of the removal shall be landscaped in accordance with Eatonton Code. 
(b)  A ground or pole-mounted solar energy system is considered to be abandoned or defective if it has not been in operation for a period of 12 months. If abandoned, the solar energy system shall be repaired by the responsible party, as per subsection 53-6(7), meet federal, state, and local safety standards, or be removed by the owner within the time period designated by an Eatonton Building Code Official. If the owner fails to remove or repair the defective or abandoned solar energy system, the City of Eatonton may utilize the parameters of Eatonton Code, chapter 14, article III, Nuisance Abatement, including, but not limited to a court summons, mandated repair, or demolition and removal of the violating property. 
(c)  Utility-grade or solar farm solar energy systems shall be subject to the creation of a decommissioning plan at time of permit approval. This plan shall include, at a minimum: 
(1)  Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be initiated (i.e. end of lease, safety hazard, etc.); 
(2)  Removal of all non-utility owned equipment conduits, structures, fencing, roads and foundations; restoration of property to condition prior to solar farm development; 
(3)  The timeframe for completion of removal and decommissioning activities; and 
(4)  Signed statement from the party responsible for completing the decommissioning plan acknowledging such responsibility. 
Upon failure to accomplish the decommissioning plan, the building inspector may take action as authorized in the City Code, chapter 14, article III, Nuisance Abatement. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the owner of a solar energy system is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, appeals should be made in accordance with the established procedures of the Eatonton Code. 
(b)  If a building permit for a solar energy system is denied because of a conflict with other goals of the City of Eatonton, the applicant may seek relief from the planning and zoning commission, which shall regard solar energy as a factor to be considered, weighed, and balanced along with other factors. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-9. - Solar-ready zoning. 
(a)  New structures will, to the extent possible and insofar as practical, be situated on the lot to take advantage of solar access, including the orientation of proposed buildings with respect to sun angles, the shading and windscreen potential of existing and proposed vegetation on and off the site, and the impact of solar access to adjacent uses and properties. 
(b)  To permit maximum solar access to proposed lots and future buildings, wherever reasonably feasible and where consistent with other appropriate design considerations, new streets shall be located on an east-west axis to encourage building siting with the maximum exposure of roof and wall area to the sun. 
(c)  Eatonton tree-planting programs shall take into account the impact of street trees on the solar access of surrounding properties and, where possible, efforts shall be made to avoid shading possible locations of solar collectors. 
(d)  When the planning and zoning commission reviews and acts upon applications for subdivision approval or site plan approval, it shall take into consideration whether the proposed construction would block access to sunlight between the peak daylight hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time for existing ground-mount, pole-mount, or roof-mount solar energy collectors, or for solar energy collectors for which a permit has been issued. 
(e)  Where reasonable and appropriate, new subdivisions should be platted so as to preserve or enhance solar access for either passive or active systems, consistent with the other requirements of the Eatonton Code. 
(f)  The plan for development of any site within cluster subdivisions shall be designed and arranged in such a way as to promote solar access for all dwelling units. Considerations may include the following: 
(1)  In order to maximize solar access, the higher-density dwelling units should be placed on a south-facing slope and lower-density dwelling units sited on a north-facing slope. 
(2)  Subject to the Eatonton setback requirements, structures should be sited as close to the north lot line as possible to increase yard space to the south for reduced shading of the south face of a structure. 
(3)  A tall structure should be sited to the north of a short structure. 
(g)  Solar-ready zoning should be considered as one among multiple considerations in planning new developments. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-10. - Restrictions on solar prohibitions. 
In accordance with Eatonton Code chapter 75 (Zoning), the City of Eatonton and the planning and zoning commission maintains and reserves the right to refuse any plat or subdivision plan if deed restrictions, covenants or other agreements running with the land prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting reasonably sited and designed solar collectors or other renewable resource devices. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-11. - Application process. 
All applications for conditional use shall be made in accordance with the procedures outlined in Eatonton Code subsection 75-64(a), unless otherwise listed in section 53-12. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 53-12. - Exclusions. 
The following conditional use permit applications shall be exempted from the City of Eatonton Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing, but shall be heard directly by the city council at its regular meeting. Advertisement and notice requirements shall comply with Eatonton Code subsection 75-63(f)(1). 
(1)  Public utilities. 
(Amd. of 2-2-2016) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 

Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building material means any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than six cubic yards, nor larger than eight cubic yards, made of watertight construction with doors opening on two sides and the top, and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by a specially equipped truck. Containers shall be kept covered at all times. 
Business trash means any waste accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations, other than garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices or similar businesses. 
Commercial establishment means any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Garbage means the by-product of animal, vegetable or other foodstuff resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or other generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors. 
Hazardous refuse means material such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, paint, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, sludges and liquids and semi-solids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste material or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified in this article. 
Loading and unloading area means any stream, river, lakeside or land dock, space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulation consisting of garbage, household trash, and business trash. 
Refuse receptacle means a metal or plastic container for refuse, of substantial construction, with tightfitting lids and provided with wheels and/or handles sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacle shall have a capacity of not less than ten gallons nor more than 32 gallons and shall be kept in a serviceable condition at all times. Plastic containers shall meet standards set by the Society of Plastic Engineers. 
Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one family. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-1; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-32. - Administration and enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the duty of the city administrator or designee. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-2; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 54-33. - Receptacles and containers to be made available for collection required. 
It shall be required of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which, business trash, garbage, household trash, and yard trash is accumulated or produced, to make available at specified times in a suitable place readily accessible to the city collection crews or private collection agencies, receptacles provided by the city for trash collection purposes. The city administrator or designee is designated as the agency to determine the quantity and location of the receptacles and to determine whether the receptacles are serviceable and to provide and replace receptacles as needed. Building materials, fats, oils, grease, restaurant and industrial waste must be deposited in containers rated for such contents introduced therein and their disposal is the responsibility of the property or business owner. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-3; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Sec. 54-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 20, 2006, deleted § 54-34 in its entirety. Former § 54-34 pertained to receptacles and containers to be safe and derived from Code 1982, § 5-2-3. 
Sec. 54-35. - Precollection practices. 
(a)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified in this article. All containers shall be kept covered at all times with tightfitting covers. 
(b)  Garbage. All garbage being placed in containers for collection shall have drained from it all free liquid, and shall be wrapped, bagged or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(c)  Household trash. All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its deposit in refuse receptacles. Household trash may be combined with garbage or yard trash. Any items of household trash which are too large for receptacles and cannot be reduced to a size which can be placed in a receptacle may be placed with tree and shrubbery trimmings no earlier than noon on the day next preceding the collection date for such material, provided such items are covered or secured so as to avoid unsightly litter conditions. 
(d)  Dangerous trash items. All dangerous trash items and waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, lightbulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes, shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the collection crew. 
(e)  Hazardous refuse and building materials. No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection by the city, nor shall it be collected by the city. Paint cans containing liquid paint shall have the paint made solid by the addition of an absorbent material such as sand or cat litter. The can should then be placed at the side of the trash receptacle for collection. 
(f)  Yard trimmings. Yard trimmings shall not be placed in refuse receptacles. No tree trunks, branches, limbs or shrubbery larger than four inches in diameter, longer than five feet or heavier than 75 pounds shall be collected by the city. Tree and shrubbery limbs shall have protruding branches trimmed and must be neatly stacked and placed in an orderly manner at curbside. Unless such branches or limbs are of a size not to be blown about and scattered by the elements, they shall be effectively tied so as to avoid wind-driven debris and unsightly litter conditions. Leaves must be in neat piles. Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors or other commercial workmen, or resulting from land being cleared, shall not be collected by the city. All yard trimmings, including leaves, shall be placed adjacent to the curb surrounding the property, but not on the street side of the curb. 
(g)  Special collection of household furniture and appliances. Upon request, the city shall collect normal household discarded furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters and similar items. Persons requesting this service shall be notified by the city street department as to the date collection will occur. Items for collection shall be placed at curbside no earlier than noon on the day next preceding the stated collection. This service shall be available in residential areas only. 
(h)  Special assessment for oversized loads and non-customers. Residents may be notified that certain loads are oversized and that a special oversized load assessment fee will need to be paid or the customer will have to remove the material to county convenience centers themselves. Current customers in good standing with city hall, with oversized loads of brush or other yard trimmings or debris may call city hall to request assistance in removal and disposal. The assessment will be based on the size and quantity of the material to be removed. This assessment, which will be added to the next bill for service, shall not be less than $50.00 nor greater than $150.00. Non-customers and former customers may also request this service. The fee for any non customer shall be the same as for customers in good standing plus the cost of application and one month's service, to be paid in advance of the pickup. Customers or non-customers who fail to pay the fee when properly assessed or otherwise found to be violating, failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any provision or requirement of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-5; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3); Ord. of 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 54-36. - Storing of refuse and trash. 
All accumulations of refuse and trash shall be stored or placed for collection in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except as stated in this article. 
(2)  Blockage of storm drains. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles or containers on, upon or over any storm drain, or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into them. 
(3)  Unauthorized accumulations. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. Failure of the owner or occupant to remove and correct any such unauthorized accumulation of refuse shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-6) 
Sec. 54-37. - Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Scatter refuse about or litter any public or private street, area or place; 
(2)  Cast, throw, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse or trash in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied or unoccupied premises within the city; or 
(3)  Throw or deposit any refuse, trash or debris in any stream or body of water. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials within the city to transport such material without suitable covers. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock or silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of livestock or poultry. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-7) 
Sec. 54-38. - Commercial establishments. 
All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers as specified in this section so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and around their establishments. Approved methods of containerization include refuse containers, bulk containers and detachable containers. The number of containers necessary for each commercial establishment shall be as required to maintain clean, neat, sanitary premises as directed by the planning and engineering department. Spillage and overflow shall be immediately cleaned up when and as it occurs by the establishment. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-8; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 54-39. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The number of containers necessary shall be as required to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary premises as directed by the planning and engineering department. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-9; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Sec. 54-40. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Obligation to furnish receptacles. All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles distributed within the parking area. The city administrator or designee shall have the authority to determine the number of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the manager of the parking lot to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store such material in an approved location. 
(b)  Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the obligation of all persons using parking areas to use such refuse receptacles or containers as provided in this section for the purposes intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, scatter or throw upon any such parking lot, any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-10; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Sec. 54-41. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building materials waste, scrap building materials and other trash produced by those working on the site. All such materials shall be containerized by the end of each day and the site shall be kept in a reasonably clean and litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the contractor. Construction sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-11) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 54-42. - Points of collection. 
Refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level on the property and with access without the need for walking or carrying a refuse container over, under or around some yard or property obstacles. No refuse shall be collected where sanitation workers cannot have access without unlocking or opening a door, gate or similar obstacle, encountering a dog or otherwise being denied reasonable access by parked vehicles, yard tools and equipment or other similar objects. No refuse receptacles or containers shall be stored in front of a home or in front of the building line closest to the street. The city administrator or designee shall have the authority to determine the proper receptacle or container location on private property. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-12; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Sec. 54-43. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Residential. Garbage and household trash accumulated by residents shall be collected weekly according to a specific schedule available at city hall. Oversize household trash, and yard trimmings Shall be collected weekly according to a specific schedule available at city hall. Service will be on regularly scheduled days except weekends. During weeks in which there is an official holiday, the scheduled collection will occur on the next business day or may in some cases not occur that week.. 
(b)  Commercial establishments. Service to commercial establishments shall be weekly according to a specified schedule available at city hall. 
(c)  Bulk containers. It is the responsibility of the individual business to contract for the use and emptying of bulk containers. 
(d)  Industrial waste. Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing such waste. 
(e)  Hazardous refuse. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the city. Paint cans will be collected as long as the paint has been rendered solid and the cans left at the side of the trash receptacle 
(f)  Dead animals. Small dead animals will be collected by the city provided the body of such animal is in a location accessible to the collector. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. Bodies of dead animals must be disposed of within 24 hours of death. 
(g)  Building materials. The city shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings, alterations or additions to existing buildings of any type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. No new certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such material has been removed by the owner or contractor. 
(h)  Hazardous, liquid or highly combustible waste. Hazardous or liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste must be safely disposed of by the property owner at their expense. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-13; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Sec. 54-44. - Post collection practices. 
Refuse receptacles placed at curbside for collection shall be removed from curbside by midnight on the day of collection. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-14) 
Sec. 54-45. - Special refuse disposal problems. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for city collection. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing such instruments in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(c)  Ashes. Ashes that are to be hauled by the city must have been wetted and cooled to the touch prior to collection. Ashes shall be placed in suitable containers of such size and weight that they can be handled by one man. 
(d)  Cardboard boxes and cartons. Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons, or the person in charge of the premises, shall collapse all cardboard boxes, cartons and crates. 
(e)  Yard trimmings. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(f)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(g)  Yard trimmings—shredded. Where possible these trimmings shall be shredded for mulch and made available to the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-15; Ord. of 9-3-1996, § 1; Ord. of 2-20-2006(3)) 
Sec. 54-46. - Collection and disposal. 
All collectors of refuse who desire to haul over the streets of the city shall use a watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover and operated so as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-16) 
Sec. 54-47. - Responsibility of owners and agents. 
The owners or agents, tenants or lessees of all residential units and commercial establishments shall be responsible for compliance with this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-17) 
Sec. 54-48. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Sidewalks, alleys and rights-of-way. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a clean and litter-free manner, including sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of alleys, curbs or rights-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or streets. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-18) 
Sec. 54-49. - Penalty. 
Any person violating, failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any provision or requirement of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2-19) 
Sec. 54-50. - Scrap tire management. 
(a)  Purpose. It is declared to be the policy of Eatonton, Georgia, in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety and well being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment, to institute and maintain a comprehensive city-wide program for all scrap tire management which will assure that the storage, transportation, collection, processing and disposal of scrap tires does not adversely affect the health, safety, and well-being of the public and does not degrade the quality of the environment. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  The term "dump" means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 1 
(2)  The term "manifest" means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 2 
(3)  The term "person" means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 3 
(4)  The term "retail tire dealer" means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 4 
(5)  The term "scrap tire" means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 4 
(6)  The term "scrap tire carrier" means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 4 
(7)  The term "scrap tire generator" means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, re-treaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 4 
(8)  The term "scrap tire processor" means any person who is approved by the Environmental Protection Division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 4 
(9)  The term "scrap tire sorter" means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and re-treadable casings from scrap tires. 4 
1 As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
2 As defined in Section 391-3-4-.19 (2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
3 As defined in Section 391-3-4-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
4 As defined in Section 391-3-4-.19 (2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
(c)  Scrap tire management—General. 
(1)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the City of Eatonton, Georgia including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city, unless: 
a.  The property is designated by the City Council of Eatonton, or its duly designated agent and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property for the accumulation of such scrap tires; 
b.  The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
c.  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(3)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. applicable to solid waste, except where requirements of this ordinance are more stringent. 
(d)  Accumulation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate more than four scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. 
(2)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 500 scrap tires. 
(3)  All other businesses that accumulate scrap tires, other than for retreading by a bona fide tire retreader licensed by the city and the State of Georgia for such purpose, my not accumulate more than eight tires on or around property that they own or occupy. 
(4)  Scrap tires may not be kept in such storage as identified above for longer than 60 days and must be stored in covered or enclosed areas, or under an impermeable cover to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(e)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the Municipal Court of Eatonton, Georgia, shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the first offense: By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 1 , or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the city from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the city to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area. 
b.  For the second or more offense(s): The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; and/or 
(2)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this section; and/or 
(3)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation 2 and/or 
(4)  In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this section. The city shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(5)  The expenses incurred by the city for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this section. 
(6)  In addition to actions filed by the city for violations of this section, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
1 As provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.1). 
2 As provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-53 (d). 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the city administrator, city marshal, city police department, the city council of the City of Eatonton, Georgia or their designee. 
(2)  Any person(s) authorized to enforce this section shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this section, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this section must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this section, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(g)  Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(1)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this section, the city or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation 1 . In addition, the city may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other city issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(2)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in subsection (d)(2). 
(3)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this section, the court and/or the city council may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this section for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(4)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the city council is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in 
violation of the ordinance on behalf of the city. The expenses incurred by the city shall be chargeable to the violator and the city council and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(5)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the city council shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the city, the dates of city action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(6)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
1 As provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-52, 16-7-53. 
(h)  Severability. Should any sentence, section, subsection or a provision of this section or application of a provision of this section be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court or other competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any part thereof that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 54-51. - Storage of motor vehicle tires. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this section is to provide for the public health, safety and welfare for the residents and visitors of the city by prescribing the manner of storage of tires and used tires in a manner that will prohibit the same from becoming a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other pests which carry diseases including, but not limited to, Zika, West Nile and Chikungunya viruses. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this paragraph, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Scrap tires are defined and governed in section 54-50 in this Code of Ordinances. 
Tire means a hollow ring, made of rubber or other material, which is designed for placement on the wheel or rim of a motor vehicle to facilitate its operation. 
Used tire means a tire that has a minimum of 2/32 inches of road tread mid that is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marked in substantiality the same fashion as a new tire. It is a rebuttable presumption that non-new tires are scrap tires and not used tires. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization, or association of any kind in charge or control of any property within the area of the City of Eatonton, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, agent or otherwise, to store or permit the storage of tires or used tires outside of a building permanently affixed to the property between the hours of 8:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization, or association of any kind in charge or control of any property within the area of the City of Eatonton, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or agent or otherwise, to store or permit the storage of tires in a building permanently affixed to the property unless the same protects tires and used tires from the elements and prior to storage, all water has been drained therefrom. 
(e)  The owners or occupants of existing storage sites of tires shall, immediately upon the passage of the ordinance from which this section derived, comply with the standards therein set forth herein; provided, however, that the owners or occupants of existing sites storing tires and/or used tires shall be allowed a period of 30 days in which to bring existing storage into compliance with the provisions of this section. Thereafter the city administrator, or his designee, may enter into a written agreement containing a specific and dated plan for the removal of tires and used tires off the premises or otherwise into compliance with this section. 
(f)  The code enforcement officer is hereby designated as an agent of the city administrator to enforce the terms of this section. 
(g)  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to authorize any outside storage when it is prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(h)  Each day an offense occurs shall be a separate punishable offence. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished as prescribed by section 1-12 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Res. of 8-21-2017) 
Secs. 54-52—54-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 54-81—54-84. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 20, 2006, deleted Art. III, §§ 54-81—54-84, in its entirety. Former Art. III, §§ 54-81—54-84, pertained to yard trimmings disposal and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 3, 1996, § 1. 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-4(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-4(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 38; planning, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Power to construct or maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Obstruction of visibility on street corners prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, place or grow, or suffer to be constructed, placed or grown, any structure, vegetation or obstruction of any kind which exceeds three feet in height measured from the crown of the street, on any property zoned as a residential district, and which is located at the corner of intersecting streets within the area formed by a triangle, the apex of which is the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets, the legs of which extend 75 feet along the centerlines and the hypotenuse of which connects the ends of the legs; provided, however, that the terms of this section shall not apply to utility facilities or to vegetation the branches of which are kept trimmed to a height of six feet above the ground. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-6) 
Sec. 58-2. - Use of cleated wheels, rims, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven upon, over or across the asphalt pavements laid in the streets, any vehicle, machine or implement of any description having sharp rims or other projections thereon which plow into, cut up, injure or damage the pavements. It shall be likewise unlawful for any such person to drive upon the asphalt pavements in any vehicle designed for rubber or other cushioned or inflated tires or treads while such vehicle is running on the rim; nor shall any person drag or tow any such vehicles, machines or implements over or upon the asphalt pavements. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-7) 
Sec. 58-3. - Obstructing streets, generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or construct any fence, building or other obstruction upon or over, or otherwise obstruct, all or any part of any street, avenue, alley, lane or sidewalk, or other public ground of the city. 
However, upon the payment of associated fees and obtaining appropriate permits, restaurants may place tables and chairs, suitable and designed for outside purposes, on sidewalks in front of the restaurant provided 42 inches of clearance remains from the end of the pavement to any chair or table when in the course of normal use and provided the restaurant has indemnified and holds harmless the city by the posting of a bond in the amount of $100,000.00 payable to the City of Eatonton to be paid in case of a pedestrian accident or other accident caused or conditioned by the existence of tables and chairs on the sidewalk, or by the provision of liability insurance indemnifying the city for a like amount and under like circumstances. Evidence of such bonding or indemnification is to be placed with the city at the time of requesting the permit for outside tables and chairs. Additionally, no beverage may be served in a can or glass bottle to patrons of establishments approved for outside tables and chairs. Such permits and evidence of indemnification is to be renewed annually with a non pro-ratable fee of $25.00 payable coincidentally and in addition to any other occupational tax or administrative fee charged. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-1; Amd. of 9-21-2009) 
Sec. 58-4. - Abatement and removal required. 
All encroachments or obstructions on any public street of the city are declared to be nuisances and shall be abated and removed in accordance with law. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 58-5. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 9-6-1 of the 1982 Code on the subject of parades is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 58-6—58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted May 3, 2016, amended art. II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 58-36—58-39, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1982, §§ 5-1-4—5-1-7. 

Sec. 58-36. - Requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, contractor, utility (as defined in section 58-82), or other operator to cut into, dig, trench, ditch, excavate or otherwise deface, cut, grade or alter the grade or surface of any street, pavement, sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way, without first obtaining a permit for that purpose from the board of council or its designated agent. 
(b)  Permits are issued conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against any and all claims, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council, or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore, and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the mayor and city council, all openings and excavations made in streets and rights-of-way, and to maintain any street or right of way where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 12 months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted. Any settlement of the surface within said one-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee. 
(c)  Permitees shall strictly adhere to all provisions set forth in this article. 
(d)  No city streets or rights-of-way will be closed to vehicular or pedestrian traffic without the prior approval of the public works superintendent or city administrator. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants to the abutting property and to the general public. When necessary to restrict the flow of traffic, proper traffic work zone procedures and certified flagmen shall be utilized. Permitee assumes all responsibility for any claims or judgments arising from traffic control operations related to its excavation. 
(e)  The permittee may be required to place and maintain a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such temporary restorations to ensure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(Res. of 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 58-37. - GUPS notification to accompany application for permit. 
Any applicant for a permit for work as set forth in section 58-36 shall, before being entitled to the permit, obtain a Georgia Utility Protection Service ticket number so that underground facilities can be properly marked to prevent damage to existing facilities. No permit will be issued without a valid GUPS ticket number. In the event of an emergency situation GUPS will be notified as soon as possible. 
(Res. of 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 58-38. - Replacement of surface excavated. 
(a)  In the event of such cutting or other operation as described in section 58-36, it shall be unlawful for the person, firm, contractor, utility (as defined in section 58-82), or other operator to leave the street, sidewalk, alley or other public way in a state of disrepair, without restoring the area cut or excavated to its condition prior to such work thereon. 
(b)  In areas where hard surfaces are to be excavated, it shall be neatly and uniformly cut with square edges by machine at each side. All backfill material in excavations shall be compacted in layers not exceeding 12 inches in compacted thickness using pneumatic tampers, vibratory compactors, or other approved means. Asphalt roadway excavations will be resurfaced with a minimum of six inches of compacted crushed rock or gravel and three inches of compacted asphalt topping. At no time shall wet or frozen fill material be used. Seed and straw are required for disturbed non hard surface areas. Existing grassed areas, shoulders, sidewalks, curbing or any other appurtenances, structures, or utilities disturbed or damaged shall be restored to original or better condition as determined by a representative from the department of public works. The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expediency all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the excavation site as soon as practicable and in any event not later than 30 days upon completion of required work in the excavation site. 
(c)  If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the mayor and city council shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the excavation site and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administrative expenses. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for one year after restoring it to its original condition. 
(d)  In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit, or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit, or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health, and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which City Hall is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as herein provided. 
(e)  The public works superintendent and city administrator shall be authorized to make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city or contractors hired by the city. 
(Res. of 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 58-39. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person, firm, contractor, utility (as defined in section 58-82), operator or other person who shall fail to comply with sections 58-36 through 58-38, or who shall violate any provision of sections 58-36 through 58-38, shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided for in section 1-12. In addition, it shall be required to repair any damage done to the streets, sidewalks or other public ways, or to reimburse the city for the cost of such repair plus 25 percent for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(Res. of 5-3-2016) 
Secs. 58-40—58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS 

Sec. 58-61. - Permit—Required; definition of parade. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to organize, participate in or conduct any parade, march, protest, procession or other assemblage of persons, vehicles or mobile displays, foot race, bicycle race or other contest of speed or endurance, other than a funeral procession, or to cause a congregation of people, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property or ways of the city unless an application for a permit has been previously filed and a permit therefore been granted for such person or organization. However, under no circumstances shall more than one permit be issued to the same person or organization in any 12-month period without that person or organization receiving specific permission for the city council. The term "parade" shall mean any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles, mobile display or a combination thereof, foot race, bicycle race or other contest of speed or endurance, except funeral processions, and hereinafter shall include any assemblage of persons upon any public street, sidewalk or public property or way which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls. Any person knowingly violating the regulations in this section, or the terms and conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court. Upon conviction, any person found to have violated this article shall be punished as set forth in section 1-12. Conviction for a violation of this article shall be sufficient grounds for denial of a future parade permit to such person. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-62. - Permit—Application. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the city clerk. Such application shall be in writing, shall be filed at least seven days prior to the proposed parade date, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons and organizations sponsoring, organizing or conducting the parade. 
(2)  The purpose of the parade. 
(3)  The date and time of the parade. 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade, including its beginning and terminating points, or the proposed fixed locations. 
(5)  The number and type of vehicles, animals, marching units, bands and floats to be utilized in the parade including a description of any sound amplification equipment to be used. 
(6)  The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade. 
(7)  The maximum length of the parade. 
(8)  A statement from the person or organization making the application that such person or organization anticipates no unusual problems concerning either police protection or traffic congestion to be experienced as a consequence of the parade, or, if such statement cannot be made, the reasons therefore. 
(9)  When a separate permit from the state department of transportation is required, the mayor or city administrator shall cooperate with the applicant in making application to the state department of transportation for such permit; however, the city shall not be liable to the applicant if permission is denied. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-63. - Permit—Investigation of and report on application. 
The mayor or city administrator shall forward the application to the chief of police who shall investigate the application and make a report to the city administrator. The report shall indicate whether the requirements of section 58-62 have been met and shall state the official position of the police department regarding the certification specified in subsection 58-62(8). If it is the opinion of the chief of police that the parade will require additional personnel above and beyond that number of police officers normally scheduled to be on duty on the date of the proposed parade, such information shall also be included in the report. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-64. - Permit—Issuance; denial. 
The mayor or city administrator shall review the report of the chief of police and if all of the requirements specified in this section have been satisfied by the applicant, the mayor or city administrator shall issue a parade permit, unless the mayor or city administrator finds that: 
(1)  The parade will be of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto that allowing the parade would deny reasonable police protection to the city. 
(2)  The parade will interfere with another parade for which a permit has been issued. 
(3)  The information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
(4)  The purpose of the parade is illegal or in any way prohibited by law. 
(5)  The applicant refuses to agree to abide by and comply with the conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-65. - Permit—Notice of denial; appeal. 
(a)  A decision to deny a permit shall be made in writing with all reasons for such denial enumerated and stated therein, and shall be issued to the applicant, at the supplied address, with all due promptness. 
(b)  Upon the denial of a parade permit, the applicant may appeal such decision to the city council within five days of the date of such decision. 
(c)  The city council shall consider the appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting which is at least three days from the date of appeal. Upon such an appeal, the city council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the decision to deny the permit. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-66. - Permit—Revocation. 
Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to this article may be summarily revoked on the date of the parade by the chief of police when, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. If a permit is so revoked, the permittee shall be allowed to reapply for a new parade permit. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-67. - Additional police protection. 
If it is the official position of the chief of police that additional police personnel shall be required for traffic and spectator control, the chief of police shall apprise the city administrator. Together they shall act to secure the additional personnel necessary and may request assistance from the state bureau of investigation and other law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-68. - Regulations. 
(a)  For the purpose of controlling traffic and pedestrian congestion and of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the following regulations shall pertain to all parades conducted within the city: 
(1)  All parades shall form on S. Washington Street in the block between W. Walnut Street and Oak Street; thence, proceed north along Oak Street through its intersection with S. Jefferson Street; then, travel along N. Jefferson Street to Wayne Street and turn west on Wayne Street to N. Madison turning south to Marion turning west to Washington turning south traveling back to the point of origin to disband, at which point the parade shall terminate. Parades may follow a shorter distance along this route with express written approval of the chief of police. Buses and other vehicles used to transport participants to the formation site shall be moved to the point where the parade is to disband before the parade starts. To the extent the owners of commercial properties at or near the forming and disbanding points give the parade sponsor their written consent, parades should be lined up or formed, and disband, off the public street and sidewalk so as not to impede the free movement of motor vehicles and pedestrians. The normal route of the parade may be reversed if the chief of police finds it in the best interest of the safety of participants and spectators. Other routes may be approved by the city council. 
(2)  Parades shall be conducted on Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays, and legal holidays only, between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., and on Sundays between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., provided the city council may approve such other times as requested by the sponsor of a parade. Parade sponsors are encouraged to schedule parades at those times which create the least interference with traffic and pedestrian movement along the parade route and its intersecting streets. Notice of previously scheduled events or assemblies within the downtown area shall be sufficient cause for the chief of police to deny issuance of a permit during a conflicting time period; provided, the sponsor shall be permitted to conduct its parade at a nonconflicting time. 
(3)  All parade participants shall assemble for the parade at the location designated in the permit. Participants entering upon private property without permission of the owner may be charged as trespassers. 
(4)  No parade participant or spectator shall carry firearms, knives, or weapons of any character while engaged or participating in a public assembly, parade or gathering. 
(5)  All materials used in the construction of floats or other mobile displays shall be fire-resistant and shall be subject to inspection for compliance with fire safety requirements by the city fire chief. 
(6)  Once commenced, a parade shall not stop along the parade route, but shall continue to move at a fixed rate of speed. Any willful delay or stopping, except where reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, shall constitute a violation of the permit. 
(7)  To prevent the risk of injury to persons, no objects shall be thrown from floats or vehicles in the parade. Individually wrapped pieces of candy, literature, or other objects of a nature not likely to cause physical injury may be handed out to spectators by participants walking the parade route, if done in such manner as to be away from the roadway so as not to cause injury. Literature, publications, flyers, leaflets or other written materials of a commercial nature shall not be distributed during a parade. No objects may be thrown by spectators into the parade route or at parade participants. 
(8)  Parade participants shall not engage in speeches during the parade, but may make speeches and distribute literature at rallies and similar gatherings conducted after the conclusion of a parade, if suitable arrangements have been made for a location off the public street and sidewalks of the city. 
(9)  Drivers of motor vehicles, whether or not required by law to be tagged or titled, shall operate their vehicles in accordance with the Uniform Rules of the Road, as adopted by city ordinance, while participating in a parade or funeral procession. Any driver who operates their vehicle in an unsafe manner, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-251, may be cited accordingly. Drivers of parade vehicles shall follow the lawful commands and instructions of police officers at all times. 
(10)  Where barricades, ropes, tape or similar devices are used to demarcate the limits of the parade route, spectators shall remain within these defined spectator areas. Spectators shall not cross the parade route between floats and vehicles while the parade is in progress or in such manner as to interfere with its progress. 
(11)  It shall be the duty of every parade sponsor to whom a permit is issued under this article to familiarize all participants, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit and these regulations prior to commencement of the parade. Every participant shall, in advance of participating, sign a statement acknowledging that he has been so advised by the permittee, understands and will comply with the regulations, terms and conditions of the permit. Where a group participates or enters the parade, the participant shall designate, in writing, to the parade sponsor an individual of adult age who shall be physically present and responsible for his group. 
(b)  All parades shall be held and strictly governed by the regulations in this section and any special conditions set forth as terms and conditions of the specific parade permit. Any violation or material departure from these regulations, without the express written consent of the chief of police, shall be sufficient grounds for the police officers of the city to immediately stop the parade and direct it to immediately disband. 
(c)  Any person knowingly violating the regulations in this section, or the terms and conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court. Upon conviction, any person found to have violated this article shall be punished as set forth in section 1-12. Conviction for a violation of this article shall be sufficient grounds for denial of a future parade permit to such person. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-69. - Identification of funeral processions. 
No permit shall be required for a funeral procession; provided, however, a funeral procession composed of motor vehicles shall be clearly identified by lighted headlights or other appropriate markings on the vehicles as designated by the chief of police. Funeral directors shall notify the police department of the approximate time and route of the funeral procession in order that an escort or other necessary arrangements can be made to prevent disruption of the orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Sec. 58-70. - Driving through parades and processions. 
It shall be an offense against the city for any person to intentionally disrupt a parade or procession, including funeral procession, by driving a motor vehicle into or through the parade or procession while in progress, except upon command of a police officer. Persons violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2006(4)) 
Secs. 58-71—58-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AND MAINTENANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 16, 2008, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 58-70—58-103. In order to maintain the style of the Code and the ease of supplementation, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 58-80—58-185. 

DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 58-80. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Eatonton (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this ordinance for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-70) 
Sec. 58-81. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-71) 
Sec. 58-82. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Eatonton, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the director of planning and zoning for the City of Eatonton, Georgia, or designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the Rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-72) 
Secs. 58-83—58-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 58-91. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-73) 
Sec. 58-92. - Registration timing. 
Following the effective date of this article, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a permit application prior to construction with the department. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-74) 
Sec. 58-93. - Registration procedures. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-75) 
Sec. 58-94. - Incomplete registrations. 
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-76) 
Sec. 58-95. - Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. 
Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-77) 
Sec. 58-96. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-78) 
Secs. 58-97—58-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 58-101. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the department of planning and zoning in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-79) 
Sec. 58-102. - Permit procedures. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city administrator may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the department of planning and zoning. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-80) 
Sec. 58-103. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-81) 
Sec. 58-104. - Issuance of permit. 
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-82) 
Sec. 58-105. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-83) 
Sec. 58-106. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Term of permit. Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)  The permit shall remain in place construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-84) 
Sec. 58-107. - Cancellations for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The c;ity shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-85) 
Sec. 58-108. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-86) 
Secs. 58-109—58-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 58-121. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Eatonton's municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-87) 
Sec. 58-122. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-88) 
Sec. 58-123. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten business days' notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-89) 
Sec. 58-124. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-90) 
Sec. 58-125. - Notice required for blasting or excavating. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-91) 
Secs. 58-126—58-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 58-141. - Responsibility for cost of repair in rights-of-way. 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-92) 
Sec. 58-142. - Utility liable for other repairs. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-93) 
Secs. 58-143—58-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 58-151. - Site available for inspetion. 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-94) 
Sec. 58-152. - Cessation of work. 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-95) 
Sec. 58-153. - Notification of construction completion. 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-96) 
Secs. 58-154—58-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 58-161. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in subsection 58-93(2). 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-97) 
Secs. 58-162—58-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 58-171. - Violation. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-98) 
Secs. 58-172—58-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 58-181. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-99) 
Sec. 58-182. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-100) 
Sec. 58-183. - Compliance. 
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-101) 
Sec. 58-184. - Appeal of administrative decisions. 
All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director specified in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-102) 
Sec. 58-185. - Article [and division] headings. 
Article [and division] headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2008, § 58-103) 
Secs. 58-186—58-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NAMING OR RENAMING CITY-OWNED PROPERTY OR FACILITY 

Sec. 58-201. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to establish a uniform process for naming or renaming a city-owned property or facility or renaming a public street. 
(Amd. of 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 58-202. - Approval of naming or renaming. 
(a)  Authority . City council shall name or rename a city-owned property or facility or rename a public street by adoption of a resolution. 
(b)  Naming . City council shall adopt a resolution, at a regular or special council meeting, to designate the name of a city-owned property or facility. The resolution to name a city-owned property or facility does not require a public hearing. 
(c)  Renaming . Before adopting a resolution to rename a city-owned property or facility or to rename a public street, the city clerk shall place a display advertisement giving notice of the public hearing in the official legal organ at least 14 days prior to the public hearing to be held by city council. 
(d)  No property rights . No property right is conferred upon any entity, individual, group, or group of individuals or entities as a result of naming or renaming any city-owned property or facility or renaming a public street. 
(Amd. of 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 58-203. - Public property or facility naming or renaming. 
Application . An application for naming or renaming a city-owned property or facility shall be submitted to the city clerk on a form provided by the city. The application to name or rename a city-owned property or facility shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of individual(s) making such request. 
(2)  Biographical information about the person for whom the city-owned property or facility is proposed to be named or renamed. 
(3)  An explanation, with documentation, as to how the proposed name satisfies the naming or renaming criteria as follows: 
a.  Historical, biographical, geographical, or cultural significance of the property or facility. 
b.  If the proposed name is that of a well-known individual, family, or group who has made substantial contributions to the community either through civic involvement or monetary donations, a written narrative of such contributions including a description of the involvement by the person in the community and that person's significant connection to the city-owned property or facility. 
(4)  Letters from appropriate professional organizations or individuals, which provide evidence of substantial local support for the naming or renaming of a city-owned property or facility. 
(5)  City council shall consider the information provided prior to deciding the appropriateness of the proposed naming or renaming of a city-owned property or facility. City council shall name or rename the property or facility by resolution as provided in section 58-202. 
(Amd. of 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 58-204. - Public street renaming. 
(a)  Application . An application for renaming a public street shall be submitted to the city clerk on a form provided by the city and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of individual(s) making such request. 
(2)  The present official name of street. 
(3)  The proposed new name of street. 
(4)  A written petition with printed names and signatures, telephone numbers, and addresses containing at least 80 percent of the abutting property owners consenting to the street name change. 
(5)  An explanation, with documentation, as to how the proposed name satisfies the naming or renaming criteria as follows: 
a.  Historical, biographical, geographical, or cultural significance of the person for whom the street is to be renamed. 
b.  If the proposed name is that of a well-known individual, family or group who has made substantial contributions to the community either through civic involvement or monetary donations, a written narrative of such contributions including a description of the involvement by the person in the community. 
(6)  Written verification from Putnam County 911 that the proposed street name is not a duplicate of an existing street name. 
(7)  Any letters of support from appropriate professional organizations or individuals which provide evidence of substantial local support for renaming a public street. 
(b)  Criteria . 
(1)  The proposed street name shall not be duplicated anywhere in Putnam County. 
(2)  A public street may only be renamed after a person if such person has achieved prominence as a result of his or her significant, positive contribution to the local community, the State of Georgia, or nationally. 
(3)  All street name changes shall be for the entire length of the street where the street is continuous. 
(4)  City council shall consider the information provided by the city administrator prior to deciding the appropriateness of the proposed renaming of a street. City council shall rename the street by resolution as provided in section 58-202. 
(Amd. of 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 58-205. - Costs of naming or renaming; failure to pay. 
Upon approval of a resolution for the naming or renaming of a street, city-owned property, or facility, the applicant(s) shall pay to the city clerk the fee established by the city council to cover the cost and expense to be incurred by such naming or renaming. Such payment shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. If the naming or renaming costs are not paid to the city clerk within 30 calendar days of the date of approval of the resolution, the naming or renaming shall not be effective for any purposes whatsoever and shall be deemed repealed as of the 31 st day after initial approval of the resolution. 
(Amd. of 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 58-206. - Denial of application. 
If a proposed naming or renaming is not approved by the city council, no application seeking to rename said street, city-owned property, or facility shall be accepted by the city clerk for a period of six calendar months from the date of the denial of the application. 
(Amd. of 5-16-2016) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-4(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-4(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-4(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-186 et seq.; occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 18-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Tax levied on telephone companies. 
(a)  Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues by such company from subscribers located within the city. The occupational license tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the first day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter, and shall be based upon the recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. 
(b)  The license tax charges assessed under this section shall be in addition to all other license or occupation taxes now in effect in the city against the existing telephone company, and shall be in addition to the existing concessions under which the existing telephone company furnishes certain telephone services to the city. 
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 19, 2001 repealed in its entirety § 62-31, special provisions for insurance companies, and enacted new §§ 62-31—62-36 as set out herein. Said former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, § 3-3-10. See Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 62-31. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by Section 2, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 11-19-01, § 1) 
Sec. 62-32. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 11-19-01, § 2) 
Sec. 62-33. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 62-31 of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-19-01, § 3) 
Sec. 62-34. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 62-31 of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-19-01, § 4) 
Sec. 62-35. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 62-31 and 62-32 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2002 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 11-19-01, § 5) 
Sec. 62-36. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the insurance commissioner of the State of Georgia within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Ord. of 11-19-01, § 6) 
Secs. 62-37—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 62-61. - Levied. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations at the rate of one-quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
Sec. 62-62. - Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the financial information provided in the return. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
Secs. 62-63—62-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 62-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including but not limited to any bed and breakfast house, lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint or any single family residence being leased or rented on at least a month to month basis. 
Monthly period means the calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or use or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in this city, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, and lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, section 1-2. 
Sec. 62-71. - Rate of levy. 
There is set and levied on each occupant of a guestroom of any hotel located within the corporate limits of this city a tax in the amount of eight percent of the rent for such occupancy. This tax is imposed per O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b) and shall become effective on September 1, 2016. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006; Res. of 6-20-2016(2)) 
Sec. 62-72. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the city to collect the tax on occupants imposed in section 62-71. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-73. - Exemption. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident, or upon rooms, lodgings or accommodations for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees traveling on official business. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-74. - Registration of operator. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register the business with the city clerk, on a form provided by the city clerk for such purpose. The required registration shall set forth the name which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of ownership by association or partnership, or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-75. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as provided in this article, the city clerk shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-76. - Due date and required report. 
All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, and amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-76. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied under this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. Laws 1951, page 360). 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-77. - Determination if no return made; unsatisfactory return. 
(a)  Estimate authorized. If any hotel operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator for the period for which the operator failed to file the return and such estimate shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Notice of determination. The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the hotel operator written notice of his determination as provided in this section. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when mailed by certified mail. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination made under this section shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction of a month, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion of the amount should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should expire last. 
(e)  Unsatisfactory return. The same rules shall apply if a return is made but is determined to be unsatisfactory by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-78. - Required records. 
Each hotel operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers for a period of at least three years, setting forth dates of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-79. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Authority of the clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the mayor and council may require. 
(c)  Examination of authorized records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-80. - Action for collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the mayor and council may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other incidental legal fees. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate showing no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this section, it may be offset by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 62-81. - Penalties. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Secs. 62-82—62-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AD VALOREM TAXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. 

Sec. 62-111. - Annual property tax returns. 
All real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city, which is subject to taxation by the city, shall be returned for taxation each year by the owners thereof as of the first day of January in the year in which such returns are made. All such returns shall show the fair market value of the property returned and shall be made under oath and shall be filed between the first day of January and the last day of March of each year. The returns of such property (including automatic returns where there are no changes of status of property) to the tax commissioner of Putnam County, Georgia, for Putnam County and State of Georgia ad valorem tax purposes shall be deemed to be an adequate return of such property for the city ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Res. of 5-21-2012, § 62.100.010) 
Sec. 62-112. - Compilation of tax digest. 
The compilation of a tax digest of all real property and personal property within the corporate limits of the city which is subject to taxation by the city, giving the fair market value and 40 percent assessed value of all such property for taxation as determined for the county and the state ad valorem tax purposes, shall be prepared by the county tax commissioner, as provided in the contract between the city and the county for assessment and collection of city taxes entered into pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. 
(Res. of 5-21-2012, § 62.100.020) 
Sec. 62-113. - Property not included in county ad valorem tax information. 
(a)  If any property subject to taxation by the city should not be reflected on information furnished to the city by the county, the board of tax assessors shall bring such fact to the attention of the appropriate authorities of the county so that such property may be entered on the county tax digest at its fair market value. 
(b)  Any property added to the county tax digest in accordance with the procedures aforesaid shall likewise be added to the city tax digest by the board of tax assessors so that the final tax digest shall include all property subject to taxation by the city. 
(Res. of 5-21-2012, § 62.100.030) 
Sec. 62-114. - Levy of taxes. 
When the board of tax assessors has completed the tax digest for the city as hereinbefore provided, the mayor and council shall proceed to levy sufficient taxes by millage or other means to satisfy all of the city's obligations on its bonded indebtedness and to produce such additional revenues as may be needed for municipal purposes, subject to the limitations provided by the laws and constitution of this state. All taxes levied by the mayor and council shall be levied on the assessed value of the taxable property of 40 percent of the fair market value thereof. 
(Res. of 5-21-2012, § 62.100.040) 
Sec. 62-115. - Tax notices—Time of payment. 
(a)  When the tax levy has thus been completed as aforesaid, the city shall notify the county tax commissioner of same, as provided in the contract between the city and the county for assessment and collection of city taxes entered into pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. 
(b)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be due and payable contemporaneously with the county ad valorem taxes. 
(Res. of 5-21-2012, § 62.100.050) 
Sec. 62-116. - Delinquent taxes—Execution—Interest—Penalties. 
(a)  All taxes not paid on or before the due date provided for at subsection 62-115(b) of this chapter are delinquent. 
(b)  All delinquent taxes shall be collected by the county tax commissioner, as provided in the contract for assessment and collection of city taxes entered into between the city and the county pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. 
(c)  The rate of interest and penalty to be imposed on delinquent taxes shall be as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Res. of 5-21-2012, § 62.100.060) 
Chapter 63 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 2, 2002 did not specifically amend the Code. At the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been added as new §§ 63-1—63-7. 

Sec. 63-1. - Purposes. 
These regulations are designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of Putnam County and the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunication towers (excluding HAM and other amateur radio towers, emergency service radio towers, etc;...) within Putnam County and the city so as to protect the welfare, safety, character and integrity of residential neighborhoods and the overall community; provide the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities to serve the residents of Putnam County and the city; protect the environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunication facilities; minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; to avoid adverse impacts to other communication carriers; avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout Putnam County and the city; maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures and co-location as a primary option rather than construction of single use towers; provide for location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned residential; and provide for the removal of all towers that are either abandoned or fail to meet the requirements set forth in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-2-02, § 1) 
Sec. 63-2. - Registration required. 
In order to provide the governing authority with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications providers who offer or provide wireless telecommunications services within Putnam County and the city; to assist the governing authority in enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County and the city Zoning Ordinance; to assist the governing authority in the collection and enforcement of any fees or charges that may be due Putnam County; and to assist the governing authority in monitoring compliance with local, state, and federal laws, all owners of telecommunications towers that offer or provide any telecommunications service within Putnam County, Georgia shall register annually with the Putnam County Planning and Engineering Department for a registration fee of $35.00, on forms to be provided by the Putnam County Planning and Engineering Department, which form shall include the following: 
(1)  The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registrant's information; 
(3)  A description of the telecommunications service the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses, or institutions within Putnam County; 
(4)  Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license, or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunication services or facilities within Putnam County; 
(5)  A narrative and map description of the applicant's existing wireless telecommunication facilities towers that are either within Putnam County and the city or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The governing authority may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this ordinance or with other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of Putnam County and the city; provided, however, that the governing authority is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. Any loss of use, increase in use, or change in use of existing antennas or towers must be reported at the time the change occurs; and 
(6)  Such other information as the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department, board of commissioners or city council of the city may reasonably require; 
(7)  Failure to register as required and to truthfully report all information required in the annual registration shall be an offense and a conviction for violation thereof shall be punished as provided in section 66-692 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances or section 10-6 of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-2-02, § 2) 
Sec. 63-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, terms shall have the meanings indicated below. 
Alternative tower structure: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, flag poles, light poles, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers (such alternative design structures are also known as "stealth design"). 
Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Co-location: The placement of antennas of two or more service providers on a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
Governing authority: The governing authority of Putnam County, Georgia or the City of Eatonton. 
Monopole tower: A telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without lattice-work and without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Nonresidential district: C-1 and C-2 Business District, SC Commercial, O/I Office Institutional, H-I and L-I Industrial as set forth in The Putnam County Code of Ordinances or the city zoning ordinance. 
Residential district: AG, R-1-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RM, MHP, AHD Airport Hazard District, LD Lake District as set forth in The Putnam County Code of Ordinances or the city zoning ordinance. 
Temporary telecommunications tower: Mobile wireless telecommunications towers mounted upon trailers, operated temporarily. Also known as "cellular on wheels." 
Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunications towers, alternative tower structures, and other similar structures. 
Tower height: The distance measured from base level of the tower to the highest point on the tower including antennas. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities: All buildings, cabinets, structures and facilities, including generating and switching stations, repeaters, antennas, transmitters, receivers, towers and all other buildings and structures relating to low-power mobile voice transmission, data transmission, video transmission, and radio transmission, or wireless transmission; accomplished by linking a wireless network of radio wave transmitting devices (including, but not limited to, wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, portable phones, pagers, mobile phones, or similar facilities) to the conventional ground-wired communications system (including by not limited to telephone lines, video and microwave transmission) through a series of short range, contiguous cells that are part of an evolving grid. 
(Ord. of 4-2-02, § 3) 
Sec 63-4. - Exclusions. 
The following will be exempt from these regulations: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna less than 50 feet in total height and owned and operated to receive only antenna designed for over the air reception of television broadcast signals, multi-channel, multipoint distribution services or direct broadcast satellite service; 
(2)  Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by Putnam County or the city and used for governmental or emergency purposes unless otherwise directed by the local governing authority and further provided that a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority of Putnam County or the city; 
(Ord. of 4-2-02, § 4) 
Sec. 63-5. - Placement by zoning district. 
Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be authorized in the zoning districts of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County and/or the city zoning ordinance as follows: 
(1)  Not permitted: Excepted as otherwise provided for in this subsection, telecommunications towers or antennas shall not be permitted in residential districts R-1, R-1-R, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RM, MHP, Special Commercial SC and Lake District L-D; the Airport Hazard District (AH); or towers along any corridors described below: 
a.  Properties that are located in downtown Eatonton and front the following streets: Jefferson Avenue, Marion Street, Oak Street, Sumter Street, Harris Street, Wayne Street, Magnolia Street, Oconee Street, Washington Street, Madison Avenue, Maple Avenue, and county roads Old Phoenix Road (within one mile of S.R. 44), Harmony Road (within one mile of S.R. 44), S.R. 44 (2 miles south of intersection of Harmony and Old Phoenix Roads north to the Greene County line unless the tower is a monopole (100 feet or less in height) at least 200 feet from the road way and separated from other towers at least 1200 feet in all directions. 
(2)  Conditional use: The placement and installation of all towers and antennas shall be conditional uses in the following zoning districts: 
a.  Towers and antennas in the industrial districts L-I and H-I; 
b.  Towers and antennas in agricultural district (AG); 
c.  Towers and antennas in C-1 and C-2; 
d.  Antennas attached to buildings in the C-1 and C-2 districts; provided, however, that antennas will add no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of the building and will be installed on any building in such a way as to minimize the visual impact of the installation from public streets to the absolute minimum; to minimize visual impacts of the antenna from habitable living areas of residential units which directly face the antenna within 100 feet horizontal distance; if back-up equipment is installed on any roof, the back-up facility shall be low lying and set back or otherwise located to minimize visibility, no building mounted antenna shall extend more than four horizontal feet from the building. 
e.  Monopole towers (or alternative tower structures of stealth design) and antennas no greater than one hundred (100) feet in total height along the protected corridors set forth in section 63-5, provided the tower and antenna is setback from said roadways at least 200 feet and is separated from all other towers at least 1200 feet in all directions. Antennas on existing structures will be subject to the conditions of the previous paragraph. Towers that are taller than prescribed in this paragraph may seek a conditional use, but there is no guarantee of an approval. 
f.  Temporary telecommunications tower for a period not to exceed six months in any nonresidential district provided height does not exceed district requirements and provided the temporary tower is setback from any protected corridors set forth is section 63-5 a distance of at least 200 feet from the right of way. A temporary permit is all that may be conditionally approved. 
(3)  Prohibitions. No new cell tower may be established if there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the search area that the new cell is to serve. A propagation study will be required to show proof that coverage objections cannot be met, should a carrier seek a variance to this provision. 
(4)  Preferred Location Sites. Any telecommunications towers being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication and any existing structure shall be a preferred location site for antenna where located within non residential districts; provided, however, that locations which meet these criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-2-02, § 5) 
Sec. 63-6. - General provisions. 
The following provisions are applicable to all towers and antennas regardless of location unless context limits application to towers only: 
(1)  Landscaping and maintenance: Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent properties. As such, a landscaping buffer consisting of evergreen material that is at least six feet in height, xeriscape tolerant, or irrigated, shall be planted on all sides of the site, Said landscaping plan shall be submitted to the planning and engineering department when the building permit is applied for. Said buffer shall be maintained and any loss of vegetation within the buffer shall be replaced by the applicant. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as tower sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may provide a sufficient buffer as determined by the appropriate authority (city/county). Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. The landscaping maintenance set forth herein shall be a required condition for approval of the annual occupation registration. No more than two parking spaces per facility shall be allowed, and a minimum ten foot wide turnaround drive with an all-weather surface shall be required if parking spaces are provided. 
(2)  Lighting: Towers and antennas shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area and views, or the tower shall use a dual lighting system consisting of a strobe light during the day and a slow flashing red light at night unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(3)  Removal of abandoned towers and antennas: After a continuous period of 12 months during which an antenna or tower is not used for its original purpose (including upgraded equipment), it shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department notifying the owner of such abandonment. The owner may request a three-month extension prior to the end of the twelve-month period. Said three-month extension may be granted administratively by the planning and engineering department if the request is received in writing by the planning and engineering department prior to the end of the twelve-month period. If a three-month grace period is granted, then a notice of abandonment will be given to the owner at the end of the three-month period. If any abandoned antenna or tower is not removed by the owner within said 90 days after notice of abandonment, then the governing authority may remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective for the tower until all users cease using the tower. Within 30 days of the owner's receipt of said notice of abandonment, any owner aggrieved by said notice of abandonment may file a written request to be heard before the governing authority. 
In addition, prior to the issuance of any tower construction permit, the applicant shall submit security for the costs of removal of the structure in an amount estimated by the applicant and approved by the building official as sufficient to cover the costs of removal. Such security may be in the form of: 
a.  An 18 month security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, payable to the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department; the security bond shall be renewed at the time the annual operating permit is renewed in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of removal at the time of renewal. Such renewal bond must be approved by the building official. 
b.  A deposit of cash with the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department or an escrow of any other instrument readily convertible to cash at face value with a financial institutional; and in case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are deposited, being subject to the approval of the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department. In the case of an escrow account, the applicant shall file with the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department an agreement between the financial institution and the applicant specifying the funds that are in the escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department and may not be used or pledged by the applicant as security in any other matter during that period and that, in the case of the applicant's failure to remove the tower and antennas in accordance with the terms set forth above, then the bank shall immediately make the funds available to the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department for use of completion of the removal of the structure. Said deposit of cash shall be kept current to cover the actual costs of removal. 
c.  A letter of credit from a financial institution in a form approved by the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department providing that the financial institution does guarantee funds in an amount equal to the aforementioned cost of removal and that in the event the applicant fails to remove the structure in accordance with the terms set forth above, the financial institution shall pay to the Putnam County Planning & Engineering Department immediately and without further action, such funds as necessary to finance the removal of the structure up to the amount specified in the letter of credit. Such amount shall be kept current to cover the actual costs of removal. 
(4)  Setbacks and separation: The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers. 
a.  Freestanding towers must be set back a distance equal to the total height of the tower from adjacent property lines, as measured radially from the from the base of tower to the property line of the subject property; and 
b.  Freestanding towers must also be set back from all single and two-family residential districts and historic districts or historic landmarks, a distance of the total height of the tower in all directions, as measured radially from the base of the tower to the district boundaries or landmark boundaries; and 
c.  Guy wires and accessory facilities associated with towers must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for buildings. 
d.  All lattice or guy-wired towers constructed after the effective date of this ordinance shall conform to the following minimum tower separation requirements as set out in chart form below. Antennas mounted on rooftops, monopole towers, or alternative tower structures shall be exempt from these minimum separation distances as set out in chart form below. Except in the Industrial district, monopole towers shall be separated from any other tower at least a distance equal to 1200 feet in all directions. In the Industrial District the separation distance between monopole towers shall equal the height of the tallest tower adjacent to the monopole tower. All freestanding towers which are alternative in design (stealth design) shall be separated from any other towers a minimum distance of the height of the tallest tower to which it is adjacent. 

 
(5)  Tower color: The color of the tower shall be either painted gray or left in its natural gray metallic state unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(6)  Insurance: Commercial general liability insurance shall be required with combined single limits of liability coverage of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, for bodily injury and property damages, with respect to the construction, use of the property, maintenance, operation, or other liabilities associated with a telecommunication tower. An adequately funded self-insurance program will be considered as a substitute for commercial insurance, if approved and subject to any condition imposed by the governing authority. 
(7)  Federal and state requirements: All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the federal government or state government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the compliance schedule mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna by the owner or by the local governing authority at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided above. 
(8)  Building codes and safety standards: To insure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a town shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the latest edition of the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. A professional engineer shall certify that all antennas, towers, and wireless telecommunications equipment are erected and installed so as to comply with said codes and standards. 
(9)  Security fence. All towers shall have a security fence of not less than six feet in height with anti-climbing devices on the fence. A sign no larger than 32 square feet in size shall be placed on the security fence or other outermost structural element of the telecommunication facility; which sign shall state the name and telephone number of a person responsible for the safety and maintenance of said facility and emergency contact numbers. No other signs, symbols, or advertisements shall be allowed on the security fence or on any monopole, tower, or antenna. Check with the office of Putnam County Planning and Engineering for sign permits and allowable sign sizes. 
(10)  Noise: The intensity level of sound from the wireless telecommunications facility including temporary generators used during power outages, measured at the property line of abutting property zoned for residential use shall not at any time exceed 70 decibels from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 55 decibels from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.; and abutting property zoned for nonresidential use the same shall not exceed 80 decibels at any time. 
(11)  Maintenance of telecommunications facilities: Towers must be properly and routinely maintained in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all included in submittal information. The owner shall provide the Putnam County Planning and Engineering Department with a certified copy of the engineer's inspection report, which includes, but is not limited to, the condition of the grounding system, the structural integrity of the facility, any damage incurred over the past year, the condition of the bolts, and a plan to correct any deficienceies. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communications towers as follows: Guyed tower at least once every two years; lattice or self-supported towers every three years; and monopoles every three to five years to insure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the Putnam County Planning and Engineering Department. If, upon inspection, the Putnam County Planning and Engineering Department concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days from the date of the mailing of such notice, to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, or the owner may submit an alternate schedule for approval within 30 days of notice. There is no guarantee an alternate schedule will be approved. The governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense, if the deadline is not met. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided. 
(12)  Fire prevention: All telecommunication facilities shall be designed and operated in such a manner so as to minimize the risk of igniting a fire or intensifying one that otherwise occurs. To this end all of the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunications facilities when determined necessary by the state fire marshal. Demonstration of compliance with requirements (1) through (5) shall be evidenced by a certificate signed by the state fire marshal on the building plans submitted. 
a.  At least one-hour fire-resistant interior sufraces shall be used in the construction of all building; 
b.  Monitored automatic fire extinguishing systems approved by the state fire marshal shall be installed in all equipment buildings and enclosures; 
c.  Rapid entry (KNOX) systems shall be installed as required by the state fire marshal; 
d.  Type and location of vegetation and other materials within ten feet of the facility and all new structures, including telecommunication towers, shall have review for fire safety purposes by the state fire marshal. Requirements established by the state fire marshal shall be followed; and 
e.  All tree trimmings and trash generated by construction of the facility shall be removed from the property and properly disposed of prior to building permit finalization or commencement of operation, whichever comes first. 
(13)  Co-location: Each telecommunications tower application shall be required by affidavit of the applicant to make a good faith effort to substantially demonstrate that no existing or planned towers within the applicant's search ring can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna/transmitter as described below: 
a.  The applicant shall contact the owners of all existing or planned towers within the applicant's search ring of a height roughly equal to or greater than the height necessary to accommodate the applicant's antenna. Such contact shall be by certified mail/return receipt requested. The applicant shall provide a list of all owners contacted, the date of such contact, the form and content of such contact, and a copy of the return receipt of the certified mail. 
b.  The applicant shall request the following information from each owner contacted: 
1.  Identification of the site by location, tax map and parcel number, existing uses on or adjacent to the site, and tower height; 
2.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the antenna proposed by the applicant without requiring structural changes be made to the tower. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
3.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the tower. If so, the owner shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required; 
4.  If structurally able, would shared use on such existing tower be precluded for reasons related to RF interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing tower or antenna(s) or the proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if at all; and 
5.  if shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing tower would charge for such shared use. 
6.  Co-location on an existing tower will only require a building permit, as the tower would have already obtained or conditional use. 
c.  Such request shall be made at least one month prior to the filing of an application for a building permit or conditional use. Responses to such request shall also be included. 
1.  Failure of a listed owner to respond shall not be relevant if a timely, good faith effort was made to obtain one. However, where an existing or planned tower is known to have capacity for additional antennas of the sort proposed, that application for a new tower shall not be complete until the response of such owner is filed, or in the case of a failure to respond, proof of the applicant's attempted contact with the correct owner to the correct address by certified mail/return receipt requested is filed by the applicant, or by way of a propagation study which shows the tower in technically flawed for the required coverage. 
2.  The governing authority shall maintain and provide, on request, records of responses from each owner. 
3.  Once an owner demonstrates an antenna of the sort proposed by the application cannot be accommodated on the owner's tower, the owner need not be contacted by future applicants for antennas of the sort proposed. 
d.  The governing authority may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee for shared use and the costs to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared tower are reasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. Shared use is not precluded simply based on fee and cost structures, unless found to be unreasonable by the local governing authority. 
e.  If the owner of an approved or pre-existing tower refuses to allow co-location, an affidavit shall be required that states the reason for the refusal. An unsubstantiated refusal by the owner of a tower to allow for co-location not supported by the required engineering evidence shall be a reason for the governing authority to refuse to renew the annual operating permit of said approved or pre-existing tower. It is understood that pricing is propriety and therefore can and will be considered a valid reason. Generally however, the only other reasons for revoking a tower permit would be for continued non-compliance of health, safety, and general welfare issues, relating to tower maintenance. 
In addition, evidence submitted by the applicant based on a report by a certified engineer to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall be required and shall be required and shall consist of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
5.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure are in excess of the cost of new tower development and location to the extent that co-location would impose a significant financial burden on the applicant; and 
6.  The applicant demonstrates there are other limiting factors that render existing towers or structures unsuitable. 
7.  If co-location on an existing tower or structure is not possible as set forth above, and a new tower is deemed appropriate, then the new tower must be constructed to allow co-location of antennas and the applicant must agree to accommodate the co-location of other antennas on the new tower, according to the following: For towers up to 100 feet in height, the tower and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least two users; for towers up to 125 feet in total height, the tower and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three users; and for towers more than 125 feet in height, the tower and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four users, unless the proposed tower is an alternative tower structure or stealth design. 
(14)  Any new antenna/provider shall ensure there will be no interference to other providers or customers in the area. If such occurs this may result in an immediate resention of the permit and service may be required to be terminated immediately. 
(Ord. of 4-2-02, § 6) 
Sec. 63-7. - Permits. 
(a)  Procedures for conditional use permits. The following provisions shall govern the application for and consideration of conditional use permits for towers and antennas: 
(1)  Conditional use permits shall be applied for and considered in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County and the city zoning ordinance. The fee for conditional use application is $500.00. Conditional use permits are not required for co-locations on an existing tower. When appropriate in achieving the purposes of the section, the governing authority may waive or reduce any requirements or standards during the conditional use process. Additional fees shall be charged to cover the actual cost to the local government of obtaining expert opinion and studies in reviewing applications for conditional use. The initial deposit for such additional fees shall cover a minimum of ten hours of an expert consultant's hourly rate to provide consultation to Putnam County. If the actual cost to the government is greater than the initial deposit, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and shall pay the bill in full prior to the hearing before the commission/council. If the actual cost to the government is less than the initial deposit, the actual cost will be deducted from the initial deposit and the remainder of the deposit will be refunded to the applicant within ten working days following the hearing before the commission/council. In addition to the requirements of this section, the staff shall provide to the zoning commission substantial evidence contained in a written record in support of the staff's written recommendation regarding the petition for consideration by the zoning commission at its regularly scheduled meeting. In addition to the requirements, the zoning commission's written recommendation to the commission/council shall be based on substantial evidence contained in a written record provided to the commission/council. 
(2)  Any engineering information, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, that an applicant submits shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer; however, information relative to radio frequency information by radio frequency engineers does not require certification. 
(3)  If an environmental assessment is required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), a copy of the assessment, as well as documentation of the FCC's subsequent approval thereof, must be submitted at the time of application. In addition, the applicant shall be required to submit documentation that the proposed wireless telecommunications facility complies with current Federal Communications Commission standards for radio frequency emissions, as adopted by the FCC at the time of application. Under no circumstances shall emissions cause, interference with other communication providers (cellular or non-cellular) and documentation shall be provided to this end. 
(4)  In considering a conditional use permit, the governing authority may impose conditions, to the extent necessary, to minimize any adverse effects the proposed tower or antenna may have on the adjoining properties if after considering all of the factors required, the governing authority decides conditions can reduce such adverse impacts upon adjoining properties to an acceptable and reasonable level. 
(5)  The governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit; provided, however, the governing authority may consider additional factors if the governing authority concludes that the goals of this section are better served thereby: 
a.  Height and setbacks of the proposed antenna and tower; 
b.  Proximity of the antenna and tower to other structures and zoning district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of the uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the antenna or tower, with particular reference to design features that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Availability of suitable existing antennas or towers or other structures for antenna co-location; 
h.  Proximity of the antenna or tower to other antennas or towers; 
i.  Impact of the tower and antenna upon scenic views and upon visual quality of surrounding areas; and 
j.  Such other and additional standards of review as set forth concerning conditional uses, of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County or the city zoning ordinance. 
(6)  Any decision to deny a conditional use permit shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. No decision to deny a conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna shall be based on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent such facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission's regulations concerning such emissions. 
(7)  Public notice for location of tower: In addition to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County and the city zoning ordinance, the following additional public noticing shall be provided for towers more than one hundred 150 feet in total height to be located within 1200 feet of any residential district: at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the required public hearing, the applicant shall cause to be floated from the proposed tower site a balloon of the standard size used in aerial line of sight surveys. Said balloon shall be floated to the height of the proposed tower for a period of three working days so that the visibility of the tower from locations surrounding the proposed tower site ban be viewed by the public prior to the required hearing. In addition, the required legal notices shall explain the presence of and the purpose of said balloon. The applicant shall send certified/return receipt letters to property owners within a distance of 1200 feet of the proposed tower as measured from the base of the tower to the subject property lines, the applicant will furnish receipts to the planning department. The owners of record shall be as shown on the Putnam County Tax Commissioners records. The planning department shall use the addressed and stamped envelopes to send a letter by regular mail giving notice of the public hearing and of the purpose of the balloon. After the three day period required herein, the balloon may be taken down permanently by the applicant. In addition, during the three day period the balloon shall be taken down every day at noon and refloated at sunrise. It is acknowledged, inclement weather may have an affect on this procedure. As such this procedure may require some mutually agreed alteration. It is required that one of the three days be a Saturday. 
The applicant, in addition to meeting the posting requirements for conditional use required by the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County or the city zoning ordinance shall also post the purpose of the balloon. Said sign shall be erected, in a conspicuous location, on or adjacent to the proposed tower site and be at least 4'×8' in size. 
(b)  Administrative procedures for tower and antenna building permit. A building permit issued by the building official is required in advanced of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any tower or antenna permitted. Additionally, only a building permit shall be required for a provider intending to co-locate on an existing tower. 
All telecommunication facilities which have received conditional use approval shall obtain a building permit and be required to submit to the Putnam County Planning and Engineering Department all applicable forms and documentation. Permit fees shall be subject to the Putnam County Planning & Engineering fee schedules. 
If an environmental assessment is required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), a copy of the assessment, as well as documentation of the FCC's subsequent approval thereof, must be submitted at the time of application. In addition, the applicant shall be required to submit documentation that the proposed wireless telecommunications facility complies with current Federal Communications Commission standards for radio frequency emissions, as adopted by the FCC at the time of application. 
(c)  Annual operating permit required. All wireless telecommunication facilities must obtain an operating permit on or before April 1 of each calendar year. The operating permit shall be issued by the planning and engineering department after written application to the planning and engineering department on a form to be supplied by the planning and engineering department. Any change in the five-year buildout plan must be submitted with the application for the operating permit. Within 90 days of receiving a complete application for a renewal permit, the planning and engineering department shall issue a written determination granting or denying the operating permit in whole or in part, based on the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this code section. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. 
No operating permit shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the permittee's performance have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective actions to be taken by the permittee has been approved by the planning and engineering department. 
The fee for the operating permit shall be one $35.00 annually for each operating permit issued pursuant to this section and shall be submitted with the application for the operating permit. The fee for the operating permit is intended to reimburse the local governing authority for costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting, and supervising performance under this code section. 
In order to provide the local governing authority with current information concerning nonconforming towers and in order to enforce the provisions of the Section that will apply to nonconforming towers upon adoption of this section, the owners of nonconforming towers shall be required to obtain an annual operating permit at the time the structure becomes nonconforming by adoption of this chapter. 
(d)  Pre-existing towers/non-conforming uses/structures. All pre-existing towers that do not satisfy the requirements of this ordinance shall be considered nonconforming uses and/or structures, according to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County or the city zoning ordinance. All nonconforming towers shall be subject to the landscaping, lighting, removal of abandoned towers and antennas, insurance, federal and state requirements, building codes and safety standards, noise, maintenance and co-location, at the time of adoption of this section. Any unsubstantiated refusal by an owner of a nonconforming tower to allow for co-location as set forth in section 63-6(5)e. shall be cause for revocation of the annual operating permit for the nonconforming tower. 
If an additional antenna is co-located upon a pre-existing tower after the adoption of this section, then requirements noted above shall be met as part of the permitting process; however, without violating any state and federal law the building inspector may waive certain requirements he deems overly burdensome or unnecessary for any additional antenna to be attached to an existing tower or simply to an existing tower, as is. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinance, for the purposes of this subsection, abandonment of the nonconforming use or structure shall occur if the tower is not used for telecommunication purposes at any time. Removal of such abandoned towers shall be required according to the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Expiration of permits. If substantial construction on the telecommunications facilities has not begun within 180 days of the granting of the conditional use, then a conditional use permit shall expire, and the applicant shall be required to resubmit an application for conditional use based on the latest technical and development requirements in the zoning ordinance. If substantial construction on the telecommunications facilities has not begun within 180 days of issuance of building permit, then the building permit shall expire, and the applicant shall be required to resubmit an application based on the latest technical and development requirements in the zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Coordination with federal law. Whenever the governing authority finds that the application of this ordinance would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent person wireless telecommunication services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless telecommunication services, a conditional use permit waiving any of the provisions of this chapter may be granted. Any decision by the local governing authority to deny a request pursuant to this subsection shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(g)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any official of Putnam County/City of Eatonton or affected by any decision of a zoning official related to the issuance, denial, revocation, or suspension of any permit governed by this section may request a hearing in writing within 30 days of the date of said decision. Appeals from any decision by the local governing authority (board of commissioners/city council) shall be made to the Superior Court within 30 days of the decision. 
Appeal of decision of building official shall be heard by the zoning board. 
Appeal of decision of zoning board shall be heard by the board of commissioners/city council. 
Appeal of decision by board of commissioners/city council shall be heard by Superior Court. 
(Ord. of 4-2-02, § 7) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; vehicles for hire, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD 

Sec. 66-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. Title 40, Chapter 6 (O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1- et seq.), known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city, with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-1; Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 66-32. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
On special occasions when traffic may be extraordinarily heavy, the public safety department may make temporary rules for the regulation of traffic in the congested district, and it shall be unlawful for any person, after being warned of such temporary rules by the police department, to refuse to comply therewith. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
State Law reference— Obedience to authorized persons directing traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-2. 
Sec. 66-33. - Vehicles not to obstruct traffic. 
No vehicle shall occupy any street so as to obstruct traffic. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-203; obstructing intersections, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-205. 
Sec. 66-34. - Skateboards. 
(a)  Where prohibited. Skateboarding shall be prohibited on any roadway or sidewalk: 
(1)  Where the volume or speed of the vehicular traffic or the width of the roadway renders the roadway unsafe or unsuitable for skateboarding as determined by the department of public safety. 
(2)  In any portion of the city specifically designated by the zoning ordinance of the city as a business district, be it B neighborhood business district, CBD central business district, C highway commercial district or C-PUD commercial planned unit development district, unless the owner of such zoned property authorizes the use thereof for skateboarders and has erected a sign thereon indicating the authorization. 
(3)  In any park or other public area which has not specifically been designated as an area where the use of skateboards or similar instruments are allowed. 
(b)  Yield right-of-way. Notwithstanding their status as pedestrians, skateboard operators on sidewalks and/or streets shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicular and to all other pedestrian (nonskateboard) traffic upon the sidewalk and/or street. 
(c)  Rights and duties. Skateboard operators on roadways and sidewalks in authorized areas shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to nonskateboard pedestrians. 
(d)  Limitation on operation. No more than one person shall operate or ride on a skateboard at one time. 
(e)  Authority to establish written regulations. The chief of police or his designee is authorized to establish all written regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 66-35. - Designation of streets, parts of streets on which truck traffic prohibited; signs required. 
When appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof, all trucks are hereby prohibited upon the streets or parts of streets so designated; however, such restriction shall not apply to trucks making local deliveries within the areas so posted. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 66-36. - Truck routes designated; use regulated. 
(a)  Truck routes within the city are hereby designated as follows: 
Business 441/129 Highway, from city limit to the city limit; 
Ga. 16/44, from city limit to the city limit; 
Old Godfrey Highway, from N. Jefferson to city limit; 
Imperial Mill Road from N. Jefferson Avenue to the 441/129 Bypass; 
The U.S 441/129 Eatonton Bypass. 
(b)  All trucks other than trucks making local deliveries within the city shall use the streets designated in this section and no others. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 66-37. - Vehicles weighing more than eight thousand pounds—Authorized routes through city designated. 
All motor vehicles which, together with load, weigh in excess of 8,000 pounds, passing through, entering or leaving the city shall be restricted to the following streets and parts of streets, subject to the exceptions set out in section 66-38: 
Oak Street/Jefferson Avenue/Madison Highway; 
W. Marion Street; 
Sumter Street; 
Old Godfrey Highway; 
Imperial Mill Road; 
The U.S. 441/129 Bypass. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 66-38. - Same—Duties of operator; exceptions. 
Each motor vehicle, falling within the provisions of section 66-37, entering the city by any other road or street than those set out in section 66-36 shall proceed by the shortest route to the nearest street or part of street set out in section 66-36 and shall proceed thence along the streets or parts of streets named through the city subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Vehicles based within city. Motor vehicles having a base within the corporate limits may proceed to such base by the shortest route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 66-33 and shall likewise return to such streets or parts of streets by the shortest route. 
(2)  Servicing vehicle. Motor vehicles may leave the streets and parts of streets set out in section 66-36 for the purpose of purchasing gasoline and oil or securing repairs, but in such case they shall be permitted only upon such streets and parts of streets as are upon the most direct and shortest route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 66-36. 
(3)  Loading, unloading. Motor vehicles may leave the streets and parts of streets set out in section 66-36 for the purpose of making deliveries consigned to points upon other streets, roads and alleys in the city and for the further purpose of receiving goods or other property for transportation from points upon other roads, streets and alleys within the corporate limits, but shall proceed to such points by the shortest direct route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 66-36 and shall return by the same route. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 66-39. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2006) 
Secs. 66-40—66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 66-61. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning local authorities' power to alter lawful speed limits, the following ordinance regulating speed limits within the city is adopted: Be it ordained by the board of council that the following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
ON-SYSTEM 
State Route 16, from the west city limit (M.L. 6.62) 0.29 mile west of County Road 203 to a point 0.16 mile west of County Road 41 (M.L. 7.18) a distance of 0.56 mile to be zoned 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 16, from a point 0.16 mile west of County Road 41 (M.L. 7.18) to a point 0.09 mile east of County Road 41 (M.L. 7.43) a distance of 0.25 mile to be zoned 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 16, from a point 0.09 mile east of County Road 41 (M.L. 7.43) to Washington Street (M.L. 9.01) a distance of 1.58 miles to be zoned 35 miles per hour. 
State Route 16, from Washington Street (M.L. 9.01) to Putnam Avenue (M.L. 9.48) a distance of 0.47 mile to be zoned 25 miles per hour. 
State Route 16, from Putnam Avenue (M.L. 9.48) to a point 0.20 mile east of Grand Avenue (M.L. 9.76) a distance of 0.28 mile to be zoned 35 miles per hour. 
State Route 16, from a point 0.20 mile east of Grand Avenue (M.L. 9.76) to County Road 142 (M.L. 10.92) a distance of 1.16 miles to be zoned 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 16, school zone, from a point 0.19 mile west of State Route 44 (M.L. 10.26) to a point 0.19 mile east of State Route 44 (M.L. 10.64) a distance of 0.38 mile to be zoned 25 miles per hour from 7:30—8:30 a.m. and from 3:00—4:00 p.m. on school days only. 
State Route 16, from County Road 142 (M.L. 10.92) to the city limit (M.L. 11.79) a distance of 0.87 mile to be zoned 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from the south city limits (M.L. 9.28) 0.29 mile north of County Road 178, to State Route 44 (M.L. 10.01) a distance of 0.73 mile to be zoned 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from State Route 44 (M.L. 10.01) to County Road 212 (M.L. 10.97) a distance of 0.96 mile to be zoned 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from County Road 212 (M.L. 10.97) to State Route 16 (M.L. 12.11) a distance of 1.14 miles to be zoned 35 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from M.L. 12.11 to M.L. 12.18 0.07 mile common with State Route 16 to be zoned 25 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from State Route 16 (M.L. 12.18) to East Wayne Street (M.L. 12.37) a distance of 0.19 mile to be zoned 25 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from East Wayne Street (M.L. 12.37) to Imperial Milis Road (M.L. 12.76) a distance of 0.39 mile to be zoned 35 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from Imperial Mills Road (M.L. 12.76) to Sherwood Avenue (M.L. 13.93) a distance of 1.17 miles to be zoned 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 24, from Sherwood Avenue (M.L. 13.93) to the north city limit (M.L. 14.79) 0.05 mile south of County Road 174 a distance of 0.86 mile to be zoned 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 44, from the south city limit (M.L. 8.53) to 0.74 mile south of State Route 24 to a point 0.49 mile south of State Route 24 (M.L. 8.78) a distance of 0.25 mile to be zoned 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 44, from a point 0.49 mile south of State Route 24 (M.L. 8.78) to State Route 24 (M.L. 9.27) a distance of 0.49 mile to be zoned 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 44, from State Route 16 (M.L. 12.57) to County Road 142 (M.L. 13.01) a distance of 0.44 mile to be zoned 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 44, from County Road 142 (M.L. 13.01) to the city limits (M.L. 13.87) a distance of 0.86 mile to be zoned 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 826 (Eatonton By-Pass), from State Route 24 (M.L. 0.00) to State Route 24 (M.L. 5.10) a distance of 5.10 miles to be zoned 55 miles per hour. 
(b)  Signs shall be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1993) 
Secs. 66-62—66-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STANDING, STOPPING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 6, 2006, supplied provisions to be added to the Code as §§ 58-40—58-48. At the discretion of the editor, with the concurrence of the city, these provisions have been redesignated and included as §§ 66-81—66-90 to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 66-81. - Parking, stopping so as to obstruct another vehicle. 
No vehicle shall be parked or stopped in such a position as to prevent the convenient movement of another vehicle. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-82. - Manner of parking regulated. 
All vehicles parking upon the streets of the city shall occupy parking spaces marked out by the public safety department in the manner provided. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
State Law reference— How vehicles to be parked, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200. 
Sec. 66-83. - Specific streets where parking is prohibited. 
Parking is prohibited at all times upon the following streets or parts of streets, unless otherwise indicated: 
State Route 16, from city limit sign on the east to the city limit sign on the west unless otherwise provided for by sign. 
U.S. Highway 129, from city limit sign on the south to the city limit sign on the north unless otherwise provided by sign. 
U.S. Highway 441, from city limit sign on the south to the city limit sign on the north unless otherwise provided by sign. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-84. - Two-hour parking; designation of locations. 
Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on all days except Sunday, and when appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave parked an automobile or other vehicle for longer than two hours upon any of the streets or parts of streets so designated by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-85. - Parking time limit in alleys. 
No vehicle of any description shall be left standing longer than one-half hour in any alley of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-86. - Receipt, discharge of passengers. 
No vehicle shall take on or discharge passengers except at the right-hand curb. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-87. - Truck parking restricted. 
(a)  Parking in business district. No truck larger than one-half ton shall park in other than parallel parking spaces in the business district. No truck loaded with livestock shall be parked for longer than five minutes in the business district. 
(b)  Overnight parking. No truck larger than one-half ton shall be left parked overnight on any street of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-88. - Trucks loading, unloading at business houses; hours. 
All trucks loading or unloading at business houses shall use the back entrance to business houses if a back entrance is available and shall not be permitted to unload or load in front between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-89. - Garages parking, working on vehicles. 
Garages shall not leave motor vehicles parked in the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way or easements for the purpose of repairing the vehicles, except in case of emergency repairs, and all work to be done on such vehicles must be carried on upon the premises of the person operating such garage. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-90. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: 
(1)  The parking area is identified by at least one sign as specified in this subsection, and if the parking area contains more than 150 parking spaces, then by at least one such sign for every 150 parking spaces, each such sign containing the following information in easy to read printing: 
a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; 
b.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customers' use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
c.  Meeting the requirements of an emergency situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; 
d.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(b)  A person who commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provide in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Secs. 66-91—66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DAMAGE TO VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 6, 2006, supplied provision to be added to the Code as § 58-59. At the discretion of the editor, with the concurrence of the city, these provisions have been redesignated and included as § 58-101 to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 66-101. - City not responsible for damage to vehicles on city streets. 
No payment, fee, relief of debt or other settlement shall be made to any person for claims of damage to a vehicle arising from driving or parking on city streets or parking lots because of potholes, manholes, valves, curbs, gutters, storm drains, gravel or other objects thrown from the street or dropped from a vehicle or damage from the acts of others including vehicular accidents, vandalism, burglary or any act of God, civil disturbance, civil or military authority, war, court order or acts of public enemy except as provided in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; damage to property of public utilities, § 46-71 et seq.; planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Connection, permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect his premises to any city utility system until he shall have applied for and received a permit, furnishing any information required by the city, and paid all fees and charges imposed by the city incident to such connection. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-1) 
Sec. 70-2. - Illegal use of systems. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, use or consume water, gas or other utility service furnished by the city, unless and until the person shall become a customer of the city, and is authorized to connect with the mains or lines of the city in the manner and under the regulations prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-2) 
Sec. 70-3. - Charges, fees, rates and deposits for utility services. 
(a)  The charges, fees, rates and deposits for all utility services, including water, sewer and gas shall be fixed from time to time by the board of council. A schedule of such utility fees, charges, rates and deposits shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  All utility charges, fees and rates shall be subject to a 15 percent penalty if not paid within 15 days of billing. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-3) 
Sec. 70-4. - Free service prohibited. 
No free service shall be furnished at any time from the water and sewerage system. No customer shall be connected to the system or be served by the city without a proper meter having been installed first. All services shall be furnished in accordance with rates established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or other public body. No customer shall be connected to the system without first paying a connection fee which shall not be less than the actual cost of such connection. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-4) 
Sec. 70-5. - Meters required. 
No person shall be furnished water or gas by the city, for any purpose, unless the person shall have a meter as prescribed by the city for the purpose of measuring the quantity of water or gas used by such person. All meters shall be of the make and kind prescribed by the city and shall be connected at the place and in the manner prescribed by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-5) 
Sec. 70-6. - Permission to install meter; placement. 
No person shall install or cause to be installed any city utility meter in any home or business establishment in the city without first obtaining the permission of the city. In all new construction, or where the old building is being remodeled, the meter shall be placed on the outside of the home or building at a place designated by the city so such meter will be readily accessible to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-6) 
Sec. 70-7. - Notice and permission to disconnect meters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a customer or user of water or gas supplied by the city through meters, to disconnect, change or otherwise tamper with those meters, unless the person shall have first received permission from the city to remove, disconnect or change the meter. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-7) 
Sec. 70-8. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When utility service is discontinued and all bills are paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water or gas supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; and 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood or unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-8) 
Sec. 70-9. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. The claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this article. The consumer may pay the bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee, as fixed from time to time by the board of council; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly, or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-9) 
Sec. 70-10. - Disconnection of utility service for nonpayment; reconnection; late charge. 
(Reserved) 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-10) 
Sec. 70-11. - Execution for delinquent service charges. 
Whenever there shall be due to the city any charges for utility service the city clerk may issue an execution against the person, in the form prescribed for execution for taxes, returnable to the next regular meeting of the city council. The execution shall be satisfied in the same manner and subject to the same defenses as execution for city taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-11) 
Sec. 70-12. - Access to premises. 
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters or for any other purpose in connection with the utility service and its facilities. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-12) 
Sec. 70-13. - Tampering with facilities. 
Any person who shall tamper with, injure or damage any hydrant, line, valve, meter, pipe, reservoir, curb box, machinery or anything else used in connection with any utility system of the city, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as prescribed by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-13) 
Sec. 70-14. - Connection to water required before occupying any building. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any building of any kind unless the building is connected to the water system of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-14) 
Sec. 70-15. - Only authorized persons to use water from public hydrants. 
No person, except authorized city officers and employees, shall take water from any public hydrant, plug, street washer or drain cock. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-15) 
Sec. 70-16. - Water shortage emergency; proclamation. 
In the event of a shortage of water in the city storage tanks and cisterns, or a shortage of water available for filtration and flow into the city water system, whether from dry weather, breakdown in pumping or water system facilities or from abnormal use during fire or other emergencies, it shall be the duty of the board of council, any member of the board of council or their designee to declare an emergency, and to issue and cause suitable proclamation or other notice to be published or broadcast to the citizens of the city, informing them of such emergency. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-16) 
Sec. 70-17. - Uses permitted or prohibited. 
If an emergency is declared or proclaimed, it shall be unlawful for any water customer or other person to draw or cause to be drawn from the water system of the city, or use any water in any amount for any purpose except for cooking, sanitation and health uses, or other essential uses necessary to avoid hazard or hardship to the health and welfare of the people. The following uses shall be considered nonessential and shall be unlawful during a declared emergency: watering lawns, shrubbery and flowers; washing cars, sidewalks, floors and gardens; nonessential air conditioning; building; and such other uses as may be specifically named in such declaration or proclamation. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-17) 
Sec. 70-18. - Penalty for violation of proclamation. 
Any person violating the provisions of sections 70-16 and 70-17, or the terms of any proclamation issued under such sections, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. In addition, upon the discovery of such violation, it shall be the duty of the head of the water department to immediately cut off the customer whose water is being used unlawfully. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-18) 
Sec. 70-19. - Gas emergencies; aid to neighboring city. 
If the city is called upon to furnish supplies, equipment, machinery and personnel to a neighboring city in distress, the board of council or in their absence, the head of the gas department, shall be authorized to furnish the requested equipment, machinery, supplies and personnel in their discretion, without further approval. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-19) 
Sec. 70-20. - Participation in emergency procedure plan. 
The city does agree to participate in the emergency procedure plan as sponsored by the gas section of the state municipal association and authorizes the board of council to participate in such plan on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-20) 
Sec. 70-21. - Liability insurance. 
The board of council is authorized to contact the liability insurance carrier of the city and to work out the necessary details to be sure that the liability insurance coverage will be in force on any equipment and machinery which may be furnished under this plan by the city. They are further requested to take such other action as is necessary to protect any key personnel who may be furnished to a requesting city under the emergency plan. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-21) 
Secs. 70-22—70-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 70-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Industrial waste means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary waste. 
May is permissive. (See definition of Shall in this section.) 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 7 . 
Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and watercarried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community; the preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Shall is mandatory. (See the definition of May in this section.) 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of wastewater facilities of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as "nonfilterable residue." 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. This term is sometimes used as a synonym with waste treatment plant or water pollution control plant. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-57. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, shall be required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 70-58. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 70-57, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information, as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee, as fixed from time to time by the board of council, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within eight hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  When a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tank, cesspool and similar private wastewater disposal facility shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-3) 
Sec. 70-59. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee, as fixed from time to time by the board of council, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection set forth in this subsection. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-4) 
Sec. 70-60. - Damage to system. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-5) 
Sec. 70-61. - Discharge of stormwater and surface water prohibited. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which may be polluted at times, and which may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-21) 
Sec. 70-62. - Use of storm sewers. 
Stormwater other than that exempted under section 70-61, and all other unpolluted drainage, shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers, storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-22) 
Sec. 70-63. - Substances prohibited as discharges. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant; 
(3)  Waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities, or of such size, capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-23) 
Sec. 70-64. - Limitations on certain substances. 
The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems in concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations in this section, if in his opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the objectives of this section. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent and/or in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-24) 
Sec. 70-65. - Authority of superintendent. 
Should waters or wastes be discharged, or proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, where such waters contain substances or possess the characteristics prohibited by this article, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Terminate admission of prohibited waters or wastes into the public sewers whenever discovered to exist; 
(2)  Refuse proposed admission of prohibited waters or wastes into the public sewers; 
(3)  Require pretreatment to a permissible condition of any waters or wastes as a condition to acceptance into the public sewers; 
(4)  Require control over the quantities and rates of waters or wastes entering the public sewers; and/or 
(5)  Require payment to cover the added capital and operating costs not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, to cover the added cost of handling and treating otherwise prohibited wastes. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-25) 
Sec. 70-66. - Pretreatment or flow equalization facilities. 
(a)  Where treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense. 
(b)  Where pretreatment or control over quantities of wastes is required, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(c)  Any approval by the superintendent of a type, kind or capacity of an installation shall not relieve a person of the responsibility of revamping, enlarging or otherwise modifying such installation to accomplish an intended purpose; nor shall any fixed or verbal agreement as to limits of constituents or volumes of waters or wastes be considered as final approval for continuing operation. These limits will be subject to constant study and change as considered necessary to serve their intended purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-26) 
Sec. 70-67. - Facilities for sampling of wastes. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-27) 
Sec. 70-68. - Screen provided at point of connection. 
The owner of any operation producing industrial wastes which enter public sewers shall install a final one-half-inch mesh screen in their effluent waste system immediately prior to entrance into the public sewer. There shall be no bypass around the screen. The screen shall be locked in place and sealed with a city seal. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-28) 
Sec. 70-69. - Sampling standards and methods. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-29) 
Sec. 70-70. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-30) 
Sec. 70-71. - Accidental spills. 
In the event of an accidental spill or unavoidable loss to the drains of any deleterious material, the industry concerned shall promptly notify the superintendent of the nature of the spill, the quantity and time of occurrence. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-31) 
Sec. 70-72. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent, or other duly authorized employee of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, pertinent to discharge to the community system, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent, or other duly authorized employee of the city, is authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city to enforce the provisions of this article, and in the performance of this duty, the appropriate city personnel shall have access to enter any property at any reasonable time as may be necessary for inspection and enforcement. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-41) 
Sec. 70-73. - Violation; notice and penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this article, except section 70-60, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provision of section 70-60, or who shall continue any violation beyond the applicable time limit, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-42) 
Secs. 70-74—70-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL—GENERAL POLICY 

Sec. 70-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is: 
(a)  To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) or the customer's private water system(s) such contaminates or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system; and 
(b)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and industrial piping systems; and 
(c)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 70-101. - Responsibility. 
The water superintendent shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said water superintendent, an approved backflow-prevention assembly is required (at the customer's water service connection; or within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water system, the water superintendent or his/her designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow-prevention assembly(s) at such location(s) on his/her premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(s) at his/her own expense; and, failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested, and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 70-102. - Definitions. 
Approved. Accepted by the authority responsibility as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this article or as suitable for the proposed use. 
Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any other natural source(s), such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, and so forth; used waters; or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted, or they may have been objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution system as a result of a cross-connection. 
Backflow preventer. An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. 
(1)  Air gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical, physical separations must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, never less than one inch (25 mm). 
(2)  Reduced-pressured backflow-prevention assembly. The approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly consists of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units are located between two tightly closing resilient-seated shut-off valves as an assembly and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly. The approved double check valve assembly consists of two internally loaded check valves, either spring-loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between two tightly closing resilient-seated shut-off valves and fittings with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (that is, a pollutant). 
Backpressure. A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow. 
Backsiphonage. Backflow is caused by negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping. 
Contamination. An impairment of potable water supply by the introduction or admission of any foreign substance that degrades the quality and creates a health hazard. 
Cross-connection. A connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any other environment containing other substances in a manner that, under any circumstances would allow such substances to enter the potable water system. Other substances may be gases, liquids, or solids, such as chemicals, waste products, steam, water from other sources (potable or nonpotable), or any matter that may change the color or add odor to the water. 
Cross-connection-controlled. A connection between a potable water system and a nonpotaable water system with an approved backflow-prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Cross-connection controlled by containment. The installation of an approved backflow-prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises, where it is physically and economically unfeasible to find and permanently find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow-prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections that cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection. 
Hazard, degree of. The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
(1)  Hazard—health. a cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that could, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
(2)  Hazard—plumbing. A plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or an approved backflow-prevention assembly. 
(3)  Hazard—non-health. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the potable water supply. 
(4)  Hazard—system. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination that would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Industrial-fluids system. Any system containing a fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration, such as would constitute a health system, pollution or plumbing hazard, if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower; and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, and so forth; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes for fire-fighting purposes. 
Pollution. The presence of any foreign substance in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a non-health hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Service connection. The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, that is, where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow-prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Water commissioner or health official. The water superintendent in charge of the water department of the city is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Water—potable. Water that is safe for human consumption as described by the public health authority having jurisdiction. 
Water—nonpotable. Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality. 
Water—used. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after if has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 70-103. - Requirements. 
(a)  Water system. 
(1)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the utility system and the customer system. 
(2)  The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
(3)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
(4)  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
(5)  The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system that are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(b)  Policy. 
(1)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state/provincial laws and regulations and this article. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow-prevention assembly required by this article is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow-prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such condition or defects are corrected. 
(2)  The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the water superintendent to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the water superintendent shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state/provincial and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(3)  An approved backflow-prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
a.  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be safe bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the water superintendent, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the decree of hazard. 
b.  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substances are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system that have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
c.  In the case of premises having (1) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line. 
(4)  The type of protective assembly required under subsections (3)a through (3)c above shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows: 
a.  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (3)a above and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principal backflow-prevention assembly. 
b.  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
c.  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants. 
d.  In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly at the service connection. 
e.  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly on each service to the premise. 
f.  In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the water superintendent, an undue health threat is posed because of the presence of extremely toxic substances, the water superintendent may require an air gap at the service connection to protect the public water system. This requirement will be at the discretion of the water superintendent and is dependent on the degree of hazard. 
(5)  Any backflow-prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the water superintendent. The term approved backflow-prevention assembly shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association titled ANSI/AWWA C510-89—Standard for Double Check Value Backflow-Prevention Assembly, and AWWA C511-89—Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow-Prevention Assembly, and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCCHR) of the University of Southern California established by "Specification of Backflow-Prevention Assemblies", Sec. 10 of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control. 
Said AWWA and FCCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the water superintendent. Final approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCCHR specification. 
The following testing laboratory has bee qualified by the water superintendent to test and certify backflow preventers: Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA 90089. 
Testing laboratories, other than the laboratory listed above, will be added to an approved list as they are qualified that may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified by the water superintendent. 
Backflow preventers that may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of approved backflow-prevention assemblies may be used without further testing or qualification. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow-prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least one per year. In those instances where the water superintendent deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the assembly manufacturer's representative, water department personnel, or by a certified tester approved by the water superintendent. It shall be the duty of the water superintendent to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer-user shall notify the water superintendent in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that the customer-user may witness the tests if so desired. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and made available to the water superintendent. 
(7)  All presently installed backflow-prevention assemblies that do not meet the requirements of this section but where approved assemblies for the purpose described herein at the time of installation and that have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance under subsection (6) above, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the water superintendent is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the water superintendent finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow-prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord of 2-21-2005, § 3) 
Secs. 70-104—70-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FATS OILS AND GREASE (FOG) 

Sec. 70-110. - Purpose, short title and definitions. 
(1)  Purpose and short title. The short title of this article is the Fats Oils and Grease Ordinance (FOG). The purpose of this article is to control discharges into the public sewerage collection system and wastewater treatment plant that interfere with the operations of the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines, interfere with normal operation of pumps and their controls, and contribute waste of a strength or form that either causes treatment difficulties or is beyond the treatment capability of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(2)  Definitions. 
Food service facilities. Those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. 
Also included are [infrared] heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. These facilities include restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants, or any other sewer users as determined by the Eatonton Putnam Water and Sewer Authority who discharge applicable waste. 
Grease. Material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease (FOG) from animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil, and, grease shall be deemed as grease by definition. Grease does not include petroleum based products. 
Grease trap. A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
Oil/water separator. An approved and industry standard system that is specifically designed and manufactured to separate oil from water. The system shall allow the oil to be collected and removed on a regular basis as to prevent it from being discharged into the wastewater collection system. Only oil/water separators manufactured for that specific operation will be approved. Adequate support literature from the manufacturer will be required so as to allow a proper review by the EPWSA personnel. 
User. Any person or establishment including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the Eatonton Putnam Water and Sewer Authority's wastewater collection or treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
(Res. of 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 70-111. - Control plan for FOG and food waste. 
(a)  Any new construction, renovation, or expansion of food service facilities shall be required to submit to EPWSA a FOG and food waste control plan that will effectively control the discharge of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system. 
(b)  Any existing food service facilities shall also be required to submit a FOG and food waste control plan that will effectively control the discharge of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system. Existing facilities shall not be exempt from the requirements of this article. There will be no "Grandfathering". 
(c)  General control criteria. 
(1)  Installation requirements. All existing, proposed, or newly remodeled Food service facilities inside the EPWSA wastewater service area shall be required to install, at the user's expense an approved, properly operated and maintained grease trap. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer flows. Sanitary sewer flows from toilets, urinals, lavatories, etc. shall not be discharged into the grease trap. These flows shall be conveyed separately to the sanitary sewer service lateral. 
(3)  Floor drains. Only floor drains which discharge or have the potential to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease trap. 
(4)  Garbage grinders/disposers. It is recommended that solid food waste products be disposed of through normal solid waste/garbage disposal means. If a grinder/disposal is used it must be connected to the grease trap. The use of grinders is discouraged since it decreases the operational capacity of the grease trap and will require an increased pumping frequency to ensure continuous and effective operation. 
(5)  Dishwashers. Commercial dishwashers must be connected to the grease trap. Dishwashers discharge soap and hot water which can melt grease and allow it to pass through an undersized grease trap. Traps must be sized accordingly to allow enough detention time to allow water to cool and grease to solidify and float to the top of the trap. 
(6)  Location. Grease trap shall be installed outside the building upstream from the sanitary sewer service lateral connection. This will allow easy access for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at any time. A grease trap may not be installed inside any part of a building without written approval by the EPWSA. 
(7)  Pass through limits. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from grease trap to exceed 100 MgPL (milligrams per liter) as identified by EPA method 413. 
(Res. of 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 70-112. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Construction. Grease traps shall be constructed in accordance with EPWSA's standards and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. All grease removal devises or technologies shall be subject to the written approval of the EPWSA. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology. 
(b)  Access. Access to grease traps shall be available at all times, to allow for their maintenance and inspection. Access to trap shall be provided by two manholes (one on each compartment) terminating at finished grade with cast iron frame and cover. 
(c)  Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the grease trap shall be designed to have adequate load- bearing capacity. (Example: vehicular traffic in driving or parking areas) 
(d)  Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to a grease trap shall enter only through the inlet pipe of the trap. Each grease trap shall have only one inlet and one outlet pipe. 
(e)  Grease trap sizing. The required size of the grease trap shall be calculated using EPA-2 model. All grease traps shall have a capacity of not less than 1,000 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. If the calculated capacity exceeds 3,000 gallons, multiple units plumbed in series shall be installed. 
(Res. of 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 70-113. - Grease trap maintenance. 
(a)  Cleaning/pumping. The user at the user's expense shall maintain all grease traps to assure proper operation and efficiency and maintain compliance with the EPWSA's pass through limits. 
Maintenance of grease trap shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludge and solids. This work shall be performed by a qualified and licensed hauler. 
Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the trap from which it was removed or any other grease trap, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is prohibited. This service shall also include a thorough inspection of the trap and its components. Any needed repairs shall be noted. 
Repairs shall be made at user's expense. 
(b)  Cleaning/pumping frequency. The grease trap must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every four months, or more frequently, as determined by the EPWSA, as needed to prevent carryover of grease into the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Disposal. All waste removed from each grease trap must be disposed of at a facility approved to receive such waste in accordance with the provisions of this program. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any private or public portion of the EPWSA's sanitary sewer collection system. All pumpage from grease traps must be tracked by a manifest, which confirms pumping, hauling, and disposal of waste. The customer must obtain and retain a copy of the original manifest from the hauler. 
(d)  Maintenance log. A grease trap cleaning/maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous 24 months shall be maintained by each food service facility. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler, and disposal site and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection. Said log shall be made available to EPWSA personnel upon request. 
(e)  Submittal of records. Each user shall submit all cleaning and maintenance records to the EPWSA. The maintenance records shall include the following information: 
(1)  Facility name, address, contact person, and phone number. 
(2)  Company name, address, phone number, and contact name of person responsible for performing the maintenance, cleaning, pumping, or repair of grease trap. 
(3)  Types of maintenance performed. 
(4)  Dates maintenance was performed. 
(5)  Date of next scheduled maintenance. 
(6)  Copies of manifests. 
The user shall be required to submit maintenance records to the EPWSA on a biannual basis (twice per year). Records shall be submitted by March 1 and September 1 of each year. The records shall be submitted to: 
Attn. Eatonton Putnam Water and Sewer Authority  PO Box 3639  Eatonton, Georgia 31024 
The EPWSA personnel will perform periodic inspections of these facilities and shall notify the user of any additional required maintenance or repairs. Upon written notification by the EPWSA, the user shall be required to perform the maintenance and records of said maintenance within 14 calendar days. Upon inspection by the EPWSA the user may be required to install, at his expense, additional controls to provide a complete system which prevents discharges of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system. 
(f)  Additives. Any biological additive(s) placed into the grease trap or building discharge line including but not limited to, enzymes, commercially available bacteria, or other additives designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat, or otherwise eliminate fats, oils, and grease shall require written approval by the EPWSA prior to use. The use of such additives shall in no way be considered as a substitution to the maintenance procedures required herein. 
(g)  Chemical treatment. Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, acid, or other chemical solvents designed to dissolve or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease trap. 
(h)  Sand, soil, and oil interceptors. All car washes, truck washes, garages, service stations, car and truck maintenance facilities, fabricators, utility equipment shops, and other facilities (as determined by the EPWSA) that have sources of sand, soil, and oil shall install effective sand, soil and oil traps, interceptors, and/or oil/water separators. These systems shall be sized to effectively remove sand, soil, and oil at the expected flow rates. These systems shall be, at the user's expense, cleaned or pumped on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the wastewater collection and treatment systems. Users whose systems are deemed to be ineffective by the EPWSA shall be asked to change the cleaning frequency or to increase the size of the system. Owners or operators of washing facilities will be required to prevent the inflow of detergents and rainwater into the wastewater collection system. 
Oil/water separator installations shall be required at facilities that accumulate petroleum oils and greases and at facilities deemed necessary by the EPWSA. 
(i)  Laundries. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor with a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that prevents passage (into the wastewater collection system) of solids ½-inch or larger in size such as rags, strings, buttons, or other solids detrimental to the system. 
(j)  Control equipment. The equipment or facilities installed to control FOG, food waste, sand, soil, oil, and lint must be designed in accordance with the Southern Plumbing Code, the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division guidelines, most current engineering standards, or other applicable guidelines approved by the EPWSA. Underground equipment shall be tightly sealed to prevent inflow of rainwater and shall be easily accessible to allow regular maintenance and inspection. Control equipment shall be maintained by the owner and/or operator of the facility as to prevent a stoppage of the wastewater collection system, and the accumulation of FOG, food waste, sand, soil, and lint in the collection lines, pump stations, and wastewater treatment plant. 
If the Eatonton Putnam Water and Sewer Authority is required to clean out the wastewater collection lines, as a result of a stoppage resulting from poorly maintained control equipment (or lack thereof) the owner or operator shall be required to refund the labor, equipment, materials, and any overhead costs to the EPWSA including any fines incurred due to any sanitary sewer overflow due directly to the stoppage. The EPWSA retains the right to inspect and approve any and all installations of control equipment. 
(k)  Alteration of control methods. The Eatonton Putnam Water and Sewer Authority reserves the right to request additional control measures if existing control equipment is shown to be insufficient to protect the wastewater collection system and wastewater treatment plant from interference due to the discharge of FOG, sand, soil, lint, or any other undesirable materials. 
(Res. of 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 70-114. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Any person who violates this article, in part or whole, shall be guilty of a civil violation punishable under and according to the general penalty provision of this Code. Each day's violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Res. of 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 70-115. - Severability. 
Each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, and clause of this article is declared to be separable and severable. 
(Res. of 3-19-2012) 
Chapter 74 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 74-31. - Compliance with provisions. 
All persons or firms operating taxicabs in the city shall, in addition to obtaining the occupation tax certificate required by chapter 18 of this Code, comply with the regulations of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 74-32. - Liability insurance. 
Each vehicle shall be covered by public liability insurance for the protection of the passengers and public, in the amount of $100,000.00. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-2) 
Sec. 74-33. - Qualifications of driver. 
No taxicab shall be operated by a driver under the age of 18 years. Each driver shall be licensed as a chauffeur under state law. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 74-34. - Application for license. 
Each operator shall file his application for license in both his individual, corporate or partnership name, as well as any trade name he may use. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-4) 
Chapter 75 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-4(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 75-1. - Authority of chapter. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Georgia Constitution, Article IX, § II, part IV, as amended, and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the community of the City of Eatonton and other purposes, this chapter regulates the location, construction and use of buildings, structures and land; and divides the city into districts for such purposes and establishes boundaries therefore; provides for the method of administration and amendment; and prescribes penalties for the violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is made and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to prevent flooding of improved property; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sanitation, schools, parks, housing, communications, health care and other public requirements; to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city; and to improve the quality of life through protection of the city's total environment including, but not limited to, the prevention of air, water and noise pollution. Such regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other buildings and structures throughout the city. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-3. - Title of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Eatonton." 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. This section is intended to define terms frequently used throughout this chapter. It is not intended to be exhaustive, and definitions also may appear in article IV of this chapter (the permitted use regulations). Words not specifically defined in this section shall be construed to have the customary or preferred meaning given by Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, latest edition published. 
(b)  Use and interpretation. The following shall apply to the use of all words in this chapter: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(4)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(5)  The nouns "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the zoning districts established by this chapter. 
(6)  The noun "use" shall mean the manner in which a structure, building or parcel of land actually is occupied. 
(7)  The noun "map" means the "Official Zoning Districts Map of Putnam County, Georgia," (includes the City of Eatonton) adopted in 1997 and amended from time to time as permitted in this chapter. 
(8)  The word "structure" includes, but is not limited to, the word "building." 
(9)  The word "lot" shall include the words "piece," "plot," and "parcel." 
(10)  The word "should" is suggested but not mandatory. 
(11)  The word "constructed" includes the word "erected", "built", "altered", "rebuilt", and "repaired". 
(c)  Specific definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building or use means a subordinate building or use which is customarily incidental to the principal use or building and which is located on the same lot with the principal use or building. 
Adult arcade means an establishment, where for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Adult bookstore means an establishment in which more than 20 percent of its stock in trade is offered for sale for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines and periodicals containing pictures, films, motion pictures, photographs, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity. 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment which features or allows live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical 
areas or by specified sexual activity, or which features motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic picture reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis on specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any commercial establishment which features or allows any form of adult entertainment as defined in this chapter; and shall specifically include: adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater and adult arcade. However, traditional or live theater shall not be included in this definition. 
Adult movie theater means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means an establishment such as a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar entertainment facility which, for any form of consideration, features or allows live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. Traditional or live theater shall not be included in this definition. 
Airport community means a residential development within which there is a runway or landing area/strip that may be used by the residents of the airport community or their guests for their pleasure or at their leisure. The landowners will generally be somewhat contiguous to the runway or landing area/strip. The development (runway, roads, lots, structures, etc.) must be integrally designed together and be approved under the conditional-use provisions of the chapter. 
Alley means a service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
Alteration, building or structural means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as any type of supporting structural members) except such a change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another. 
Amusement facility means an establishment in which 30 percent or more of the gross floor area is utilized by amusement machines or their patrons. This can be a primary or secondary use within the establishment. 
Amusement machines means any mechanical, electronic and/or coin-operated game and/or device for the amusement of patrons. This definition shall not be construed to include coin-operated music players, coin-operated mechanical kiddy rides or coin-operated television. 
Apartment means a multifamily residential building containing four or more dwelling units exclusive of a townhouse building or unit; also, a dwelling unit within an apartment building. 
Applicant means the owner, or his rightfully appointed agent, of land proposed to be subdivided. 
Arterial means a street used primarily for fast or heavy through-traffic. The recommended future right-of-way is 80 feet (40 feet from the centerline). 
Automobile repair garage means any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail service of major repairs, minor repairs and painting of automobiles, including the incidental services of lubricating and cleaning. Those garages in which major repairs and painting may occur will also be referred to as "automotive repair garages." 
Banquet/reception hall means an establishment which is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions including, but not limited to, banquets, weddings, anniversaries, religious services, and other such gatherings. Such a use may or may not include kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food. In some cases, a restaurant may be associated with a banquet/reception hall. 
Bar/tavern/pub/cocktail lounge means a commercial structure open for public use in which alcoholic beverage sales may constitute more than 50 percent of the gross sale of goods. All such facilities must operate in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq., as amended, or any other applicable state law. 
Basement means an area below the first floor, having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground, used for storage, garages for use of occupants of the building, janitor/watchman quarters or other utilities common to the rest of the building; synonymous with the term "cellar." 
Bed and breakfast means a single-family dwelling, other than a hotel, motel, or boardinghouse, or portion thereof, providing eight or fewer rooms for rent where short-term lodging and meals are provided to registered guests for compensation. The operator of the bed and breakfast must live on the premises. 
Bedroom means that room within a dwelling unit that is normally used to provide sleeping accommodations for the residents of the unit, regardless of its daytime use. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land usually bounded on all sides public by streets or other transportation routes, such as railroad lines, or by physical barriers such as water bodies or public open spaces, and not transversed by a through street. Blocks are divided into lots for building purposes. 
Boarding or rooming house means any dwelling in which three or more persons either individually or as families are housed for payment with or without meals. 
Buffer means portion of a lot set aside for open space and visual screening purposes, pursuant to applicable provisions of this chapter, to separate differing use districts or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. Such visual screening, unless otherwise provided in this definition, shall be of a nature calculated to attain a 20-foot height within three years of planting. 
Building means any roofed structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls, constructed or used for a residence, business, industry or other public or private purposes; or accessory thereto, and including, but not limited to, tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers, mobile homes, manufactured homes and similar structures, whether stationary or movable. 
Building inspector means the primary employee or his/her designee at planning and development that administers and enforces zoning, development, building code and related regulations. "Building inspector" is also known as "director of planning and development", "building official", or "chief building inspector". 
Building permit means a permit that authorizes actual construction or alteration of a physical structure on any property within the city limits and which issues after issuance of a development permit. 
Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
Building setback line means the minimum horizontal distance allowed between the future street right-of-way line and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof except the projections of eaves, gutters and similar fixtures as permitted by this chapter. 
Building site means (a) the ground area of one lot or, (b) the ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this ordinance. 
Business or commerce means the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the maintenance and use of offices, structures and premises by professions and trade rendering services. 
Cafeteria means an eating establishment where persons serve themselves or are served from one common food service area. 
Clinic means a use where medical examination and treatment is administered to persons on an outpatient basis. No patient shall be lodged on an overnight basis. 
Club or lodge, private means an incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Collectors mean streets that carry traffic from local streets to the major system of arterial or freeways. The recommended future right-of-way is 80 feet. 
Comprehensive plan means a comprehensive policy, which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portions thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto adopted by the city council indicating the general location for airports, roads, schools, parks, correctional facilities, utilities or other similar information. This plan is based upon and includes appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems. This term includes component or functional plans for the city including, but not limited to, a plan for land use or a plan for transportation facilities. 
Conditional rezoning means the attachment of special conditions to a rezoning that are not spelled out in the text of this chapter. 
Conditional use means a use that, because of potential ill effects or inconsistency between it and uses allowed in a district as a matter of right, may exist or operate only after issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Condominium means a form of ownership as defined by state law in which common elements are jointly owned. A condominium is not a building type. 
Council means the mayor and/or city council for the City of Eatonton. 
Covenant means a private agreement running with and intended to burden and benefit a particular tract of land. Under no circumstances does the city enforce such covenants. 
Day nursery/kindergarten means a school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from three through six years that operates for less than four hours per day. 
Density means, as used in residential categories, the number of dwelling units permitted per acre or other specified area of land. 
Developer is synonymous with the terms "applicant" and "sub-divider." 
Development, existing means those projects that are built and those projects that, at a minimum, have established a vested right based on at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Substantial expenditure of resources (time, labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received a valid local government approval to proceed with the project; or 
(2)  Having a valid outstanding building permit; or 
(3)  Having expended substantial resources (time, labor, and money) and having an approved site specific, or phased development plan in compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
Development permit means a permit that authorizes initial clearing, grading, dredging, excavating, filling or other site preparation for the use, construction upon or alteration of any property within the city limits. 
District means a section of the city within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Drive-in restaurant means eating and/or drinking establishment that caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes his food/drink while sitting in his vehicle or where curb or carryout services are provided. 
Drive-through restaurant means food service establishment that sells food from a counter or window for consumption on-premises or off-premises. Tables may be provided and food may be served at a table, but may not be ordered from a table. 
Duplex means one structure containing two separate dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with one set of cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, or a corporation or a certain person or persons. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
Floodplain means that area within the intermediate regional flood contour elevations (IRF) subject to periodic flooding as designated by the building inspector or like city official, based upon the U.S. Corps of Engineers' floodplain information reports and other federal, state or city hydrologic studies. 
Floor area means the sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls or the center of common or connected walls, including common public areas such as lobbies, restrooms and hallways; but excluding attic space with headroom of less than seven feet, uncovered steps or fire escapes, open porches, accessory water or cooling towers, permanent mechanical and elevator housing, accessory off-street parking spaces, accessory off-street loading berths and basement storage area. 
Freeways means streets used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic and which are divided with full control of access and no crossing at grade. The required future right-of-way for freeways will be based upon design criteria. 
Frontage, lot means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street right-of-way line are coincident. 
Frontage, street means all the property on the side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street. 
Garage apartment means a dwelling unit located on top of a garage or a converted section of a garage that is accessory to a principle residence on the same lot. 
Garage, private means an accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. A carport would be considered as a private garage. 
Grade means the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to all sides of any structure. 
Group home means residential structure occupied by individuals unrelated to the property owner, in which the residents require watchful oversight and assistance with the aspects of daily living due to age, status, impairment or infirmity. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological and other medical wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; biomedical wastes; and other waste material that may be a hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as defined by the state. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade along all walls of a structure to the highest point of the coping or parapet of a flat roof or to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Home occupation means an occupation customarily carried on by an occupant in a dwelling unit as a secondary use that is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and operated in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Hospice means a home for terminally ill persons with less than six months to live in which palliative care and social services, including bereavement counseling, is provided. 
Hospital means a structure in which is provided in-patient health care for people, including general medical and surgical services, psychiatric care and specialty medical facilities. Outpatient facilities within such structures in which such services are provided are included. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging, or board and lodging, are provided for more than 20 persons and offered to the public for compensation, and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is made through the interior of the building. 
Individual water well means any well constructed for the purpose of obtaining ground water to supply water appurtenant to a single-family dwelling and intended for domestic use, including, but not limited to, household purposes, farm livestock, or gardens. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof that is manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrial Building Act and the rules of the commissioner of community affairs issued pursuant thereto and which must bear a seal of approval issued by the commissioner of the department of community affairs. 
Inventory means either material, temporary structures, or other similar items that are a part of businesses goods for sale or display and are a part of the balance sheet. 
Junked vehicle means any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck or other automotive vehicle that does not bear a current license plate. 
Junkyard means any use on public or private property involving the parking, storage or disassembly of junked vehicles, or wrecked or nonoperable automobiles, trucks or other automotive devices; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap iron and other metals; used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, old refrigerators and old household appliances; and used brick, wood or other building materials. These uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or part of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in addition to or accessory to other uses of the premises. 
Kennel means any location where boarding, caring for and the keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats or other small animals (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
Land disturbance permit means a permit for any development that disturbs more than 1.1 acre of land that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments which may include clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Landfill means an area of land on which or an excavation in which solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile, as those terms are defined by current Georgia Law or current DNR regulations. 
Loading space means a space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
Local streets means streets used primarily to access abutting properties. The recommended future right-of-way is 60 feet, 30 feet from the centerline. 
Lot means a development or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership, legally transferable as a single unit of land. The term "lot" is synonymous with the term "parcel." A lot must meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must front on a public street or on an approved private street. 
Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage means the percentage of a lot that may be covered with buildings or structures, excluding walks, drives and other similar uses and recreational facilities which are accessory to a permitted use. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot having a frontage on two streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot of record means a lot that is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
Lot width means the width of a lot is the distance from one side lot line to the other side lot line measured at the minimum building setback line. 
Lunch counter/coffee shop means an eating establishment in which 50 percent or more of the seating is provided at a counter. 
Manufactured home means a detached, single-family dwelling designed for long-term occupancy, designed to be transported on its own wheels, arriving at the site as a complete dwelling unit, usually including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy; which dwelling has been constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards of June 15, 1976, as amended, and bears an insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Removal of the wheels and placement of this dwelling on a foundation does not change its classification. A travel trailer is not a manufactured home. 
Manufactured home lot means a parcel of land in a manufactured home park for the placement of a single manufactured home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single ownership on which three or more manufactured homes are located for the purpose of residential use. 
Manufactured home stand means that part of a manufactured home lot that has been reserved for the actual physical placement and tie-down of a manufactured home for non-transient use. 
Marina means a location, with or without lake access, in which boats may be stored or serviced and from which boats and boating supplies, possibly including food and recreational items, may be purchased or rented. 
Minimum square feet per dwelling means the area of a dwelling which is designed as interior living space and which is heated or air-conditioned or both and excluding any porch area which is open to the elements or any area designated as or used as a carport or garage. 
Mini-warehouse/self-storage means a building or group of buildings in a controlled access and secured compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of customers' goods or wares. 
Mobile home means a manufactured home constructed prior to 1976. 
Mobile office/sales center means a temporary sales center, in a mobile or "spec" structure, may be used to market homes during the development and building phase of a subdivision. 
Model home means a dwelling used initially for display purposes that typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. 
Modular home means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be assembled at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. 
Motel means a building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made primarily from an exterior walkway rather than from an interior lobby. 
Nonconforming lot, use and building means a legally existing lot, use or building which fails to comply with any provision of this chapter either at the effective date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, or as the result of subsequent amendments; synonymous with the term "grandfathered lot, use or building." 
Nonpublic water well means any well constructed as a source of water supply for a water system which provides piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has fewer than 15 service connections or regularly serves fewer than 25 individuals, excluding individual water wells. 
Nonresidential development means all commercial, office, institutional, manufacturing, industrial and similar lands and uses. 
Nursing/convalescent home means a use in which domiciliary care is provided to three or more elderly or convalescing non-family members who are provided with food, shelter and medical care. 
Open space means that portion of a lot, including yards, which is open and unobstructed from its lower level to the sky, with the exception of natural foliage or accessory recreational facilities or walkways. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation, or any other legal entities having legal title to the land sought to be sub-divided under the regulations of this chapter. 
Parking lot means any area designed for temporary accommodation of motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating condition whether for a fee or as a service. 
Parking space means an area of not less than 120 square feet (smaller car space) or not less than 153 square feet (larger car space) with dimensions of not less than eight feet wide by 15 feet deep (small cars) or eight feet, six inches wide by 18 feet deep (large cars), the exclusive purpose of which is the parking of a vehicle. 
Permitted use means a use by right that is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Planned unit development means any planned concentration which provides for innovative and/or mixed use concepts in large-scale development which enables economy in capital expenditures on utilities and streets and in subsequent maintenance and/or which also provides planned and shared parking, access and service; synonymous with the term "planned development." 
Planning and zoning commission means the city planning and zoning commission, the public agency in the city empowered to prepare a comprehensive plan and to evaluate proposed changes in land use, either by public or private developers, for conformance with the plan. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Principal use means the primary purpose for which land, structure or a building is used. 
Private school means an educational use having a curriculum at least equal to a public school, but not operated by the board of education. 
Public water system means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals. Such term includes but is not limited to any collection, treatment, storage, or distribution facilities under the control of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with such system, and any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such control that are used primarily in connection with such system. 
Recommended future right-of-way means the amount of right-of-way to be dedicated to the city for existing or proposed streets on which property subject to rezoning has frontage, prior to the issuance of a development permit for that property. 
Relative residence means a second cooking facility with associated living space constructed and used within a single-family residence for the exclusive use of relatives of the real property owner/occupant. 
Residential district means any district of which the primary purpose is for residential dwelling units. 
Restaurant means a facility that provides food served exclusively inside an enclosed building; alcoholic beverages may be served incidental to such service, provided that such sales do not exceed 50 percent of gross revenues. 
Re-subdivision means a change in the map of a recorded subdivision plat if such a change effects any street layout, area reserved or public use, or any lot line, and includes the further division of platted subdivision lots. 
Retirement home means an apartment building or buildings designed for occupancy primarily for persons 65 years of age or older, which may contain, for the convenience of its residents, common eating areas, personal/infirmary care, common recreational areas and accessory retail uses. 
Right-of-way means a portion of land over which a local, state or federal government has designated a right of use. 
Rooming house/boarding house means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation and/or by prearrangement, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
Sanitarian means the legally entitled official of the health department. 
Sawmill, portable means a sawmill moved onto one tract of land for purposes of clearing prior to actual development. 
Sawmill, temporary means a sawmill set up to operate for less than 180 days in any given calendar year. 
Servant dwelling means a garage apartment or other dwelling unit on the premises occupied exclusively by a domestic employee of the owner of the primary residence. 
Service station means any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automotive accessories and incidental services, including facilities for lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting, major repair or automatic washing. Minor auto repair and maintenance shall include the installation of tires, carburetors, ignition parts and other minor accessory parts as shall be incidental to the normal upkeep of an automobile, but shall not include engine or body dismantling. This use also may include accessory convenience stores. 
Setback means the space between a property line and a building or specified structure excluding inventory. 
Sign means any name, identification, description, display, illustration, writing, emblem, pictorial representation or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the general public, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
Sign area means the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming and integral part of the display, or used to differentiate this sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which this sign is placed; provided, however that any open space contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign, or between any component, panel strip or fixture of any kind composing the display face, shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign whether this open space is enclosed or not by a frame or border. For projecting or double-faced signs, only one display face shall be measured in computing the sign area when the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less, provided that it is a common attached structure. If the two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face. 
Site built construction means a dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site; and which is constructed in accordance with the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. (SBCCI), and CABO. 
Site plan, preliminary means a detailed plan, drawn to scale, based on a certified boundary survey, and reflecting conditions of requested rezoning, various requirements of state law, and other requirements of city ordinances. 
Spot zoning means the process of singling out a small parcel of land for use classification totally different from that of the surrounding area, for the benefit to the owner of such property and to the detriment of other owners. 
Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Each floor or level in a multistory building used for parking, excluding a basement, shall be classified as a story. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property, whether designated as an "avenue," "road," "boulevard," "highway," "expressway," "alley" or any other term. Streets are classified according to the following hierarchy, in descending order of importance, based on traffic volume or type, or other factors: 
(1)  Collector. Functions to conduct traffic between arterial streets or activity centers. It is a principle traffic-way with residential area and carries a relatively high traffic volume. 
(2)  Sub-collector. Provides access from lanes to collectors, and conducts traffic to any activity center. 
(3)  Lanes. A short street, cul-de-sac or court. The primary purpose of a lane is to conduct traffic to and from dwelling units to higher classified streets. 
(4)  Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principle frontage is on some other street. 
Street right-of-way line means the legal line between a street right-of-way and abutting property. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground including, but not limited to, tennis courts, fences, pools and buildings. 
Subdivider means the owner or the agent of the land to be subdivided who will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land in accordance with the regulations of this chapter. 
Subdivision shall include all divisions or re-divisions of a tract or parcel of land into five or more parcels, or into two or more parcels if the land to be subdivided has been previously divided within the preceding five years, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development according to a plat thereof of record, and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; provided, however, that the following shall not be included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resulting lots comply with the standards of this chapter. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels greater than 15 acres where no public street right-of-way dedication is involved provided each such parcel fronts on a paved road that meets city road standards. 
(3)  The public acquisition by purchase, acceptance of deed of dedication or exercise of the right of eminent domain of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets. 
Subdivision, major means the division of a tract in single ownership, into more than five parcels, and where the resultant parcels are equal to or exceed the standards of this chapter. The developer, also known as the sub-divider, is required to pave to city specifications all streets in the subdivision including, but not limited to, those streets that lead to a public road, whether or not said public road is paved or unpaved. 
Subdivision, minor means the division of a tract in single ownership into not more than four parcels, and where the resultant parcels are equal to or exceed the standards of this chapter. The developer, also known as the sub-divider, is required to pave to city specifications all streets in the subdivision including, but not limited to, those streets that lead to a public road, whether or not such public road is paved or unpaved. 
Tenant dwelling means a residential dwelling unit located on a farm and occupied by a non-transient farm worker (and his family, if applicable), who is employed by the farm owner. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. This definition includes campers, motor homes, park-models, RV's, etc. 
Travel trailer park means any lot on which are temporarily parked two or more travel trailers, for a period of less than 30 days per calendar year, per travel trailer. 
Triplex means a structure containing three dwelling units. 
Truck stop means a facility for the sale of gasoline and related products for primary use by trucks with more than four wheels and two axles. Such facilities may include, if internal to a structure, restaurants, areas for bathing and retail sales of convenience goods. 
Variance means a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance, not a change in a zoning district, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Veterinary clinic or hospital means an establishment in which veterinary services, clipping, bathing, boarding and other services are rendered to dogs, cats and other animals and domestic pets. 
Yard means that area of a lot between the principal building and adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this section. The minimum required width or depth of a yard shall be determined as the horizontal distance between the lot or street lines and the minimum setback lines, as established by this chapter. 
Yard, front means a yard extending across the total width of a lot between side lot lines and being that area between the street right-of-way line and that line established by the front wall of the principal structure projected to intersect the side lot lines. 
Yard, rear means a yard extending across the total width of a lot between side lot lines and being that area between the street right-of-way line and that line established by the rear wall of the principal structure projected to intersect the side lot lines. 
Yard, side means a yard extending the total depth of a lot between the front and rear yards and being that area between the side lot line and that line established by the side wall of the principal structure. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Res. of 6-7-2016, § 1; Res. of 7-18-2016; Res. of 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 75-5. - Interpretation and application of chapter provisions. 
In interpreting and applying this chapter's provisions, the requirements contained in this chapter are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Except as provided in this chapter, this chapter shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height of buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this chapter shall govern unless elsewhere provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-6. - Compliance with chapter required. 
No land, building or structure shall be used; no building or structure shall be erected; and no existing building, use or structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged or altered except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-7. - Jurisdiction of chapter. 
This chapter shall apply only in the city. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-8. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and validity of prior approvals and actions. 
(a)  This chapter is the city zoning resolution of [Eatonton, GA], and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approval or use or building permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this chapter. 
(b)  All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the board of appeals shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by the board of appeals shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against these violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-9. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-10—75-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 75-31. - Responsibility of building inspector. 
On a day-to-day basis this chapter's provisions shall be administered by the building inspector, who shall have the following duties with respect to such administration: 
(1)  Issuance of permits. Supervise the issuance of development and building permits so as to make sure that all new development and construction complies with this chapter. The building inspector should have permits reviewed, or at least comments regarding a permit application, ready for an applicant within 15 days. 
(2)  Variances. Grant administrative variances (except for density and use variances) from the development standards of this chapter where, for reason of narrowness, shallowness, shape, the need to use septic tanks, topographic conditions or other conditions of the property, strict application of the development standards would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon, the property owner. In granting a variance, the building inspector may attach thereto any conditions that may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. The authority to grant variances shall be limited in scope when related to the following variance requests: 
a.  Front, side or rear yard: The variance shall not exceed 50 percent of the minimum district requirements. 
b.  Distance between buildings on same lot: The variance shall not exceed ten feet. 
c.  Parking: The variance shall not exceed 50 percent of that required. 
d.  No parking allowed in a required front yard in an O-I district: The variance may be approved to grant parking in a required front yard if a ten-foot buffer area is retained between future street right-of-way and parking area. 
e.  Minimum single-family lot area required to be above and spaced a distance of the dwelling unit from intermediate regional flood contour elevation: The variance shall be limited to reducing the minimum single-family lot area required to be above the intermediate regional flood contour elevation to 50 percent and the distance of a dwelling unit from the intermediate regional flood contour elevation to the minimum yard requirements of applicable zoning districts, and only upon written approval of the county engineer and/or sanitarian. 
(3)  Inspections. Make field inspections to determine that the building, construction or structural alteration or use is being pursued in accordance with the site plan for which a development or building permit has been issued and in compliance with this chapter. These inspections and reports of findings shall be made as soon as practicable after inspection is requested by the developer. When a violation is found to exist, the building inspector shall immediately advise the chairman of the city council of the violation so that appropriate legal action may be taken to ensure compliance. 
(4)  Certificate of occupancy. Ensure that all construction has been completed in accordance with all applicable laws and requirements prior to allowing occupancy by way of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, which authority shall include the right to refuse to allow hookup to public utilities until compliance has been obtained. The code enforcement officer shall have the primary authority and responsibility to investigate complaints about noncompliance with this chapter and to notify the building inspector of any violation so that appropriate legal action may be taken. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-32. - Development permit required. 
A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or buildings, if the building inspector requires, to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter before any building permit is issued or any improvements, grading or alteration of lands or buildings commences. Notwithstanding the foregoing, approval of a comprehensive site land disturbance permit, approval of a preliminary/final plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations and approval of a planned development shall constitute approval of the development permit for such subdivision or development, and development permits for individual structures within this approved subdivision or planned development shall not be required to be presented with an application for a development permit for a single-family dwelling unit on an individual lot or tract not part of an approved subdivision or planned development. 
(1)  Application. All applications for a development permit shall be made to the building inspector and shall be accompanied by complete plans drawn to scale, in duplicate, and signed by the author with his address, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing or intended use of each building or part of building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. One copy of these plans shall be returned to the owner when these plans shall have been approved. 
(2)  Issuance. All development permits shall be issued by the building inspector, who shall in no case grant any development permit for the use, construction or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, conditions of zoning imposed upon the property, or any other codes and laws of the city or the state, except as provided in this section. 
(3)  Duration of validity. A development permit shall be valid for one year from its issuance, subject to the following provisions. If the work described in any development permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance thereof, this permit shall expire. If the work described in any development permit has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, this permit shall expire. Written notice of the expiration shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. The foregoing expiration provisions shall not apply to a planned development, which instead must be substantially completed within five years. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-33. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any building to be located, erected, moved, expanded or structurally altered for a cost in excess of $1,000.00 unless a permit is specifically required herein (ex. temporary electrical pole, moving building on or across public thoroughfares, etc.) without obtaining a building permit issued by the building inspector in conformity with this chapter. All permits issued shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises described in the permit during construction or reconstruction. Any building permit shall automatically expire six months from the date of issuance if construction is not substantially complete. Construction or reconstruction not in compliance with the building permit issued, or without a building permit as required in this section, shall constitute a misdemeanor for which the violator, if found guilty, may be punished as provided by law. Each day upon which a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense under this section. Building permit applications shall be accompanied by two copies of a dimensional sketch or preliminary site plan, signed by the owner or his authorized agent, and include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; 
(2)  Shape, size, height and location of the structures proposed to be erected, demolished, altered or moved, and of any buildings already on the lot; yard dimensions and the use of structures, including the number of dwelling units within each structure; 
(3)  Easements (public and private); 
(4)  Watercourses; 
(5)  Fences; 
(6)  Street names and street right-of-way lines; 
(7)  Other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application; and 
(8)  Identity of owner and location by tax map and parcel number, verified by the tax office on the permit form. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-34. - Permit types. 
(a)  Building permits, as issued by the building official, shall be required for: 
(1)  The erection or construction of any building or structure and the adding to, enlarging, repair, improving, altering, covering or extending of any building or structure; 
(2)  The moving of any building or structure within, into, through, or out of the city/county; 
(3)  The demolition of any building or structure; 
(4)  The erection, remodeling, relocating, repair, altering or removal of any sign; or 
(5)  The installation or alteration of a swimming pool. 
(b)  Electrical permits, as issued by the building official, shall be required for the installation, repair, alteration, addition to or changing of any electrical wires, fixtures, apparatus, raceways, conduit or any part thereof, which generates, transmits, transforms or utilizes electrical energy in any form for lights, heat or power. 
(c)  Plumbing permits, as issued by the building official, shall be required for the installation, repair, alteration, addition to or changing of any plumbing system or appurtenances thereto, domestic water supply or distribution systems, plumbing fixtures and traps, sanitary and storm sewers, liquid waste piping, or water and sewer-using equipment, except that, where such work is located within private property, no plumbing permit shall be required for the repair of leaks, unstopping of sewers or waste pipes, repair or replacement of faucets or water closets, repair of valves, repair or cleaning of septic tanks. 
(d)  Mechanical permits, as issued by the building official, shall be required for the installation, alteration or major repair of: 
(1)  Boilers or steam-activated machinery, including the appurtenances and piping thereto; 
(2)  Heat-producing appliances, furnaces or other heating apparatus, including piping or flues, or accessories thereto, except electrical and other appliances that are fully portable and require no physical connection to piping or flues; 
(3)  Air conditioning or refrigeration systems; 
(4)  Mechanical ventilating systems, including air distribution ductwork; 
(5)  Gas systems or piping; 
(6)  Elevators, man-lifts, escalators, hoists or other transporting devices; 
(7)  Paint-spraying equipment or other process equipment that produces explosive or flammable vapors; 
(8)  Fire sprinklers, standpipes, fire hose cabinets or other fire protection apparatus; and 
(9)  Mechanical equipment of any kind that is regulated by the building code. 
(e)  Miscellaneous permits, as issued by the building official, shall be required for all construction or installations regulated by the building code, as may be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-35. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application required. Prior to the issuance of any permit required or authorized by the building code, an application therefore shall be submitted in writing to the planning and development inspection division on forms furnished for such purpose by the building official. Such application shall be signed in the spaces provided by the qualified applicant, the owner of the property or his authorized agent, and, where required, the architect or engineer. The applicant shall become the permit holder upon issuance of a permit and shall be held responsible for the supervision and conduct of all work covered thereby. The application shall serve as the basis for determination of issuance of a permit and shall be factual evidence upon which any interested party may rely as to the information provided thereon. 
(b)  Changes to application. In the event of a change in any material fact given in the application that served as a basis for issuing the permit, the permit holder shall immediately file an amended application detailing such changed conditions. If the change in the application is a change in the person responsible for the work, the owner shall immediately stop the work and notify the building official in writing, detailing such changed conditions and any other information required by the building official, or, in lieu thereof, a new permit application shall be filed immediately by a new qualified applicant. If such changed conditions are determined to be in compliance with the building code and other applicable regulations, an amended building permit will be issued, at a minimum fee if the changed conditions shall not be greater than those permitted in the original permit. 
(c)  Qualifications and responsibilities of applicant. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2), (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section, application for permits shall be accepted from and permits issued only to contractors who are qualified as provided in this article to perform the kind of work included in the particular permit for which application is made. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every contractor, builder, electrician, plumber or mechanical contractor who shall make contracts for the erection or construction or repair of buildings, or any portion thereof for which a permit is required, and every contractor or builder making such contracts and subletting the same, or any part thereof, shall be required to: 
a.  Purchase and maintain an occupation tax. Such license shall be registered with the City of Eatonton Clerk's office. 
b.  Purchase and maintain a license bond (or an equivalent) in the amount of $25,000.00. Such bond shall be conditioned that all work performed by the contractor or under his supervision shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this building code and other pertinent laws and regulations. He will pay all fees and penalties properly imposed upon him for violations of the building code. The planning and development department shall be so named on the license bond. 
(2)  The owner of commercial property, except that designated for farming and agricultural purposes, may make application for a permit, supervise and do the work in connection with construction, repair, alteration or maintenance where the total value of such work, including labor and materials, does not exceed $1,000.00, and where none of the work to be done is required by law to be performed by a licensed contractor. All work performed in the case of buildings or structures classified as Group E-educational, or Group I-institutional or Group A assembly occupancy shall be performed only by a licensed contractor. 
(3)  The owner of residential or agricultural property may make application for permit, supervise and do the work in connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or addition to a dwelling, including farm and agricultural buildings and structures, regardless of the size or cost of such work under the following conditions: 
a.  Such dwelling, farm or agricultural building is intended for the use and or occupancy of the owner making such application and not intended for sale. In this connection, no more than one permit shall be issued to an owner for the construction of a new dwelling (not including permits issued for alterations, additions and repairs to an existing dwelling) during any 12-month period. 
b.  The building official may require proof that the applicant is the owner of the dwelling upon or in which construction is to take place, and nothing in this section is to be construed to invalidate the requirement for applying for and obtaining permits, paying fees, calling for required inspections, and complying with all plans, specifications, codes, laws and regulations applicable. 
(4)  A maintenance craftsman may obtain permit for work to be done by him on the building or premises owned by his employer where such work is in the same category as the craftsman is qualified and where such work is limited to the maintenance, repair and minor alterations. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-36. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications, except as outlined in section [75-37]. 
(b)  All plans for buildings, structures, additions or alterations to Group E-educational, Group I-institutional, and Group A-assembly occupancy, regardless of size, and all buildings or structures three or more stories in height or greater than 5,000 square feet in area (except those classified as one-family and two-family dwellings, expressly exempted by the chief building inspector, and those buildings or structures for farm or agricultural purposes), such designer shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering, and shall affix his official seal to such plans, specifications and accompanying data. 
(c)  Plans shall be original drawings or prints of the structure, mechanically reproduced at the original scale on substantial paper, showing completely all foundations, wall sections, floor plans, roof plans and elevations at a convenient scale; a plot plan showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and location on the lot of the buildings or structures to be erected or altered, the location and number of required off-street parking and loading spaces; such other information as may be required to determine compliance with the building code and this chapter; complete structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical plans; and such other reasonable information as may be required to clearly show the nature, character and location of the proposed work. Computations, stress diagrams, shop drawings, floor plans of existing buildings to which additions are proposed and other data necessary to show compliance with the building code shall be included when required by the building official. Any specifications in which general expressions are used to the effect that "work shall be done in accordance with the building code" or "to the satisfaction of the building official," shall be deemed imperfect and incomplete, and every reference to the building code shall be by section or subsection number applicable to the materials to be used, or to the methods of construction proposed. 
(d)  The building official may authorize the issuance of a permit without plans and specifications for minor alterations, repairs and small or unimportant work, but in no instance where the work is of a structural nature. The issuance of a permit without plans and specifications will still require the necessary inspections and compliance with the building code and all other pertinent regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-37. - Examination of plans. 
The building official shall examine all plans and applications in the order received, except those plans that have been previously examined. If the application or the plans do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such applications in writing, stating the reasons therefore. Plans that are rejected, as stated in this section, may be returned for correction of the tracings. Penciled notations on such plans may be accepted for only minor corrections. If the application, plans and specifications meet the approval of the building code, the plans shall be stamped "approved," and the permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-38. - Approval of other authorities. 
In addition to verifying compliance with the building code, the building official shall require that the laws, rules and regulations of any other regulatory authority having jurisdiction, where such laws, rules and regulations are applicable and are known to him, shall be satisfied before a permit shall be issued. He shall require such evidence, as in his opinion is reasonable, to show such other approvals. The building official shall not thereby be held responsible for enforcement of such other regulations, as he is not specifically authorized to enforce. The following are some, but not necessarily all, other agencies having jurisdiction on some or all projects: 
(1)  The road department, the sheriff's office, the state highway department, and the city's police department for the moving of buildings, structures and heavy equipment over, temporary construction over, storage of material on, construction operations over or temporary blocking of streets or other public spaces; 
(2)  The city road department for the installation of a driveway culvert installed on city property; 
(3)  The health department for the permitting of wells, septic tanks and water and sewer systems; 
(4)  The state highway department for permitting driveway approaches on any state road. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-39. - Approved plans. 
The building official shall examine all plans and applications in the order received, except those plans that have been previously examined. If the application or the plans do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such applications in writing, stating the reasons therefore. Plans that are rejected, as stated in this section, may be returned for correction of the tracings. Penciled notations on such plans may be accepted for only minor corrections. If the application, plans and specifications, upon examination, are found to comply with the requirements of the building code, the plans shall be stamped "approved," and the permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-40. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Permits not valid. No building, construction, electrical, mechanical, miscellaneous or other permit issued by the planning and development department shall be valid until fees prescribed by this section shall have been paid to the appropriate department. 
(b)  Permit fees for work commenced prior to obtaining permits. In all cases where building, construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or other work for which a permit is required is commenced before such permit is obtained, any permit fee due to the city for a permit for such work shall be twice the amount of the regular permit fee specified in this section which would have been due had such permit been obtained prior to commencing work. In no event shall such fee be less than an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges, in addition to the regular permit fee, or more than an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges in addition to the regular permit fee. Payment of such increased fee shall not be a defense in any prosecution for any such work, for which a permit is required. Any work performed prior to the issuance of a building permit that has not been inspected by the building inspector for the city, and that is not easily inspected, or has been covered up, shall be inspected by an independent engineer that can certify that such work complies with the building code. 
(c)  Re-inspection fees. When extra inspection trips are made for a permit holder due to any of the following reasons, an addition fee in an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for each such additional inspection: 
(1)  Wrong address given on call for inspection; 
(2)  Work not ready for inspection at time specified; 
(3)  Required corrections not made within time specified; 
(4)  Failure to request required inspections; and 
(5)  Additional work done after inspection has been made. 
(d)  Refund of fees. Where no work has been done under a valid permit for which fees have been paid and a written request for refund of fees is made by holder thereof within six months of the date of original issuance, the building official may authorize the refund of 75 percent of such fee upon surrender of the permit and cancellation of the permit; provided, however, that no refund shall be made for permits whose value is less than an amount specified in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-41. - Schedule of building or construction permit fees. 
For the purpose of determining fees, floor area shall be the gross overall outside floor area of a building at each story, including all portions under a roof. Where a building permit fee is paid for a new building or addition, separate permits and fees shall not be required for fences, walls, awnings, masonry fence walls, site work or other components normal to building construction. Separate fees shall be paid for electrical, plumbing, mechanical, miscellaneous or other permits shown elsewhere in this schedule. Permit fees for all required permits shall be as provided in the following schedule: 
(1)  New buildings and additions. 
a.  For each square foot of enclosed area or fractional part of residential space, for each story below and above grade the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
b.  For each square foot of garage, storage building or barn space, the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
c.  For each square foot of open shed space, the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
d.  For commercial space, the fees shall be as listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
e.  New construction other than buildings, including pylons, storage tank foundations, structural elements of industrial complexes not within a building, and similar construction: For each $1,000.00 of estimated cost, the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
f.  Alterations (including major repair to buildings or other structures): For each $1,000.00 of estimated cost or fractional part thereof, the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
g.  Moving buildings/mobile home on or across public thoroughfares: The fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. In the case of a mobile home, this shall only apply when the move is not in conjunction with a building permit. 
h.  The mobile home fee, including 200-amp electrical fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. Services over 200 amps shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
i.  Masonry fences and walls: For each 50 linear feet or fractional part thereof, the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
j.  Swimming pools: For all permanent swimming pool installations above or in ground, including fencing, the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
k.  Demolition of buildings: The fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. For demolition of structures other than buildings, the fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
l.  Temporary permits: The fee shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
m.  Minimum fee for any building permit, based upon the fee formulas contained in subsections (1)e through (1)m of this section shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
n.  Golf course or recreational development area: A base fee plus a per acre fee in amounts listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
o.  Development/subdivision permit: The fee shall be calculated on a per developed acre basis with a minimum charge listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(2)  Electrical permit fees. Electrical permit fees for service installations (conductors and equipment for delivering energy from the electrical utility supply system) (residential and commercial) shall be as listed in the schedule of fees and charges. Each service or sub-service requiring a utility-owned meter shall be considered a service for fee purposes. 
(3)  Plumbing permit fees. Plumbing permit fees for new residential or commercial service shall include a base fee and a per fixture fee in amounts listed in the schedule of fees and charges. Renovations or additions to a room shall be charged an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(4)  Mechanical permit fees. Mechanical permit fees for new residential or commercial service HVAC system shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges per ton of air conditioning equipment and 20,000 Btu of heat equipment. Additions or changes of equipment shall be charged an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(5)  Renewal of permits. For renewal of a permit a charge in an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges shall be made. 
(6)  Re-inspection fees. Fees for re-inspection shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(7)  Miscellaneous permit fees. Tents for assembly, home occupation licenses and temporary camper permits shall all be charged amounts listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-42. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Upon completion of construction but prior to occupancy or use for the purpose constructed, and prior to utility hookup, the property owner or his agent shall notify the building inspector and request final inspection of the premises. The building inspector shall conduct such inspection as quickly as is reasonably practicable after such request and shall issue a certificate of occupancy only if he finds such construction comports with all applicable local, state or national rules, regulations, statutes, laws, ordinances, and the terms of this chapter. No certificate of occupancy shall issue until the building inspector finds such compliance, and no electricity, gas or water may be supplied to the premises until such certificate of occupancy issues. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-43. - Enforcement; penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, covered or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the building inspector, or any other appropriate authority of the city, may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this chapter requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court; or institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent this unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate this violation or to prevent the occupancy of this building, structure or land. Where a violation of the regulations of this chapter exists with respect to a structure or land, the building inspector may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service be withheld there from until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any firm, person or corporation that shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as they exist, or as they may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation, shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Any violation of this chapter shall be regarded as a misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year's imprisonment and/or a fine of $500.00. Each day that this violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-44. - Appeals from decisions of the building inspector. 
It is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be presented first to the building inspector and that these questions shall be presented to the planning and zoning commission only on appeal from decision of such official; and, that from the decision of the planning and zoning commission, recourse shall be had to the city council also and only by way of appeal. Fees shall be set from time to time by the city council governing the cost of such appeals. All appeals must be filed within ten days of the issuance of the decision being appealed. Policies and procedures for such appeals shall be governed by division 2 of this article. A permit applicant proceeds with construction at his own risk until the appeal period expires and while an appeal of the issuance of a permit is pending. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-45—75-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS AND APPEALS 

Sec. 75-61. - Creation and function of planning and zoning commission. 
The planning and zoning commission is hereby reestablished as a five-member commission appointed and approved by the city council for terms concurrent with those of the latter. All members must be residents of the city. The five members shall be selected so that each of the four city wards is represented on the planning and zoning commission by a resident of that precinct and one at large. Vacancies shall be filled for un-expired terms in the same manner as initial appointments. Members are removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after a public hearing. No member shall have any other position or office with the city. Members may be paid such sums for services as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 1-19-2010) 
Sec. 75-62. - Planning and zoning commission review; amendments. 
(a)  Initiation. This chapter, including the official zoning maps, may be amended by the city council on its own motion, by private petition or on recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning and zoning commission for review and recommendation. 
(b)  Conditional use permits. The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide conditional use permit applications as per the standards in subsection 75-64(b)(1). In granting such a conditional use permit, the planning and zoning commission may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(c)  Variances. The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide applications for variances from the development standards of this chapter, other than administrative variances decided by the building inspector under the provisions of division 1 of this article. Such variances may be granted only: 
(1)  Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, which at the time of adoption of this chapter, was a lot or plat of record; or 
(2)  Where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of a piece of property, the strict application of the development requirements of this chapter would result in practical difficulties to, and undue hardship upon, the owner of this property, which difficulty or hardship is not the result of acts of the applicant; and further provided that this relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter and is not contrary to the public welfare. 
In granting a variance, the planning and zoning commission may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. However, the planning and zoning commission shall not be authorized to grant a density variance or a use variance to permit a density or use in a district in which the density or use is otherwise prohibited. The planning and zoning commission shall not be authorized to grant a variance to development standards set forth in a statement of zoning conditions accompanying a conditional zoning. 
(d)  Questions of interpretation. 
(1)  Who may seek interpretation. A question of interpretation to the planning and zoning commission may be taken by any person, firm or officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision of the building inspector, code enforcement officer or other city administrator with respect to this chapter. This question of interpretation shall be made within ten days following notification of the decision from which the appeal is taken by filing with the building inspector a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Extent of commission power. The planning and zoning commission may, in conformity with this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector, code enforcement officer, or other city administrator at issue. The planning and zoning commission may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the building inspector, code enforcement officer and other city administrator to carry out the decisions of the planning and zoning commission. 
(e)  Appeals. 
(1)  Who may appeal. An appeal to the planning and zoning commission may be taken by any person, firm or officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision of the building inspector, code enforcement officer or other city administrator with respect to this chapter. This appeal shall be made within ten days following notification of the decision from which the appeal is taken by filing with the building inspector a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Extent of commission power. The planning and zoning commission may, in conformity with this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector, code enforcement officer or other city administrator at issue. The planning and zoning commission may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the building inspector, code enforcement officer and other city administrator to carry out the decisions of the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Effect of appeal. The pending of an appeal shall not stay the effectiveness of the permit or decision being challenged. However, the owner of property who has received the permit, variance or favorable interpretation proceeds with development at its own risk that such development may be halted if the appeal is successful. 
(f)  Organization and meetings of commission. 
(1)  Officers. The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman (who shall be acting chairman in the absence of the chairman) on an annual basis. Any officer may succeed himself. The chairman (or in his absence the vice-chairman) shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the planning and zoning commission and decide all points of order or procedure. The chairman shall appoint any committees that may be found necessary. A secretary (who need not be a member of the planning and zoning commission) shall be designated by the commission and shall conduct all correspondence of the commission; keep a minutes book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; and keep records of examination and hearing and other official action; and shall carry out such other official duties as may be assigned by the commission. The planning and zoning commission shall have the right to request interpretation of this chapter by the city attorney, in writing through the planning and development department. 
(2)  Rules. The following shall be the rules as to how and where meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held: 
a.  The regular meeting of the commission shall be held the second Monday of the month at 7:00 p.m., unless there is no cause for holding such meeting. If there is no reason to have a regular meeting, the secretary shall inform the members of the commission at least five days in advance. 
b.  Special meetings may be called by the chairman, provided that at least 24 hours' notice of such meeting is given each member and that such public notice as required by law is provided. 
c.  Four members shall constitute a quorum to conduct all business. 
d.  Neither the secretary, the building inspector, the code enforcement officer nor any member of the commission shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the commission. No member of the planning and zoning commission shall hear or vote upon an appeal in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial way. 
e.  The order of business at each meeting shall be as follows: 
1.  Roll call. 
2.  Reading and approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
3.  Report of committees, if any. 
4.  Unfinished business. 
5.  Hearing of zoning cases. 
6.  New business. 
f.  Failure to attend three consecutive meetings or more shall be considered automatic resignation from the planning and zoning commission, and upon resignation or other vacancies occurring in office, the chairman shall inform the city council of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the city council may appoint a replacement to fill the un-expired term. 
g.  All meetings shall be held in a governmentally owned or leased facility. The regular meeting place will be in the meeting room of the City of Eatonton Police Headquarters, 214 West Marion Street. Any change in meeting place will be advertised as required by law. 
h.  The planning and zoning commission shall be free to adopt such additional bylaws not inconsistent with this section or those procedural rules elsewhere contained in this section to govern further the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-63. - Specific functions—Division I; zoning. 
(a)  Authority to initiate amendments. Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend part or the entire official zoning maps (a rezoning). An application to amend the text of this chapter may be initiated by the planning and zoning commission or be submitted to the planning and zoning commission by the city council or by any person having an interest in the city. Any application to amend the official zoning maps or the text of the ordinance submitted by a private party shall be filed with the building inspector on forms by him and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee established by the city council. Unless initiated by the city council or the planning and zoning commission, all applications to amend the official zoning maps must be submitted by the owner of the affected property or the authorized agent of the owner. Such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application for an amendment to the official zoning maps affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, such interval to begin with the date of final decision by the city council. The city council in its discretion and by unanimous vote may reduce or waive the 12-month time intervals to amend the zoning maps affecting the same property; however, in the case of an application to amend the zoning maps that were defeated by the city council, the interval between the defeated application and the subsequent application affecting the same property shall be at least six months. The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications initiated by the city council or planning and zoning commission, except for amendments to the zoning maps that were denied by the city council, in which case the interval required for the subsequent application shall be at least six months. However, an application to alter conditions of rezoning as contemplated in subsection (h) of this section may be submitted at any time. 
(b)  Application, process and standards. Each application to amend this chapter or the official zoning maps shall be filed with the building inspector. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Text amendment applications. Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of applicant. 
b.  Current provisions of text to be affected by amendment. 
c.  Proposed wording of text change. 
d.  Reason for amendment request. 
(2)  Map amendment applications. Map amendment applications shall include the following: 
a.  A legal description of the tracts to be rezoned, as well as its acreage, street address (if any) or location with respect to nearby public roads; and the subdivision (if any) in which it is located. 
b.  Five copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow; land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of that tract and adjacent properties; existence of structures of intermediate regional floodplain on the property; and the current zoning of the tract; prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. His seal shall be affixed to the plat, which also shall be signed by him. 
c.  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any. If an agent is proceeding on behalf of the property owner, the owner must provide a written authorization to this effect that is witnessed by a notary public. 
d.  A letter of intent detailing the manner in which the property will be used if rezoned. 
e.  Each zoning map amendment application, whether submitted by local government, or by a party other than local government, shall include with it to be complete a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters conducted and stamped by a licensed landscape architect or engineer for all rezoning except AG and R districts that do not fall under subdivision regulation in which studies may be done by the applicant: 
1.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
2.  Whether the zoning proposal would adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
3.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
4.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools. 
5.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive land use plan. 
6.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(3)  Scheduling. Applications shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted annually by the planning and zoning commission. The city planning and zoning commission adopted a schedule in which the requests for rezoning will be heard the second Monday of each month and will be sent to the city council to be heard on the third Monday of the same month. Application fees for an application to amend the official zoning maps shall be established by the city council and made available by the building inspector. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the city council or by the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  Withdrawal of application. An application shall not be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising, as required by this article, has first appeared, except as may be permitted by the city council. 
(5)  Materials regarding application. An applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application. If any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto are proposed by an applicant and have not been filed, as required by this subsection, city council, at the time of the public hearing on the application, may defer any action on such application to a specific meeting date. The date designated for action on the application shall be set at a time that will allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this subsection. 
(c)  City study. 
(1)  Staff employed by the planning and zoning commission or the building inspector or his designee or employee, upon receiving an application to amend the official zoning maps, may do the following: 
a.  With respect to the application to amend the adopted official zoning maps, consider each of the matters set forth in [subsection (b)(2)e]. 
b.  Consult with other departments of the city to fully evaluate the impact of any zoning district change upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to, schools, drainage, traffic and related facilities. 
c.  Conduct a site review of the property and surrounding area, as well as an analysis of any previous zoning history relative to the tract. 
d.  Submit a written record of his investigation to the planning and zoning commission and city council, which report shall be a matter of public record. 
(2)  The building inspector's report may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning district requested and recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, and the health, public safety and general welfare will be secured. 
(d)  Commission action on rezoning application or text amendment. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application in accordance with a schedule adopted by the planning and zoning commission. The chief building inspector or his designee at the public hearing shall state staff's recommendation for each application after hearing proponents and opponents issues. Should a study have been conducted and was written for any one or all of the applications, then a reasonable number of copies of this analysis will be made to the public. In addition, the planning and zoning commission shall, with respect to each application, consider each of the matters set forth in subsections (b) and (g) of this section. As to each application, the planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The commission's action also may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made; change the district requested; and recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, and the health, public safety and general welfare are secured. A written report of the commission's investigation and recommendation, along with the investigation and recommendation of the building inspector, shall be submitted to the city council and shall be of public record. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission may adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of public hearings and meetings as are consistent with state laws and city codes and are appropriate to its responsibilities, which shall be published and available to the public. 
(e)  City council's action on zoning map or text amendment. Before taking action on a proposed amendment and after receipt of the building inspector and planning and zoning commission recommendations and reports thereon, where required, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At the public hearings the city council shall review documents submitted by the initiating party, if any, and the report prepared by the building inspector and the planning and zoning commission. The city council also shall consider the matters set forth in subsections (b) and (g) of this section. So that the purpose of this chapter will be served and the health, public safety and general welfare secured, the city council may approve or deny the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, add or delete conditions of the application, defer its vote to another hearing, or allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with respect to the 12-month limitation of this division. An action by the city council to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered. However, if the second public hearing will allow continued presentation of positions or information by proponents or opponents, the deferred hearing also shall be re-advertised in compliance with subsection (f)(1) of this section. 
(f)  Public notification of zoning hearings. 
(1)  Legal notice. Due notice of the public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and city council shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city by advertising the nature of the application and the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearings at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the first hearing conducted by the planning and zoning commission, and not more than 45 nor less than 15 days prior to the date of any deferred public hearing as contemplated in subsection (e) of this section. If the application is for amendment to the official zoning maps, then the notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning district of the property, and the proposed zoning district of the property. 
(2)  Signs. As to an application to amend the official zoning maps, the building inspector shall post at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the planning and zoning commission and the city council's public hearings; and not more than 45 days nor less than 15 days prior to the date of any deferred public hearing; in a conspicuous place in the public right-of-way fronting the property for which an application has been submitted, signs containing information as to the application as set forth in subsection (f)(1) of this section and the date, time and place of the public hearings. 
(g)  Other standards for zoning decisions. In addition to the standards enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall all consider the following matters in reference to a rezoning application: 
(1)  The duration, if applicable, for which the property has been vacant; 
(2)  The existence of nonconforming uses on or adjacent to the property; 
(3)  Development patterns and trends in the community; 
(4)  Transportation needs and plans; 
(5)  Sewage and water demands and plans; 
(6)  The appropriateness of the site plan, if any, or intended use due to topography, watershed, floodplain, etc.; 
(7)  Potential air, water, noise and light pollution; and 
(8)  The need to balance the property owner's rights against the public welfare. 
(h)  Alteration of conditions of rezoning. 
(1)  All approved rezoning applications shall be maintained by the building inspector as public record. The building inspector shall have the authority to approve minor alterations of zoning conditions submitted with map amendments, including the following: 
a.  Building relocation, curb cut relocation and traffic circulation changes due to topographic, environmental or other design factors. 
b.  Parking design. 
c.  Addition of permitted accessory uses or structures. 
d.  Utility relocation. 
e.  Other alterations which, in his opinion, would not change the intent of a conditional zoning approval or adversely affect city services or other properties or uses. 
(2)  An application to alter conditions of rezoning not approved by the authority of the building inspector shall be submitted through the planning and zoning condition to the city council for public hearing. The application shall be processed in accordance with all provisions applicable to map amendments. 
(i)  Conflict of interest and disclosure rules for rezoning map or text amendment. 
(1)  A member of the planning and zoning commission, city, or any other city official who knows or reasonably should know that he: 
a.  Has any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the city (other than the re-adoption of the official zoning maps as a whole); 
b.  Has a ten percent or more direct ownership interest in the total assets or capital stock in any business entity which has any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the city; or 
c.  Has a spouse, parent, sibling or child with any interest as described in subsections (i)(1)a and (i)(1)b of this section; shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the city council, as soon as he knows of its existence. Such an official also shall disqualify himself from voting on the rezoning action and shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or anyone else to influence action on the rezoning action. Any written disclosures made pursuant to this subsection shall be of public record, available for public inspection. If disqualification as required by this section results in the inability of the city council to obtain a quorum for the purpose of making a final decision when considering a rezoning action, the city council shall initiate the special master process set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-67a-5, as amended. Moreover, questions of interpretation as to the application of this statute should be resolved by reference to the state law governing campaign contribution disclosures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67a-1 et seq., as amended. 
(2)  When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within five years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the local government or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
(3)  When any applicant or his attorney for a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. The disclosures required by this section shall be filed within ten days after an application for the rezoning action is first filed. 
(j)  Compliance with zoning procedures law. This section, as from time to time amended, is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and copies of this section's provisions shall be available to the public upon request. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-64. - Same—Division II; conditional use permits, variances, questions of interpretation and appeals. 
(a)  Application process. 
(1)  Application requirements. Applications for a hearing and decision on requests for conditional use permits, questions of interpretation, variances and appeals shall be filed in writing with the building inspector on forms he shall provide at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which they first are to be heard. Each application shall contain such information as the building inspector may require to enable the planning and zoning commission to make its decision. Each application for a variance or conditional use permit and, where applicable, questions of interpretation or an appeal, shall include a plat drawn to scale showing the following information: 
a.  All property lines with dimensions. 
b.  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks and easements referenced to the property line of the tract. 
c.  North arrow, land district and land lot number. 
d.  Location of setback lines or other dimensional requirements from which the variance is sought. 
e.  In the case of conditional use permits, a conceptual plan containing details of location, size, footprint and other items relevant to the proposed use. 
(2)  If part of rezoning process. Conditional use permit requests shall not require a separate application when included with a petition for rezoning. However, each request for a conditional use permit shall be listed as a separate matter on the rezoning petition. Each request shall be voted on separately, and each conditional use permit request submitted as part of a rezoning petition shall be treated independently in the minutes of the planning and zoning commission and city council meetings. 
(3)  Notice of hearing. Notice of any hearing of the planning and zoning commission on a conditional use permit, variance, question of interpretation or appeal shall be preceded, at a minimum, by such notice or advertising as may be required by state law. Additionally, at least five days' notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by mail to the applicant. 
(4)  Reapplication. Applications under this section to the planning and zoning commission which are denied shall not be resubmitted for consideration of the denied application for a period of 12 months from the date the application was denied. However, the planning and zoning commission may, by unanimous vote of all members present and constituting a quorum, waive this waiting period upon presentation of new evidence which would warrant reconsideration of the application. 
(5)  Effect on legal proceedings. An application for interpretation, variance, conditional use permit or appeal stays all legal proceedings unless the building inspector certifies after the application shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(6)  Appeals to city council. 
a.  It is the intention of this division that from a decision of the planning and zoning commission, recourse shall be had to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the building inspector within ten days of the decision appealed from. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the planning and zoning commission may take an appeal to the city council. The authority to file an appeal shall also be granted to the building inspector or any member of the city council. This appeals process does not apply to rezoning amendment matters; it only applies to decisions of the planning and zoning commission concerning variances, conditional use permits, questions of interpretation and appeals taken by it. 
b.  The office of the city council shall schedule a hearing on the appeal to be held within 30 days of the date the appeal is filed. This appeal also shall be accompanied by a fee set by the city council to partially defray the public expense in processing the application. The fee shall not be required for an appeal filed by the building inspector or a member of the city council. 
c.  Advance notice of the city council's hearing on appeal shall take the form of such notice or advertising as is required by subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
d.  An appeal shall not stay the effectiveness of any approved variances, conditional use permits, and questions of interpretation that is the subject of the appeal. However, the owner of property who has received the variance, permit or favorable interpretation shall proceed at his own risk that a revocation of the same may occur and development may be halted when the appeal is resolved. 
(7)  City council's action on conditional use requests. Before taking action on a proposed conditional use request and after receipt of the building inspector and planning and zoning commission recommendations and any reports thereon, where required, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At the public hearing the city council shall review documents submitted by the initiating party, if any, and the report prepared by the building inspector and the planning and zoning commission. So that the purpose of this chapter will be served and the health, public safety, and general welfare secured, the city council may approve or deny the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, add or delete conditions/standards required under this section, defer its vote to another hearing, or allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with respect to the 12-month limitation to this chapter. An action to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered. However, if the second public hearing will allow continued presentation of positions or information by the proponents and opponents, the deferred hearing also shall be re-advertised in compliance with subsection 75-63(f)(1). 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Conditional use permits; generally. This section specifies uses which are not classified as permitted uses in the various zoning districts, and are therefore only allowed through the approval of a conditional use permit. The standards that apply to each use are enumerated and must be met in order for an application to be considered. The minimum standards for al such special uses are as follows: 
a.  Any use which may be authorized by conditional use permit shall be presented to the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council, provided that: 
1.  The standards for the use permit as specified in this section and any additional standard that may be specified by the planning and zoning commission and/or the city council can be met; 
2.  The benefits of and need for the proposed conditional use are more than any possible depreciating effects and damages to the neighboring properties; 
3.  Recommendations have been received from the city building inspector; and, 
4.  Conditions imposed with respect to right-of-way dedication and roadway, water, sewer and/or other infrastructure improvements, if any, are met. 
b.  Any use which may be authorized by conditional use permit shall comply with all other city regulations, zoning district regulations and other regulations contained in this section and conditions of its approval or zoning approval. Whenever a standard contained in the division is in conflict with another provision of this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail. 
(2)  Conditional use permits; specific uses. Specific conditional uses are allowed in the specified zoning districts by way of conditional use permit only. All standards set forth in this section and in each of the relevant following sections must be satisfied before the use may be approved. Article IV of this chapter should also be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Airport, general aviation: 
Allowable districts: I-2 
Additional standards: 
Cannot constitute a nuisance to areas surrounding the airport and flight paths. 
Must have FAA approval. 
Amusement or recreational activities (commercial), carried on outside a building, such as a golf course, softball field, parks, playgrounds, and uses of similar nature): 
Allowable districts: A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, I-1, I-2 
Additional standards: 
A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines shared with any lot zoned or in use for residential purposes. 
Exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
This use shall not be permitted within 200 feet of a property line. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
If approved, this use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
Athletic field, public: 
Allowable districts: A-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2, I-1 
Additional standards: 
A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines shared with a any lot zoned or in use for residential purposes. 
Exterior light shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
This use shall not be permitted within 200 feet of a property line. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
If approved, this use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
Broadcasting studio (radio, television): 
Allowable districts: A-1 
Additional standards: Refer to City of Eatonton Code of Ordinances, Chapter 63 - Telecommunications. 
Cabin/hunting lodge: 
Allowable districts: A-1, R-3 
Additional standards: 
Minimum lot size: 1.1 acre. 
Intended for only temporary occupancy. 
Water and sanitation service must be available. 
Carnival, rodeo, horse show, athletic event, tent revival, community fair or other event of interest to the public - not to exceed 30 days: 
Allowable districts: A-1, I-2 
Additional standards: 
The user must apply for a permit with the building inspector. 
All buildings or other structures must be set back a minimum of 500 feet from all property lines. 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties. 
This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
This use may be restricted to property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same, if deemed appropriate by the building inspector. 
The user must make arrangements to provide adequate sanitation services. 
The use cannot be of more than 30 days in duration unless approved otherwise. 
Permittee must provide evidence that suitable parking is available/present. 
Some uses may not be established on a lot that is either in, adjacent to, or directly across the street from any R district. 
The building inspector may require additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect public health, human life and the environment. 
Failure to apply for a permit will constitute a violation of this ordinance and shall be punishable per section 75-692. (Also applicable to nonprofit.) 
Cemetery or mausoleums: 
Allowable districts: A-1, C-2, I-1, I-2 
Additional standards: 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
The minimum size for a cemetery/mausoleum not adjacent to a church: Ten acres. 
No structure shall be located within 200 feet of any property line. 
Arrangements must be made for perpetual landscaping and maintenance. 
There must be direct access to a public road. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
Churches or other places of worship: 
Allowable districts: All except I-1, I-2 
Additional standards: 
When in an R district, any building or structure established in connection with these uses shall be set back not less than 75 feet from any property line, except where this adjoining property is zoned for nonresidential use, in which case the setback shall be the same as required for the adjoining nonresidential district. Where this property line is a street line, the front yard setback established for the R district shall apply. 
When in an R district, these uses shall be permitted only on a lot that has access to an arterial or collector street. 
The site must have access to a public street. 
No parking area shall be established within 20 feet of another R use. 
Clinic, public or private: 
Allowable districts: R-2, R-3 
Additional standards: 
Hours of operation must be reasonable and not interfere with adjacent uses. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
Commercial/public shooting range (indoor and outdoor) archery range: 
Allowable districts: 
Indoor range: A-1. 
Outdoor range: A-1, C-2, I-1, I-2 
Additional standards: 
This use shall not be permitted adjacent to or across the right-of-way from any R districts or MHP districts. In the case of an outdoor range, it shall not be permitted adjacent to or across the right-of-way from a dwelling unless there is a 2,000-foot setback from the property line adjacent to the dwelling or consent is obtained from any affected owner(s) of the dwelling(s) for a lesser distance. 
The outdoor range shall have at least a 300-foot planted or naturally forested buffer from any property line. This may be reduced for archery ranges or shotgun type facilities. 
The down range direction of an outdoor range shall be in a direction that is the least likely to cause any harm or damage in the case of a gross accident but in no case shall bear directly upon a street, dwelling or place of business. 
A berm of at least ten feet in height shall run down range and to the outside of the outdoor range and encompass the shooters' booth/bench or discharge point. At the end of the range (indoor or outdoor) there shall be some type of bullet trap whether earthen or of a manufactured/constructed nature and shall be of a suitable height but no less than ten feet in the case of an outdoor range. These conditions may be modified or eliminated in the case of a facility utilizing shotguns or bows. 
There shall be some means of protection between each shooter bench or position in the case of a lateral discharge. 
Any exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
A six-foot minimum fence shall completely encompass at least the physical outdoor shooting range. 
Adequate ventilation shall be provided for indoor facilities. 
Operational hours may be established and/or restricted by the board, as it deems appropriate. 
In the case of compound bows, re-curved bows or other forms of weapon ranges, as well as the above, the planning and zoning commission and the city council may waive certain conditions or place additional conditions as they deem necessary. 
Community center/assembly halls: (includes armories, union halls, conference halls, business meeting locations, civic halls, and internal gathering places for activities of a similar nature.) 
Allowable districts: A-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, I-1 
Additional standards: 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
Exterior light shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
If approved and adjacent to residential properties, this use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
Country clubs: 
Allowable districts: A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, PUD, C-1, C-2 
Additional standards: 
A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be required. 
A fence or wall, at least six feet high, may be required to be established along all property lines. 
Central loud speakers are not allowed unless approved for a specific event. 
Exteriorlighting shall be deflected away from adjacent property owners. 
Fire station — volunteer: 
Allowable districts: All districts 
Additional standards: 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
Flea markets/outdoor malls: 
Allowable districts: A-1, C-1, C-2, I-1 
Additional standards: 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
Exterior light shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
If approved and adjacent to residential properties, this use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
This use may be restricted to property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same, if deemed appropriate by the building inspector. 
The user must make arrangements to provide adequate sanitation services. 
The building inspector may require additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect public health, human life and the environment. 
Fraternities and sororities: 
Allowable districts: R-2, R-3 
Additional standards: 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
Exterior light shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
The structure associated with this use must be within one mile of the campus of a local college or university to which the students attend. 
All residents must be students of the local college or university. 
If approved and adjacent to residential properties, this use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
Funeral home: 
Allowable districts: A-1, R-2, R-3, I-1 
Additional standards: 
The use may not create noise, smell, excessive traffic, or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
Exterior light shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
Adequate parking must be provided so that no on-street parking shall restrict the use of local residents. 
This use may be restricted to property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same, if deemed appropriate by the building inspector. 
Group homes (six or less residential): 
Allowable districts: A-1, All residential, C-1 
Additional standards: 
Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space per three beds, plus one space for every doctor (staff or visiting) and for every two employees. 
Parking must be designed as to provide for easy access and turnaround for emergency vehicles. 
Surroundings must be consistent with the health and well being of the residents. 
The lot must be of a size sufficient to allow outdoor use or exercise b the residents. 
The maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. 
Group homes (more than six): 
Allowable districts: C-1, C-2, A-1 
Additional standards: 
Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space per three beds, plus one space for every doctor (staff or visiting) and for every two employees. 
Parking must be designed as to provide for easy access and turnaround for emergency vehicles. 
Surroundings must be consistent with the health and well being of the residents. 
The lot must be of a size sufficient to allow outdoor use or exercise by the residents. 
The maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
This use may be restricted to property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same, if deemed appropriate by the building inspector. 
Home occupations, day care (more than six): 
Allowable districts: A-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 
Additional standards: 
Must receive certificate of registration from the Department of Human Resources Family and Children Services Day Care Services. (DEFACS) 
Must abide with and follow federal and local requirements and regulations whichever is stricter. 
Home occupations, general: 
Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. 
Home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
No business or advertising sign is allowed for home occupations. 
Use of the building for this purpose shall not exceed 25 percent of one floor of the principle building. 
No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
Any accessory building or structure shall be in keeping with the essential residential character and shall comply with all development and construction standards such as setbacks and applicable SBCCI, federal, state and local codes. 
Instruction in music and similar subjects shall be limited to two students at a time. 
Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
No use shall involve public contact on the property except for tutoring, music lessons, etc. and no article, or product shall be sold on the premises other than by telephone without approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: telemarketing, insurance agent, music teacher, notary public, photography, real estate agent, tax consultant. 
Those requesting a home occupation within the historic district shall obtain a favorable recommendation from the historic preservation commission before submitting an application for a home occupation to the planning and development department. Should an unfavorable decision be received from the historic preservation commission, an appeal may be made to the city council by filing an appeal at the planning and development office. 
Junkyards: 
Allowable districts: I-1, I-2. 
Additional standards: 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, rodent infestation, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the boundary of any R district. 
A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines. 
The maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. 
A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be required. 
The minimum front yard setback is 100 feet. 
Vehicular access shall be from an arterial street. 
The minimum area is five acres. 
The minimum lot width is 300 feet. 
Lumber yard, coal storage yard: 
Allowable districts: C-2 
Additional standards: 
Outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the right-of-way. 
Yard shall be enclosed by an eight-foot, screening fence. 
Nursery schools, kindergarten: 
Allowable districts: R-2, R-3 
Additional standards: 
Off-street loading and unloading spaces are required. 
At least 100 feet of outdoor play area is supplied for each child. 
Entire play area must be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of four feet and constructed in such a manner that maximum safety of the children is insured. 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
A solid fence, wall or planted buffer must separate property from adjacent residential properties. 
Professional offices: (medical, dental, legal, financial, real estate, etc.) 
Allowable districts: R-2, R-3 
Additional standards: 
Off-street parking shall be provided with one space for each 200 square feet of floor area plus one space for each employee. 
All buildings and structures shall comply with the front, side and rear yard setback requirements established for the district in which it is to be located. 
Only one business sign, not to exceed six square feet in size, motionless, non-illuminated, and attached to the principle building. 
No advertising signs. 
Recycling centers: 
Allowable districts: All districts. 
Additional standards: 
The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines shared with any lot zoned or in use for residential purposes. 
The maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be required. 
A plan for rodent and other pest control shall be required. 
Schools (private or public): 
Allowable districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2 
Additional standards: 
The maximum lot coverage is 65 percent. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be required. 
A minimum front yard setback is 100 feet. 
Swimming pool, commercial or private: 
Allowable districts: A-1, all residential, C-1, C-2, I-1 
Additional standards: 
A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines shared with any lot zoned or in use for residential purposes. 
Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be required. 
If approved, this use may be subject to limitation upon the hours of operation or noise levels. 
Parking shall be provided at a ratio of five spaces per 1,000 square feet of pool and structure area. 
Tennis center, courts, private: 
Allowable districts: A-1, all residential, C-1, C-2, I-1 
Additional standards: 
A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines shared with any lot zoned or in use for residential purposes. 
Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties. 
The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be required. 
If approved, this use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
Parking shall be provided at a ratio of four spaces per tennis court. 
Travel trailer parks: 
Allowable districts: C-1, C-2 
Additional standards: 
No travel trailer park shall be located except with direct access to a county, state or federal highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for access points. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park though a residential district. 
The minimum lot area per park shall be three acres. 
Spaces in travel trailer parks may be used by travel trailers provided they meet any additional laws or ordinances and shall be rented by the day or week only, and an occupant of such space shall remain in the same trailer park for a period of not more than 30 days per six-month period. 
Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided that: 
Such establishments and the parking area primarily related to the operations shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park. 
Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of the commercial character that would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
No space shall be located so that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, arterial or collector streets. 
In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the county health department. 
(3)  Conditional use permits; expiration. All conditional use permits shall be in effect continuously from date of approval with the following exceptions: 
a.  The conditional use permit, to remain in effect, must be used/initiated within one year of the approval or the permit will expire after the one-year anniversary of the approval. 
b.  The conditional use conditions are not met or create a public nuisance. 
c.  Unless a time limit is set by the planning and zoning commission and/or the city council. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  A variance from the development standards of this chapter may be granted if: 
a.  The lot in question is exceptionally narrow, shallow or otherwise oddly shaped and was in existence when this chapter was adopted; or 
b.  There are other exceptional or unusual features or aspects of the property that would result in undue hardship or practical difficulty to the owner were the chapter applied. The applicant cannot create or cause the unusual circumstances of which he complains. 
(2)  Under no circumstances may a variance be granted to allow a use prohibited in any given zoning district. 
(d)  Questions of interpretation. The planning and zoning commission shall hear and resolve questions relating to interpretation of use restrictions, development standards and other administrative determinations made by the building inspector, zoning enforcement officer or other official in the administration or enforcement of any provision of this chapter. 
(e)  Appeals. The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there is an error in any order, requirement, development permit, decision, determination or refusal made by the building inspector or other administrative or enforcement of any provision of this chapter. Under no circumstances shall the planning and zoning commission hear appeals from decision of the city council, which appeals only may be heard in court in the manner prescribed by all applicable law. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-65. - Additional procedures for all public hearings. 
(a)  The following rules of procedure govern public hearings on all amendments, rezoning, variances, conditional use permits, appeals, matters of interpretation and similar matters relating to this chapter before the city planning and zoning commission and the city council. These rules apply to all such public hearing items appearing on any agenda. 
(1)  Individuals desiring to address either planning and zoning commission or city council regarding an agenda item are required to complete a name and address card and present it to the clerk. Applicants or proponents of an item on the public hearing agenda shall be heard first and shall have a total of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Opponents of the issue may respond and shall have a total of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Applicants or proponents may use any unused portion of their ten minutes for rebuttal. Opponents shall not have the right of rebuttal. If there is more than one speaker per side, speakers must divide their time in order to complete their full presentation within the ten-minute allotment. No demonstrations will be permitted. 
(2)  Written comments on the subject of the hearing may be submitted by any person at any time prior to the adjournments of the hearing. 
(3)  Following the presentation of positions by members of the public, a recommendation from the city staff shall be presented. 
(4)  Following the staff recommendation, members of either commission may ask of anyone present questions pertinent to the issue, and also may discuss the issue amongst themselves. 
(5)  Following questions and/or comments by commission members, a motion for action on the issue will be in order. 
(6)  Authorized action by the planning and zoning commission or the city council, with respect to any motion pending before it, consists of one of the following: approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice, or deferral to a time certain. Any vote shall be by roll call or show of hands. A tie vote acts as a denial. 
(7)  No official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least three members of the planning and zoning commission or city council, or a majority of a quorum, whichever is greater. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a unanimous vote of the quorum present shall be required [to] reverse a decision of the building inspector or zoning enforcement officer and to waive the waiting periods within which to re-file private applications which have been denied. 
(8)  Minutes of the meetings of the planning and zoning commission and city council shall be maintained and any written or other tangible materials presented at the hearing must be kept as a permanent records. Any person desiring a transcript of the hearing must arrange for a court reporter at his or her own expense. 
(9)  The planning and zoning commission and the city council shall confirm, in writing to the applicant, its decisions with respect to any matter pending before it at the request of a private applicant. Any map amendment shall be posted by the building inspector on the official zoning maps within 30 days of its approval by the commission. On the effective date of the amendment of the official zoning maps, such amendments shall be posted in an appropriate manner; and records accompanying or references upon the maps shall enable the identification of the official action by which such amendment was made and the date of such action. No such amendments shall become effective until such a change in entry has been made on the official maps, it being the intent of this chapter that the public shall be able to rely on such maps as correct and final authority as to current zoning status without investigating for possible errors or omissions. No change of any nature shall be made in the official zoning maps except in conformity with the procedures and requirements of this division. 
(b)  If the official zoning maps become damaged, lost or difficult to interpret by reason of the nature or number of changes, the planning and zoning commission may by ordinance authorize new official zoning maps which shall supersede the prior maps; provided, however, that if there is uncertainty about the zoning status of any area because of the condition of the maps or any part thereof, such action shall take the form of an amendment to this chapter, and shall resolve the uncertainty. The new official zoning maps may correct drafting or other omissions or errors in the prior maps, but no such correction shall have the effect of amendment as to zoning status unless the action adopting such maps is an amending action. The new official zoning maps shall be authenticated and attested as for the original, with wording indicating when and by what instrument the prior document was adopted. Unless the prior official zoning maps have been lost or wholly destroyed, such documents or any remaining significant parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with any significant records pertaining t the adoption or amendment, as a guide to prior zoning status of areas. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-66. - Assistance by building inspector. 
The building inspector shall provide such technical and clerical assistance as the planning and zoning commission and the city council may require, and shall maintain a permanent and complete record of the activities of both the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-67. - Fees. 
Each application for a rezoning, text amendment, variance, conditional use permit, question of interpretation or appeal shall be accompanied by a fee set by the city council to partially defray the public expense in processing the application. The fee shall not be required, however, for an application filed by the building inspector or a governmental agency. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-68. - Bylaws. 
The planning and zoning commission and the city council may adopt such other rules for its own internal administration and procedures, provided they are not inconsistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-69. - Corrective action. 
In such case that an application to the planning and zoning commission is initiated due to an existing violation of this chapter, and such application is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within ten days of such denial or as specified by the final decision-making authority if a greater time period is required. The maximum extension of time shall not exceed 30 days. The provision for compliance shall begin with the date of the final decision of the city council on a rezoning, or if an appeal to it is filed according to the provisions of this division; otherwise, compliance shall take place within the requisite period of time after the planning and zoning commission hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-70—75-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 75-91. - Establishment and purpose of districts. 
In order to implement the intent of this chapter, the official zoning maps shall divide the incorporated area of the city into the following districts: 
(1)  Agricultural (A-1). The A-1 district is a district for the rural use of land, or a district, which may reflect the existence of vacant land not as yet appropriate for development. This district may be used for residential purposes with a five-acre minimum lot. Farming in this district will be limited to horticultural uses. No livestock or farm animals will be permitted. 
(2)  Agricultural (A-2). The A-2 district is a district for the rural use of land, or a district, which may reflect the existence of vacant land not as yet appropriate for development. Residential development will not be permitted or allowed on agricultural land without reclassification to a residential zone. Residential development means changing the use, nature or character of a tract of land under single ownership by construction, preparing land for construction, or moving onto the land more than one dwelling per five acres, except that more than one dwelling per parcel may be allowed on said parcel provided that all dwellings on said parcel are occupied by a parent, child or sibling of the lot owner of record. 
(3)  Single-family residential district (R-1). The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 12,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. New residences erected in this district shall be in conformity with and not substandard to the existing homes in their vicinity. 
(4)  Single-family residential district (R-2). The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 10,000 square feet. This district is designed to accommodate manufactured housing in addition to site built and modular homes. 
(5)  Multi-family residential district (R-3). The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of high-density residential areas for one, two and multi-family dwellings, said areas being protected from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
(6)  Manufactured home community district (R-4). The purpose of the manufactured home community district is to provide areas within the city exclusively for manufactured home residences and for buildings directly related to the operation of the manufactured home community residential area. Manufactured home community residential areas shall be a minimum of three acres with manufactured home spaces of at least 4,000 square feet each. (See section 75-452) 
(7)  Local business district (C-1). The purpose of this district shall be to enhance and protect shopping facilities in the local business districts of the city. It is a district primarily for planned shopping centers or limited retail activities designed to serve the surrounding neighborhood with convenience goods, retail services and personal services. 
(8)  General commercial district (C-2). The purpose of the general commercial district is to provide for those business activities that are larger users of space than commercial uses serving the central commercial district and the needs of individual neighborhoods and highway business areas. It is a district for general business, storage and limited manufacturing activities, which also includes retail sales and personal services. 
(9)  Light industrial district (I-1). The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses that do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics that might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. 
(10)  Heavy industrial district (I-2). The purpose of this heavy industrial district is to provide a location for those industrial operations and processes which are not considered nuisances but which have objectionable characteristics that are not injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
(11)  Downtown business overlay (DB). The purpose of this overlay is to identify and protect that area that centers on the courthouse square for its unique and/or historic buildings with limited commercial uses. 
(12)  Flood hazard overlay (F-H). The purpose of the flood hazard overlay is to identify areas of the city that are identified by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as being subject to periodic flooding; and to limit development in these areas to uses that will be least damaged by flooding. Registered land surveyors must establish boundary limits. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 75-92. - Designation on maps. 
The boundaries of the various zoning districts are shown upon the official zoning maps of the city/county, as they may be amended from time to time and which are hereby made a part of this article and which shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners by the building inspector as a public document available for public inspection and examination. The official zoning maps shall be those 228 tax parcel/land lot tax maps as shown in the atlas entitled, "The Official Zoning Atlas of Putnam County, Georgia, June 17, 1997," signed by the chairman of the board of commissioners and maintained for public inspection at the clerk's office by the building inspector and which contain land lot, district, parcel and street boundaries located in the city/county; the "Aerial Photo-Sheet Index" map and the "1997 Master Zoning Map of Putnam County"; such maps shall and do also contain the zoning districts and zoning district boundaries. All such official zoning maps and all notations, references, and information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this article as if all the matter and information set forth by the maps were fully described in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-93. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline or right-of-way line of streets and alleys, land lot lines, militia district lines or lot lines, these lines shall be construed to be these boundaries. 
(2)  In un-subdivided property or tracts, where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of these boundaries, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on theses maps. 
(3)  Where boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerline or right-of-way line of streets, alleys or highways, these boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the zoning maps. If no distance is given, this dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the maps. 
(4)  In case any further uncertainty exists, the city council shall determine the location of boundaries as a request for interpretation and only after public hearing as per the policies and procedures set forth in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-94. - Permitted uses and district standards. 
Within the various zoning districts, as described in this article and shown on the official zoning maps, no land, building or structure shall be used as a matter of right except in accordance with the uses and standards permitted within each district. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-95—75-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 75-111. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the A-1 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the development standards applicable to the district. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: 
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Home occupation — Commercial: (for additional standards refer to section 75-452, Permitted uses.) 
Barber shop. 
Beauty salon. 
Convenience store. (No gas, diesel or kerosene fuel pumps.) 
Florist. 
Hobby/craft shop. 
Landscaping. 
Woodworking shop. 
Home occupation, general (See section 75-452 for additional requirements. Home occupations that require state or federal licensing or inspections, are conditional use only. See section 75-64 for additional standards, if required.) 
Home occupation, daycare (less than six children): conditional use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Field crops. 
Fruits/vegetable crops. 
Grape growing and wine distillation, production and sale. 
Greenhouse/nursery. 
Produce stands. 
Sawmill: temporary, permanent, portable. 
Silos. 
Timber/logging. 
Animal care facilities: Kennels/shelters. 
Building equipment, building materials and farm equipment: 
Earth moving equipment. 
Farm equipment. 
Communication: Transmission and communication tower. 
Community facilities: 
Fire station (volunteer). 
Parks, private. 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Water towers. 
Governmental uses. 
Private tennis court. 
Dwellings: 
Group home (less than six residents). 
Manufactured home. 
Modular home. 
Single-family residence. 
Education: Public schools. 
Lodging (temporary): 
Bed and breakfast. 
Manufacturing and industrial uses: 
Timber processing. 
Planned developments: See section 75-452(n). 
Recreation and entertainment: None. 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship by conditional use permit. 
Retail trade: 
Convenience stores. 
Sale of goods produced or processed on the premises. 
Sales related to agriculture. 
Services: Pest control. 
Storage: 
Storage during construction. 
Warehousing of goods produced on the premises. 
Temporary uses: 
Occupancy during construction. 
Security occupancy. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Res. of 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 75-112. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size in the A-1 district is five acres. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building setback line in the A-1 district is 125 feet. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements in A-1 districts are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: 50 feet. 
(2)  Side yard: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures. The maximum height of structures in A-1 districts is 35 feet (except water towers). 
(e)  Minimum heated floor area. The minimum heated floor area in A-1 districts is 450 square feet. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
DIVISION 3. - A-2 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 75-113. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the A-2 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the development standards applicable to the district. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: 
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Home occupation — Commercial: (for additional standards refer to section 75-452, Permitted uses.) 
Automotive repair and paint shop. 
Barber shop. 
Beauty salon. 
Convenience store. (No gas, diesel or kerosene fuel pumps.) 
Earthmoving equipment. 
Florist. 
Hobby/craft shop. 
Landscaping. 
Metalworking shop. 
Small engine repair/motor winding shop. 
Welding shop. 
Woodworking shop. 
Home occupation, general: (See section 75-452 for additional requirements. Home occupations that require state or federal licensing or inspections, are conditional use only. See section 75-64 for additional standards, if required.) 
Home occupation, daycare (less than six children): Conditional use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Field crops. 
Fish hatcheries. 
Fruits/vegetable crops. 
Grape growing and wine distillation, production and sale. 
Greenhouse/nursery. 
Produce stands. 
Riding stables. 
Sawmill: temporary, permanent, portable. 
Settling ponds. 
Silos. 
Timber/logging. 
Animal care facilities: Kennels/shelters. 
Building equipment, building materials and farm equipment: 
Earth moving equipment. 
Farm equipment. 
Communication: Transmission and communication tower. 
Community facilities: 
Fire station (volunteer). 
Parks, private. 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Water towers. 
Governmental uses. 
Private tennis court. 
Dwellings: 
Group home (less than six residents). 
Manufactured home. 
Modular home. 
Single-family residence. 
Education: Public schools. 
Lodging (temporary): 
Bed and breakfast. 
Manufacturing and industrial uses: 
Milk and food processing. 
Timber processing. 
Planned developments: See section 75-452(n). 
Recreation and entertainment: 
Fishing lake. 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship by conditional use permit. 
Retail trade: 
Bait sales. 
Convenience stores. 
Hardware/electrical supplies. 
Ice sales. 
Sale of goods produced or processed on the premises. 
Taxidermist. 
Sales related to agriculture. 
Services: Pest control. 
Storage: 
Storage during construction. 
Warehousing of goods produced on the premises. 
Silos. 
Cold storage. 
Temporary uses: 
Occupancy during construction. 
Security occupancy. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Res. of 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 75-114. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size in the A-2 district is twenty acres. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building setback line in the A-2 district is 125 feet. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements in A-2 districts are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: 50 feet. 
(2)  Side yard: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures. The maximum height of structures in A-2 districts is 35 feet (except silos or water towers). 
(e)  Minimum heated floor area. The minimum heated floor area in A-2 districts is 450 square feet. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-115—75-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-1 RESIDENTIAL LOW-DENSITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 75-131. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the R-1 district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the development standards applicable to the R-1 district. However, additional restrictions may apply, as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: 
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use: two, excluding a well house and pool. 
Home occupation, general. (See section 75-452 for additional requirements. Home occupations that require state or federal licensing or inspections, are conditional use only per section 75-64.) 
Home occupation, daycare (less than six children): Conditional use. 
Agriculture and forestry: Sawmill, portable: by conditional use permit. 
Community facilities: 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Water towers. 
Governmental uses. 
Dwellings: 
Group homes (less than six residents). 
Site-built single-family residence (includes cottages and modular homes). 
Garage apartments (Conditional Use.) 
Relative residences. 
Lodging (temporary): 
Bed and breakfast. 
Planned developments: See subsection 75-452(n). 
Recreation and entertainment: 
Parks/playgrounds, private. 
Swimming pool, private (less than one user). 
Tennis centers, clubs and facilities. 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship by conditional use permit. 
Services: Hospice, six or less. 
Temporary uses: 
Mobile office/sales center. 
Storage/occupancy during construction, 12 months maximum. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Res. of 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 75-132. - Development standards. 
(a)  Maximum dwellings per lot: One. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width in the R-1 district at setback is 125 feet. 
(c)  Minimum setbacks: The minimum setbacks in the R-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  From front property line/right-of-way: 30 feet/45 feet from a major road. 
(2)  From rear of lot: 20 feet. 
(3)  From side line: 20 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: The maximum height of structures in the R-1 district is 35 feet (except for water towers). 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: The basic parking requirement in the R-1 district is two spaces per dwelling unit. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: The maximum lot coverage by buildings in the R-1 district is 35 percent. 
(g)  Minimum lot area: 
(1)  Individual well and septic system is 1.1 acre. 
(2)  Public or community well and septic system: 30,000 square feet. 
(3)  Individual well and sewer: 30,000 square feet. 
(4)  City water and sewer: 12,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-133—75-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-2 RESIDENTIAL LOW-DENSITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 75-141. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the R-2 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the district development standards that apply to it. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: 
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Home occupation, general. (See section 75-452 for additional requirements. Home occupations that require state or federal licensing or inspections, are conditional use only per section 75-64.) 
Home occupation, daycare (less than six children): Conditional use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Produce stands. 
Sawmill, portable. 
Community facilities: 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Water towers. 
Governmental uses. 
Dwellings: 
Group homes (less than six residents). 
Manufactured home. 
Modular home. 
Single-family residence. 
Garage apartment. 
Relative residence. 
Education: Public schools. 
Lodging (temporary): 
Bed and breakfast. 
Planned developments: See section 75-452(n). 
Recreation and entertainment: 
Parks/playgrounds, private. 
Swimming pool, private (but more than one user). 
Tennis centers, clubs and facilities (private). 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship. 
Services: Hospice, six or less residents. 
Temporary uses: 
Mobile office/sales center. 
Storage/occupancy during construction. 
Camper/travel trailer: No more than 14 days within a 30-day period. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Res. of 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 75-142. - Development standards. 
(a)  Maximum dwelling(s), per lot: One. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width in the R-2 district at the setback is 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum setbacks: The minimum setback requirements for the R-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  From front property line/right-of-way: 30 feet/45 feet from major road. 
(2)  From rear of lot: 20 feet. 
(3)  Side line: 20 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: The maximum height of structures in the R-2 district is 35 feet (except for water towers). 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: The basic parking requirements for the R-2 district are two spaces per single-family home. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: The maximum lot coverage by buildings in the R-2 district is 35 percent. 
(g)  Minimum lot area: The minimum lot areas in the R-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Individual well and septic system: 1.1 acre. 
(2)  Public or community well and septic system: 30,000 square feet. 
(3)  Individual well and sewer: 30,000 square feet. 
(4)  City water and sewer: 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-143—75-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-3 RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 75-191. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the R-3 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the district development standards that apply to it. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: 
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Home occupation, general. (See section 75-452 for additional requirements. Home occupations that require state or federal licensing or inspections, are conditional use only per section 75-64.) 
Home occupation, daycare (less than six children): conditional use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Produce stands. 
Sawmill, portable. 
Community facilities: 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Water towers. 
Governmental uses. 
Dwellings: 
Duplex. 
Triplex. 
Apartments. 
Condominiums. 
Fee-simple townhouses. 
Education: Public schools. 
Lodging (temporary): 
Bed and breakfast. 
Planned developments: See subection 75-452(n). 
Recreation and entertainment: 
Parks/playgrounds, private. 
Swimming pool, private (but more than one user). 
Tennis centers, clubs and facilities (private). 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship. 
Services: Hospice, six or less residents. 
Temporary uses: 
Mobile office/sales center. 
Storage/occupancy during construction. 
Camper/travel trailer: No more than 14 days within a 30-day period. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Res. of 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 75-192. - Development standards. 
(a)  Maximum units per lot: Eight units per acre. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width in the R-3 district at the setback is 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum setbacks: The minimum setback requirements for the R-3 district are as follows: 
(1)  From front property line/right-of-way: 30 feet/45 feet from major road. 
(2)  From rear of lot: 
a.  Duplex, or triplex: 20 feet. 
b.  Apartments, condominiums, or fee-simple townhouses: 15 feet. 
(3)  Side line: 
a.  Duplex, or triplex: 20 feet. 
b.  Apartments, condominiums, or fee-simple townhouses: Ten feet. 
(d)  Minimum square footage: The minimum square footage per dwelling in the R-3 district for duplex, triplex, apartments, condominiums, or fee-simple townhouses is 450 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(e)  Maximum height of structures: The maximum height of structures in the R-3 district is 35 feet (except for water towers). 
(f)  Basic parking requirement: The basic parking requirements for the R-3 district are 1½ spaces per dwelling unit for duplex, triplex, apartments, condominiums, and fee-simple townhouses. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: The maximum lot coverage by buildings in the R-3 district is 35 percent. 
(h)  Minimum lot area: The minimum lot areas in the R-3 district are as follows: 
(1)  Individual well and septic system: 1.1 acre. 
(2)  Public or community well and septic system: 30,000 square feet. 
(3)  Individual well and sewer: 30,000 square feet. 
(4)  City water and sewer: 20,000 square feet - duplex, triplex, apartments, condominiums, and fee-simple townhouses (depending on availability of water and sewer and the requirements by state or federal agency responsible for such approval). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-193—75-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - R-4 MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 75-271. - Uses allowed. 
Manufactured home park, abbreviated in this division as MHP is a parcel of land under single ownership on which three or more manufactured homes are located for the purpose of residential use and does not include sales, manufacture or storage of such units. Those uses allowed in the MHP zoning district as a matter of right are as follows: However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: 
Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use. 
Home occupation, general. 
Agriculture and forestry: Temporary or portable sawmill. 
Community facilities: 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Neighborhood recreation facilities. 
Water towers. 
Governmental uses. 
Dwellings: 
Manufactured homes. 
Travel trailers. (conditional use) 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship by conditional use permit. 
Retail trade: By conditional use. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-272. - Development standards: total site. 
(a)  Minimum development standard for total MHP area. 
Minimum MHP parcel area: Three acres. 
Density: Five manufactured homes per acre. 
Minimum MHP setback requirements (before individual lots are established): 
From state/federal highway: 150 feet. 
From city roadway: 100 feet. 
Front: 50 feet. 
Sides: 25 feet; 100 feet if the side abuts other R districts. 
Rear: 40 feet; 100 feet if the side abuts other R districts. 
Open space requirement: Ten percent, which may include recreational uses. 
Streets: Streets within MHPs shall be privately owned, constructed and maintained. 
Streets and shall provide direct accessibility to each lot and residential unit. 
No lot or unit shall be accessible except by way of an internal street. 
Internal streets shall have a minimum of a 40-foot right-of-way and a minimum of 20 feet of paved surface. 
Parking and traffic requirements: 
Minimum entrance width: 50 feet. 
Parking spaces: Two per manufactured home space. 
Internal driveways must be paved and have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
Buffer: Twenty-five feet; 50 feet when adjacent to other R districts, densely planted with evergreen and hedge-type shrubs designed to provide full screening on the park. 
Recreational areas: A minimum of ten percent of the total usable area of the park shall be set aside and designated for recreational purposes. Such areas shall be centrally located within the park and shall contain individual areas that shall be equipped for passive adult recreation, children's play and a fenced tot lot. 
Commercial uses: If permitted accessory commercial uses are developed on the site, those uses must comply with the setback, buffer, minimum lot size and minimum lot width of the C-1 district in this article. Any portion of a manufactured home park tract used for such purposes cannot be counted as available acreage for purposes of calculating dwelling unit density. No more than ten percent of the park may be used for such commercial purposes. 
Leasehold requirements: No space shall be rented in any manufactured home park for periods of less than 30 days. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-273. - Development standards; each manufactured home lot. 
Each home shall be located on an individual lot. Each lot shall front on an interior private street. Each lot shall have all corners clearly marked. Each space shall have the parking areas required in this section and, in addition, shall have a concrete patio of at least 100 square feet which shall be convenient to the entrance of the home. In no event shall the home and parking areas cover more than one-third of the space of the individual lot. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 4,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building setback line: 50 feet; minimum lot depth: 80 feet. 
(3)  Required yards: Minimum of ten feet (all sides). 
(4)  From right-of-way of interior streets: 25 feet. 
(5)  From adjacent units: 20 feet end-to-end and 40 feet side-to-side. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-274—75-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - C-1 LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of May 17, 2010 deleted the former Div. 8, §§ 75-301—75-303 which pertained to DB downtown business district and derived from Ord. of 3-20-2006 and Amd. of 9-21-2009. In addition, the Amd. of May 17, 2010, renumbered Div. 9, §§ 75-311, 75-312 as Div. 8, §§ 75-301, 75-302. 

Sec. 75-301. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the C-1 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the development standards applicable to the C-1 district. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Produce stands. 
Sawmill, portable. 
Animal care facilities: 
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
Grooming shops. 
Pet stores. 
Automotive, boat and trailer; sales and service: 
Automobile service station, no repairs. 
Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rentals. 
Automobile/truck wash service. 
Automobile parts and tire store; retail. 
Boat sales and service. 
Building, building materials and farm equipment: 
Electrical supply stores. 
Feed, seed, fertilizer and insecticide sales. 
Hardware store. 
Paint, glass and wallpaper stores. 
Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
Commercial recreation and entertainment: 
Amusement, recreational and entertainment activities carried on wholly within a permanently enclosed building. 
Athletic club. 
Athletic field, private. 
Swimming pool, public. 
Communication: 
Communication services: Western union, etc. 
Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
Telephone business offices. 
Community facilities: 
Assembly halls (includes armories). 
Cultural facilities (museums, galleries, live theater). 
Fraternal club or lodge. 
Funeral home. 
Governmental uses. 
Noncommercial club or lodge (except fraternal club or lodge). 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Volunteer fire stations. 
Water towers. 
Dwellings: 
Second floor apartments in downtown area. 
Security. 
Eating and drinking places: 
Bar/tavern/cocktail lounge. 
Cafeteria. 
Coffee shop. 
Drive-in restaurants. 
Drive-through restaurants. 
Fast food restaurants. 
Lunch counter. 
Restaurants: sit down. 
Education: 
College and universities, private. 
Colleges and universities, public. 
Day nurseries/kindergartens. 
Industry-related schools/training centers/trade schools. 
Public schools. 
Specialized non-degree schools (business, art, dance, etc.). 
Vocational/technical schools. 
Lodging (temporary): 
Bed and breakfast/tourist homes. 
Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls. 
Planned developments: See subsection 75-452(n)(4). 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship. 
Retail trade: 
Antique shop. 
Apparel and accessory stores. 
Appliance store and repairs. 
Art store. 
Bait sales. 
Bakery/cookies. 
Banks/financial institutions. 
Book and stationery stores. 
Candy store. 
Camera and photographic supply stores. 
Carpet/rug sales. 
Cigar stores and stands. 
Computer sales. 
Consignment shops. 
Convenience stores. 
Department store. 
Drugstores. 
Farm and garden supply stores (internal operation). 
Florists. 
Food/grocery stores. 
Fuel/gasoline: manufacturers and wholesalers. 
Furniture and home furnishings stores. 
General merchandise stores. 
Gift, novelty and souvenir shops. 
Hardware/electrical supplies. 
Hobby, toy and game stores. 
Ice cream/yogurt shop. 
Ice sales. 
Jewelry stores. 
Light repair services: TV, radio, small items. 
Liquor stores. 
Meat market. 
Newsdealers and newsstands. 
Pawn shop. 
Pet stores. 
Planned shopping development. 
Sale of goods produced on the premises. 
Secondhand stores. 
Specialty merchandise. 
Sporting goods stores and bicycle sales. 
Taxidermist. 
Services: 
Aerobics/exercise studio. 
Appliance repair. 
Barber and beauty shops. 
Blueprinting. 
Business service establishments (courier, advertising, personnel, detective, etc.). 
Clinic. 
Dry cleaning pickup station. 
Gunsmith. 
Insurance sales. 
Jewelry repair. 
Laundromat. 
Locksmith. 
Manicure/massage. 
Miscellaneous personal services (diaper service, concierge, maid, clothing rental). 
Ophthalmologic and optometric sales/services. 
Pest control. 
Photographic studios. 
Professional offices (medical, legal, accounting, engineering, architectural, dental). 
Real estate office. 
Security monitoring. 
Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors. 
Tailor. 
Trailer/auto/truck lease, service and sales. 
Typesetting/photoengraving/copy service. 
Temporary uses: 
Storage/occupancy during construction. 
Transportation: 
Automobile parking garage. 
Automobile parking lot, commercial. 
Taxistands. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010; Amd. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 75-302. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size in the C-1 district is 10,890 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width in the C-1 district at the building setback line is 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements in the C-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: 45 feet - major streets/ 30 feet - all other streets. 
(2)  Side yard: 15 feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: 15 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: The maximum height of structures in the C-1 district is 35 feet. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: The basic parking requirement in the C-1 district is one space per each 200 square feet of space designated for retail sales. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: The maximum lot coverage by buildings in the C-1 district is 35 percent. 
(g)  Buffer requirement: The buffer requirement in the C-1 district is 30 feet if adjacent to any residential district. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Secs. 75-303—75-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of May 17, 2010, renumbered Div. 10, §§ 75-331, 75-332 as Div. 9, §§ 75-311, 75-312. 

Sec. 75-311. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the C-2 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the development standards applicable to the C-2 district. All uses permitted in the C-1 district are permitted in the C-2 district. However, additional restrictions may apply, as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Greenhouse/nursery. 
Livestock sales; pavilion or farmer's market. 
Animal care facilities: Boarding and breeding kennels. 
Automotive, boat and trailer; sales and service: 
Automobile and truck sales. 
Automobile repair and paint shops. 
Automobile service station, with repairs. 
Automobile upholstery shop. 
Manufactured homes sales. 
Retail automobile parts and tire store. 
Tire retreading and recapping. 
Trailer sales room and sales lot. 
Truck stop. 
Building, building materials and farm equipment: 
Building contractors/supplies. 
Construction equipment: sales and service. 
Heavy construction contractors (paving, grading, etc.). 
Lumber and other building materials. 
Lumberyard. 
Special trade contractors (electrical, plumbing, etc.). 
Tractor/farm equipment: sales and service. 
Commercial recreation and entertainment: 
Carnival, rodeo, horse show, athletic events, community fair (temporary). 
Coliseum, stadium. 
Drive-in theater. 
Fairgrounds and amusement parks. 
Fishing lake, public. 
Go-cart concessions. 
Golf course, public. 
Golf or baseball driving range. 
Miniature golf course. 
Shooting/archery range. 
Waterslides and parks. 
Zoos. 
Communication: Billboard manufacturer. 
Community facilities: Same as in the C-1 district. 
Dwellings: Same as in C-1 district. 
Eating and drinking places: Same as in the C-1 district. 
Education: Same as in the C-1 district. 
Lodging (temporary): 
Hotel. 
Motel. 
Travel trailer park. 
Manufacturing and industrial uses: 
Furniture upholstery. 
Ice cream manufacturer. 
Ice plants. 
Laboratories. 
Metal fabrication. 
Milk processing. 
Welding. 
Planned developments: See subsection 75-452(n)(4). 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship. 
Services: 
Ambulance and emergency medical services (private). 
Appliance and equipment repair. 
Hospitals. 
Medical and dental laboratories. 
Tattoo parlor. 
Vending machine distributors. 
Storage: 
Cold storage. 
Miniwarehouse/self-storage. 
Temporary uses: Same as the C-1 district. 
Transportation: Bus stations. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010; Amd. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 75-312. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size in the C-2 district is 20,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width at the building setback line is 125 feet. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements: The minimum yard requirements in the C-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: Major streets - 45 feet/all other roads - 30 feet. 
(2)  Side yard: 20 feet - abuts commercial or industrial districts. 
(3)  Rear yard: 20 feet - abuts commercial or industrial districts. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: The maximum height of structures in the C-2 district is 35 feet. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: The basic parking requirement in the C-2 district is one space per each 200 square feet of space designated for retail sales. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: The maximum lot coverage by buildings in the C-2 district is 35 percent. 
(g)  Buffer requirement: The buffer requirement for the C-2 district is 30 feet if adjacent to a residential district. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010; Amd. of 5-19-2014) 
Secs. 75-313—75-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of May 17, 2010, renumbered Div. 11, §§ 75-371, 75-372 as Div. 10, §§ 75-321, 75-322. 

Sec. 75-321. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the I-1 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the development standards applicable to that I-1 district. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is adopted otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Grape growing and wine distillation, production and sale. 
Greenhouse/nursery. 
Livestock sales; pavilion or farmer's market. 
Produce stands. 
Sawmill, permanent. 
Sawmill, portable. 
Sawmill, temporary. 
Animal care facilities: 
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
Boarding and breeding kennels. 
Noncommercial kennels/shelters. 
Automotive, boat and trailer; sales and service: 
Automobile and truck sales. 
Automobile repair and paint shops. 
Automobile service station; no repairs. 
Automobile service station; with repairs. 
Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rentals. 
Automobile/truck wash service. 
Automobile upholstery shop. 
Boat sales and service. 
Manufactured homes sales. 
Tire retreading and recapping. 
Trailer sales room and sales lot; repairs. 
Truck stop. 
Building, building materials and farm equipment: 
Building contractors (general or heavy). 
Construction equipment: Sales and service: 
Electrical supply stores. 
Feed, seed, fertilizer and insecticide sales. 
Lumber and other building materials. 
Lumberyard. 
Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
Special trade contractors (electrical, plumbing, etc.). 
Tractor/farm equipment: sales and service. 
Commercial recreation and entertainment: 
Amusement, recreational and entertainment activities carried on wholly within a permanently enclosed building. 
Athletic field, private and public. 
Coliseum, stadium. 
Drive-in theater. 
Fairgrounds and amusement parks. 
Fishing lake, public. 
Go-cart concessions. 
Golf course, public. 
Golf course, private. 
Golf or baseball driving range. 
Hunting club. 
Miniature golf course. 
Racetrack, auto. 
Waterslides and parks. 
Communication: 
Transmission and communication tower. 
Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
Radio, television and other communication transmission towers. 
Community facilities: 
Assembly halls (includes armories). 
Funeral home. 
Governmental uses. 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Volunteer fire stations. 
Water towers. 
Dwellings: 
Security. 
Education: 
Industry-related schools/training centers. 
Public schools. 
Vocational/technical/trade schools. 
Manufacturing and industrial uses: 
Fabrication shop: wood and fabric. 
Furniture upholstery. 
Ice cream manufacturer. 
Ice plants. 
Industrial park. 
Laboratories. 
Leather manufacturer. 
Machine shop. 
Metal fabrication. 
Milk processing. 
Monument works. 
Publishing. 
Welding. 
Planned developments: See subsection 75-452(n)(4). 
Religious facilities: Churches and other places of worship. 
Retail trade: 
Sale of goods produced or processed on the premises. 
Taxidermist. 
Services: 
Ambulance and emergency medical services (private). 
Blueprinting. 
Engineering/architectural offices. 
Heavy repairs. 
Hospital. 
Medical and dental laboratories. 
Security monitoring. 
Typesetting/photoengraving/copy service/electrotyping. 
Vending machine distributors. 
Storage: 
Cold storage. 
Miniwarehouse/self-storage. 
Warehousing. 
Temporary uses: 
Occupancy during construction. 
Storage during construction. 
Transportation: 
Automobile parking lot, commercial. 
Automobile parking garage. 
Bus stations. 
Bus stations for freight only. 
Railroad stations. 
Railroad yards. 
Taxistands. 
Truck terminals. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010; Amd. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 75-322. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size in the I-1 district is 20,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width at the building setback line in the I-1 district is 125 feet. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements: Minimum yard requirements in the I-L district are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: 60 feet - major streets/ 45 feet - all other streets. 
(2)  Side yard: 30 feet - abuts commercial or industrial districts. 
(3)  Rear yard: 30 feet - abuts commercial or industrial districts. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: The maximum height of structures in the I-1 district is 35 feet. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: See section 75-458 for the basic parking requirement for the I-L district. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings. The maximum lot coverage by buildings in the I-1 district is 35 percent. 
(g)  Buffer requirement. The buffer requirement in the I-1 district is 75 feet if adjacent to residential property; otherwise, 50 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010; Amd. of 5-19-2014) 
Secs. 75-323—75-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of May 17, 2010, renumbered Div. 12, §§ 75-391, 75-392 as Div. 11, §§ 75-331, 75-332. 

Sec. 75-331. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the I-2 zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the development standards applicable with this I-2 district. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article IV of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. 
Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Agriculture and forestry: 
Sawmill, permanent. 
Sawmill, portable. 
Sawmill, temporary. 
Animal care facilities: 
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
Boarding and breeding kennels. 
Noncommercial kennels (shelter). 
Automotive, boat and trailer; sales and service: 
Automobile and truck sales. 
Automobile repair and paint shops. 
Automobile service station; no repairs. 
Automobile service station; with repairs. 
Automobile, truck and trailer sales, lease and rentals. 
Automobile/truck wash service. 
Automobile upholstery shop. 
Boat sales and service. 
Manufactured homes sales. 
Retail automobile parts and tire store. 
Tire retreading and recapping. 
Trailer sales room and sales lot. 
Truck stop. 
Building, building materials and farm equipment: 
Building contractors. 
Construction equipment: sales and service. 
Electrical supply stores. 
Feed, seed, fertilizer and insecticide sales. 
Heavy construction contractors (paving, grading, etc.). 
Lumber and other building materials. 
Lumberyard. 
Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
Special trade contractors (electrical, plumbing, etc.). 
Tractor/farm equipment: sales and service. 
Commercial recreation and entertainment: 
Go-cart concessions. 
Racetrack, auto. 
Communication: 
Billboard manufacturer. 
Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
Radio, television and other communication transmission towers. 
Community facilities: 
Crematorium. 
Governmental uses. 
Landfills (private). 
Public utility facilities: distribution and transmission. 
Recycling centers. 
Sewage treatment plants. 
Volunteer fire stations. 
Water towers. 
Water treatment plants. 
Dwellings: 
Security. 
Manufacturing and industrial uses: 
Acid storage/manufacturer. 
Alcohol/alcoholic beverage manufacturer (not wine). 
Any manufacturing operation not housed within a building. 
Asphalt plants. 
Auto, truck or boat manufacturer. 
Bookbinding. 
Bottled gas storage/distribution. 
Bottling/canning plant. 
Brick/clay/tile/concrete products. 
Cement/lime/gypsum/plaster manufacturer. 
Chemical manufacturer/pharmaceutical manufacturer. 
Cosmetic manufacturer. 
Distillation of bones/slaughterhouse. 
Dry cleaning plant. 
Dye plant. 
Electronics manufacturer/assembly. 
Explosive material manufacturer and storage. 
Fabrication shop: wood and fabric. 
Fat rendering. 
Fertilizer manufacturer. 
Food manufacturing. 
Food processing. 
Furniture upholstery. 
Glue manufacturer. 
Ice cream manufacturer. 
Ice plants. 
Industrial park. 
Laboratories. 
Leather manufacturer. 
Machine shop. 
Metal fabrication. 
Milk processing. 
Mill (fabric). 
Mining. 
Monument works. 
Oxidation ponds. 
Paper and paper pulp. 
Petroleum refining and storage. 
Pharmaceutical manufacture. 
Plastics manufacturer. 
Printing plant, electrotyping, typesetting. 
Publishing. 
Quarries. 
Railroad repair yard. 
Rubber manufacturer. 
Septic tank manufacturer. 
Smelting. 
Sugar refineries. 
Timber processing. 
Transportation equipment manufacturer. 
Welding. 
Planned developments: See subsection 75-452(n)(4). 
Services: 
Blueprinting. 
Heavy repairs. 
Vending machine distributing. 
Storage: 
Automobile wrecking yards. 
Cold storage. 
Junkyards. 
Miniwarehouse/self-storage. 
Storage yards not otherwise addressed. 
Tank farm, flammable or nonflammable. 
Transportation equipment and vehicle storage and maintenance. 
Vehicle impoundment. 
Warehousing. 
Temporary uses: 
Occupancy during construction. 
Storage during construction. 
Transportation: 
Automobile parking garage. 
Automobile parking lot, commercial. 
Bus stations for freight only. 
Helicopter landing area. 
Railroad stations. 
Railroad yards. 
Taxistands. 
Truck terminals. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 75-332. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size in the I-2 district is two acres. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building setback line in the I-2 district is 125 feet. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements in the I-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: 50 feet - major streets/45 from all other streets. 
(2)  Side yard: 30 feet - abuts commercial or industrial districts. 
(3)  Rear yard: 30 feet - abuts commercial or industrial districts. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures. The maximum height of structures in the I-2 district is 35 feet. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement. See section 75-458 for the basic parking requirement for the I-2 district. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings. The maximum lot coverage by buildings in the I-2 district is 35 percent. 
(g)  Buffer requirement. The buffer requirement in the I-2 district is 100 feet if adjacent to a residential district or use; otherwise, 50 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Secs. 75-333—75-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - DB DOWNTOWN BUSINESS OVERLAY (DB) 

Sec. 75-341. - Boundary of downtown district. 
The boundary of the downtown business district is as follows: starting with the intersection of S. Washington St. and W. Sumter Street, heading northwest to the intersection of S. Washington St. and Marion St. (Hwy 16). Turn right and proceed to the intersection of Madison Ave. and Marion St. Turning left, proceed to W. Harris St. Turn right and proceed over Jefferson Ave. to Willie Bailey St. Turn right on N. Maple and continue to E. Sumter (Hwy 16). Dogleg to the right and continue on S. Maple to Walnut St. Turn right on Walnut St. to Jefferson Ave. At Jefferson Ave. turn right and proceed to intersection of Sumter St. Turn left and continue to S. Washington St. Any property on the road frontage and the interior area is considered the downtown business district and are subject to this district's requirements. (All of these areas surround the Courthouse Square.) 
(Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 75-342. - Uses allowed. 
Those uses allowed in the DB zoning district as a matter of right are as follows, as are the district requirements applicable to the district. However, additional restrictions may apply as well. Article VI of this chapter also must be consulted to determine whether a given use is subject to any additional requirement or is otherwise further defined or clarified. Any use not specified below will be considered by conditional use only. 
Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
Appliances/electronics. 
Antiques and collectibles. 
Arts and crafts. 
Bakery. 
Banquet/reception hall. 
Barber. 
Beautician. 
Bookstore. 
Business office, general. 
Clothing, general. 
Coffee shop. 
Drug store. 
Family grocery store. 
Family restaurant. 
Financial services. 
Florist/garden shop. 
Furniture store. 
Gift shop. 
Housewares. 
Ice cream/confectionary shop. 
Legal services. 
Medical services. 
Mixed use buildings with commercial on first floor. 
Music and video store. 
Nail salon. 
Retail—general. 
Shoe store. 
Sporting goods including bicycle shop. 
Tanning salon. 
(Amd. of 5-17-2010; Res. of 6-4-2013; Amd. of 5-19-2014; Res. of 6-7-2016, § 2; Res. of 7-18-2016) 
Sec. 75-343. - District requirements. 
The businesses in this district are subject to the following: 
(a)  No outside display or storage except for seasonal sales. 
(b)  Outside tables are permitted following the guidelines as stated in section 58-3, obstructing streets, generally. 
(c)  Neat and orderly window displays. 
(d)  Signs—See Article VI of this chapter. 
(e)  It is the owner's responsibility to insure that the sidewalk is kept clean and free of debris and clutter and that the building is kept in good repair and structurally sound per the International Building Code. The facade must be maintained (i.e. painted or stained, bricks mortared, cracked glass repaired, etc.). 
(f)  No outside speakers. 
(Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Secs. 75-344—75-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY (F-H)[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of May 17, 2010, renumbered Div. 13, §§ 75-400—75-402 as Div. 13, §§ 75-351, 75-353. 

Sec. 75-351. - Purpose. 
The flood hazard overlay is designed to protect human life and health and to minimize damage from floodwaters to homes, businesses and public facilities and utilities. In addition, this overlay is established to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses to flood conditions in these specific areas. 
General information, administration and enforcement of the flood hazard overlay are located in Chapter 38 - Floods, Article II of the City of Eatonton Code of Ordinances. 
Per section 38-23, no structure or land shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms set forth in chapter 38 and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 75-352. - Applicability. 
The flood hazard overlay applies to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. The flood insurance rate map (FIRM) is located at the Putnam County Planning and Development department. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 75-353. - Development permit. 
A development permit is required before any construction or alterations begin in this flood hazard overlay district. Forms are available at the Putnam County Planning and Development department. No building permit will be issued until a development plan is submitted and approved. The requirements and procedure for development permits is located in chapter 38 - Floods, Article II, Division 2, Administration and enforcement. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 5-17-2010) 
Secs. 75-354—75-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 75-451. - Defined and restricted. 
(a)  Scope. The following material is intended to define and regulate those uses allowed in any given zoning district as a matter of right. In each instance the use also must comply with any development standards of the zoning district in which it is/will be located. In the event of a conflict between those standards and the ones in this article, the more strict regulation shall govern. All uses shall have their customary dictionary definition unless specifically provided otherwise in this article. 
(b)  Governmental uses. Such uses shall include buildings, structures and uses of land by a unit of local government, not listed elsewhere including, but not restricted to, libraries, public schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and fire stations. The city council shall be advised by other governmental jurisdictions of their plans to establish public facilities within the city by written notice and a site plan submitted to the building inspector for approval in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-452. - Table of uses and restrictions. 
(a)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use (general). 
a.  An accessory structure shall be located on the same lot and within the same zoning boundary as the principal building/use to which it is accessory. 
b.  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. If the principal building has not been completed within 12 months of the issuance of a building permit, then the accessory use shall be continued only with express permission of the planning and zoning commission based upon unusual circumstances or hardship. Under no circumstances may the accessory structure or use continue for more than 24 months if the principal structure/use has not been completed. 
c.  An accessory structure shall not be permitted in a side yard in the residential districts, or in the front yard of any district without express permission of the planning and zoning commission board upon unusual circumstances or hardship 
d.  A residential accessory structure shall not be rented or occupied for gain. 
e.  An accessory structure located closer than 20 feet to the principal building in a residential district shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
f.  Except in the agriculture district, accessory structures shall not exceed two stories in height and may not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
g.  Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear a lot in a residential district, no accessory structure shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer than 25 feet to the rear property line. The setback of 25 feet will not be required when the adjoining yard is a rear yard. 
h.  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, the accessory structure shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
i.  Accessory structure swimming pools in a residential district shall comply with the minimum side and rear yard requirements of that district. Setback minimums shall be measured from the decking or closest part of the pool structure to the applicable property line. Accessory swimming pools shall be permitted only upon written approval by the appropriate governmental authority to indicate compliance with applicable swimming pool regulations. 
j.  Accessory uses in an apartment development may include, but shall not be limited to, laundry facilities, which must be housed in a permanent structure, for the convenience of residents. 
(2)  Specific accessory use restrictions. 
a.  Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rentals, as an accessory use to an automobile service station. 
1.  This use shall not be established on a lot of less than 20,000 square feet. 
2.  This use shall not occupy more than ten percent of the lot area. 
3.  No more than four trailers, trucks or cars shall be permitted outdoors on the lot at any one time. 
4.  Parking areas for the permitted trailers shall be located only in portions of the lot where off-street parking is permitted, but no area or space shall occupy spaces set aside for required off-street parking or use by cars awaiting service. No trailer shall be parked within 30 feet of the future street right-of-way line or in any way that interferes with normal traffic flow to, within or out of the lot. 
5.  All parking areas shall be clearly marked and no unit shall be parked outdoors other than within these boundaries except when being serviced. 
b.  Accessory retail sales and services. Retail sales and services accessory to the operation of an office building or institutional use, motel, hotel or high-rise apartment development, conducted wholly within the building housing the use to which these activities are accessory, provided that the floor space used or to be used for these secondary uses shall be limited to a total of 25 square feet per dwelling unit in a high-rise apartment development or 25 square feet per room in a hotel or motel, or ten percent of the net floor area in an office building or institutional use, and provided that: 
1.  Every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure. 
2.  No show window, advertising or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
3.  No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside of the primary use structure. 
However, the requirements of subsections (a)(2)a and (a)(2)b of this section shall not apply to restaurants and cafeterias secondary to a hotel or motel and office building or institutional use; these secondary uses may be located in a structure other than the primary use structure. The following secondary uses are permitted: barbershops, beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning pickup and distribution stations and other similar personal service establishments; drugstores; bookstores; florists; convenience/food stores; gift shops; cafeterias and restaurants; private clubs; laundry facilities for the convenience of residents; newsstands; and shoe repair shops. 
(3)  Home occupation. 
a.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, other than a non-illuminated identification sign having an area of not more than two square feet, which shall be attached wholly to the dwelling structure within which the home occupation is conducted. 
b.  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference that would be detected beyond the dwelling unit. 
c.  This use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed at the location of the home occupation. Non-owner applicants for home occupations must have express authorization from the property owner. 
d.  No more than 25 percent of the heated floor area of the dwelling unit may be used for the conduct of the home occupation. 
e.  No use shall involve public contact on the property and no article, product or service shall be sold on the premises other than by telephone, unless this use has been granted a conditional use permit following public hearing as provided in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
f.  No material, equipment or business vehicles shall be stored or parked on the premises of the home occupation unless they are confined entirely within the residence, except that one business vehicle (the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed one and one-half tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage or rear or side yard. In addition, there shall be no storage of mechanical earthmoving equipment at the location of the home occupation unless the property area exceeds five acres. 
g.  No home occupation shall be operated so as to create or cause a nuisance. 
h.  A permit for a home occupation shall expire every 12 months or whenever its holder ceases to occupy the premises for which it was granted, whichever shall first occur; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent reapplication for a new permit. 
(b)  Agriculture and forestry. 
(1)  Dairies. No building used to maintain livestock shall be located closer than 50 feet to any existing residential structure. 
(2)  Grape growing and wine distillation. Grape growing and wine distribution, production and sale shall be permitted, provided any structure used for processing, distilling, bottling or sale for onsite production of wine shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property line and shall comply with all federal, state or other local regulations or ordinances pertaining to the same. 
(3)  Greenhouse; nursery. A greenhouse or nursery must be set back at least 50 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(4)  Livestock and poultry. Livestock and poultry (unless raised for use exclusively by the property owner): 
a.  Shall only be permitted on a lot containing one or more acres. 
b.  Except in the AG-2 district, there shall be not less than 5,000 square feet of fenced lot area not covered by the principal structure for each animal, unless the property is a bona fide farm. 
(5)  Livestock sales; pavilion or flea market. Any buildings used for livestock sales or pavilion or farmer's market shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
(6)  Produce stands. Produce stands shall be temporary or seasonal stands for the sale of produce grown on the premises. There shall be a minimum of four off-street parking spaces. Such stands shall have access to at least a collector street and shall not be operated so as to create a traffic hazard. 
(7)  Riding stables. Riding stables shall be established on a lot having an area of not less than five acres. Any structure shall be located at least 50 feet from any property line. 
(8)  Sawmill, permanent. 
a.  The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
c.  A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be required. 
d.  If approved, this use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
e.  Vehicular access shall be from an arterial/collector street. 
(c)  Animal care facilities. 
(1)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
a.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property or structure zoned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  Adequate soundproofing and odor proofing shall be provided so the use does not create a nuisance. 
c.  No boarding shall be allowed unless required in connection with medical treatment. 
d.  No outside runs or kennels shall be allowed when such facilities are located within a planned center. 
e.  A six-foot fence shall enclose all properties on which such a use is located when it is not otherwise part of a planned center. 
(2)  Boarding and breeding kennels. All structures used for boarding and breeding kennels shall be at least 100 feet from any property or building zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(3)  Noncommercial kennels/shelters. All noncommercial kennels and shelters shall be located on a site of not less than one acre; all structures shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line; and all facilities shall be constructed and activities conducted so as not to create a nuisance. A six-foot fence shall enclose all property on which such shelters are operated. 
(d)  Automotive, boat and trailer, sales and service. 
(1)  Automobile, boat, trailer and truck sales. No vehicle parked for sale or service shall be located within a future street right-of-way as shown by any transportation and thoroughfare plans of the county, by the zoning maps or by conditions or right-of-way dedication by which rezoning is approved. No external display of merchandise shall interfere with sight lines so as to create traffic or other safety hazards. 
(2)  Automobile, truck and trailer repair and paint shops. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
b.  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
c.  This use shall not be established on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any R district. 
d.  In the C-1 district, there shall be no outside storage of materials, supplies, equipment or vehicles. 
(3)  Automobile service station. 
a.  There shall be no body and fender, repair, painting or dismantling of vehicles on the premises. 
b.  All minor auto repair, maintenance, service, storage of materials or similar activities connected with this use shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building, which shall be located at least 100 feet away from any residential district or use. 
c.  Property on which such service station is to be located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital or public library. 
d.  Property shall have minimum frontage on a public street of 100 feet and minimum area of 12,000 square feet, if existing, or 20,000 square feet for new development. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from future right-of-way lines, and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from the same. 
e.  No more than two curb cuts for 120 feet of street frontage shall be permitted, and no curb cut shall be located closer than 20 feet to a street intersection, within ten feet of adjoining property, or within 20 feet of another curb cut. 
f.  A minimum of two off-street parking spaces is required for each service station, with an additional one space for each automobile bay. 
g.  A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines (except for curb cut openings) where appropriate. 
h.  Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties. 
i.  All service areas, drives and storage areas shall be paved and curbed. Remaining lot areas shall be grassed. 
j.  Gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the future right-of-way line and also shall not be located less than 60 feet from the centerline of the arterials or collectors or 45 feet from the centerline of local streets. 
(4)  Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rentals. 
a.  All vehicles shall be set back at least 30 feet from the future street right-of-way line. 
b.  All parking areas shall be clearly marked, and no unit shall be parked outdoors other than within these boundaries, except when being serviced. 
(5)  Automobile/truck wash service. 
a.  A paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting service equal to one third of the practical hourly capacity of the wash machines. 
b.  This use in an industrial district shall be established only at the intersection of an arterial and a freeway or two arterials or in an established industrial park. 
c.  The principal structure associated with this use shall be located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
(6)  Boat sales and service. 
a.  All boats or boat trailers shall be set back at least 30 feet from the future street right-of-way line. 
b.  No outside display of merchandise shall create a traffic or other safety hazard. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Retail automobile parts and tire store. 
a.  Unless otherwise permitted within the district, there shall be no dismantling of vehicles on the premises to obtain auto parts. 
b.  Unless elsewhere permitted within this district, the only auto part installation that shall be permitted in connection with this use shall be the installation of tires and the installation of minor maintenance or accessory parts. 
c.  Unless elsewhere permitted within this district, major auto repair shall not be permitted in connection with this use. Minor auto repair and maintenance may be permitted, provided this repair and maintenance shall be incidental to the normal upkeep of an automobile. 
(9)  Tire re-treading and recapping. Tire re-treading and recapping shall be permitted, provided all vehicles shall be set back at least 30 feet from the future street right-of-way line. 
(10)  Truck stop. No truck stop shall be located any closer than 500 feet to any lot used or zoned for residential purposes. The principal structure shall be set back at least 50 feet from all property lines. A minimum 50-foot buffer is required. 
(e)  Building equipment, building materials and farm equipment. 
(1)  Electrical supply stores. 
a.  In a C-1 district, there shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment or vehicles. 
b.  In C-2 and industrial districts, outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the future street right-of-way line, and shall be enclosed by [a] six-foot screening fence. 
(2)  Lumber and other building materials. In C-2 and industrial districts, outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the future street right-of-way line, and be enclosed by an six-foot screening fence. 
(3)  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores. 
a.  In C-1 district, there shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment or vehicles. 
b.  In C-2 and I-L districts, outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the future street right-of-way lines, and be enclosed by an six-foot screening fence. 
(4)  Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
a.  In a C-1 district, there shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment or vehicles. 
b.  In C-2 and I districts, outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the future street right-of-way lines, and be enclosed by an six-foot screening fence. 
(f)  Recreation and entertainment/commercial recreation and entertainment. 
(1)  Fishing lake, public. 
a.  All buildings and structures associated with such use shall be set back not less than 50 feet from property zoned for R or RM purposes. 
b.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(2)  Go-cart concessions. 
a.  All buildings and structures associated with this use shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the boundary of an R district. 
c.  This facility shall be enclosed by a wall or solid fence of not less than six feet in height. 
d.  The maximum motor size of any cart used shall not exceed five horsepower. 
(3)  Golf or baseball driving range. 
a.  All buildings and structures associated with such use shall be set back not less than 200 feet from property used for R or RM purposes. 
b.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(4)  Miniature golf course. 
a.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area ten feet in depth to screen the adjacent property. 
b.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(5)  Golf course, private. 
a.  The golf course shall be a full nine-hole or 18-hole course. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with this use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line except where this property line is a street line. In this case, the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(6)  Swimming pool, public. 
a.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area ten feet in depth to screen the adjacent property. 
b.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
d.  All public pools shall be subject to approval by city/county health officials. 
(7)  Swimming pool (private, neighborhood). 
a.  Site plans shall be approved by the building inspector to ensure compatibility of the facility with the neighborhood in which it is to be located. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  A swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence having a height of not less than four feet. 
d.  Outdoor activity shall cease by 12:00 midnight. 
e.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
f.  This use shall be permitted only upon written approval of the health department to indicate compliance with the health department swimming pool regulations. 
(8)  Tennis centers, clubs and facilities (private). 
a.  All buildings and structures associated with such use shall be set back not less than 50 feet from property zoned for R or RM purposes. 
b.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(g)  Communication. (See chapter 63 - Telecommunications in the City of Eatonton Code of Ordinances.) 
(h)  Community facilities. 
(1)  Assembly halls. Assembly halls include armories, union halls, conference halls, business-meeting locations, civic halls, and internal gathering places for activities of a similar nature. 
(2)  Cemeteries, mausoleums, and columbariums. Cemeteries, mausoleums, and columbariums as an independent use, requires a tract of not less than 20 acres with direct access to a public street, provided that all graves shall be set back not less than 50 feet and all structures not less than 200 feet from any property line or future street right-of-way lines; and provided that all property shall be landscaped and maintained. Otherwise, all cemeteries, mausoleums, and columbariums must be operated on or as a part of a church or of the property in use by that religious institution. 
(3)  Crematorium. All buildings used for a crematorium shall be set back not less than 200 feet from all property lines and not less than 1,000 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(4)  Landfills, sanitary. This use is not permitted inside the city limits. 
(5)  Parks, private. Private parks are limited to planetariums, aquariums, botanical gardens and other nature exhibitions, provided that no structure is located closer than 100 feet to any property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(6)  Recycling center. The term "recycling center" embraces recycling efforts ranging from collection locations for recyclable materials to solid waste transfer stations. No such use may be located closer than 500 feet from any residential use or zoning district. 
(i)  Dwellings. 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings (duplexes and apartments). Multifamily dwellings (duplexes) are structures intended to house two families in two dwelling units. 
Multifamily dwellings (apartments) are structures intended to house three or more families in three or more dwelling units. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings (condominium, fee simple town-homes). Condominiums or fee simple town-homes are single-family dwelling units which are erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire registrant party wall or walls extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. 
(3)  Relative residence. A relative residence is allowed, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The real property owner must live in the single-family residence. 
b.  Relatives may be by blood, marriage or law. 
(j)  Eating and drinking places. There are no additional requirements for eating and drinking places. 
(k)  Education: Day nurseries/kindergartens. Other than being operated as a home occupation, day nurseries and kindergartens may not be located closer than 200 feet to any property used or intended to be used for residential purposes, and the facility must be enclosed by a fence not less than six feet in height. 
(1)  The lot on which these uses are established shall have access to arterial or collector streets. 
(2)  There shall not be less than 30 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment, and not less than 100 square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum enrollment. 
(3)  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height. 
(4)  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading. 
(l)  Lodging (temporary). 
(1)  Hotel. In the C-1 and C-2 districts, a hotel shall be permitted only in planned centers of not less than five acres or on sites adjacent to or within 500 feet of an interstate highway interchange or the intersection of two major arterials. 
(2)  Travel trailer park. 
a.  No travel trailer park shall be located except with direct access to a city/county, state or federal highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for access points. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
b.  The minimum lot area per park shall be three acres. 
c.  Spaces in travel trailer parks may be used by travel trailers, provided that they meet any additional laws or ordinances and shall be rented by the day or week only, and an occupant of such space shall remain in the same trailer park for a period of not more than 30 days per six-month period. 
d.  Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided that: 
1.  Such establishments and the parking area primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park. 
2.  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
3.  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character, which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
e.  No space shall be so located so that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, arterial or collector streets. 
f.  In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the city/county health department. 
g.  A minimum 50-foot buffer is required when adjacent to any residential use, 25 feet for other districts, densely planted with evergreen and hedge-type shrubs designed to provide full screening for the park. 
h.  Setbacks, open space requirement, parking, refuse collection and illumination must meet the standards of R-4 district regulations. 
(m)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  No plant shall be designed to operate in a manner that will emit smoke, odor or objectionable waste materials or produce noise or vibration so as to create a nuisance. 
(n)  Planned development. 
(1)  Generally. The purpose of this section is to encourage the unified and harmonious improvement of land and buildings under a unified plan of development rather than under conventional lot-by-lot regulations. The city benefits from variety in building types, compatibility of uses and optimum community development. The developer benefits from better land use, economy in development and flexibility in design. Review of the development plan by the planning and development department provides an opportunity to ensure that the development will be in harmony with in which it is located. 
a.  Ownership control. All of the land in a planned development initially shall be in single ownership by an individual, a partnership, tenants in common, a corporation or by some other legal entity. However, this shall not preclude several contiguous property owners from making a joint application for a planned development. Individual properties in a planned development may only be sold after a final plat has been approved and recorded with the properties, subject to private deed covenants that ensure the continuance of the planned development as originally approved and developed, or as otherwise provided in this section. 
b.  Sewer and water requirements. All planned developments shall be served by public sewer or by a sewer system approved by the state and city/county health department, the Eatonton-Putnam Water and Sewer Authority, and the state department of natural resources. All specifications regarding water supply and sewage treatment design and effective disposal shall be included in the overall development plans for a planned development. 
c.  Exempt from conventional development standards. Planned developments shall be exempt from the conventional development standards of this chapter. The provisions of this section shall govern their approval. 
d.  Common use restrictions through covenant and declaration requirements. When a planned development requires the creation of a property owner's association to govern the use of common open space or other common areas, the required covenants, declaration and restrictions shall be filed with the clerk of superior court and, as a minimum, shall provide for: Mandatory and automatic membership in the property owners' association as a function of home or dwelling unit ownership; creation of the property owners' association before any individual properties are sold; all owners to have equal access and right of use to all shared and common facilities; perpetual and continued maintenance of open and shared space; tax liability in the case of default; the method of assessment for dues, maintenance and related costs; and, where appropriate, party wall maintenance and related costs; and restoration in the event of damage or destruction. 
e.  Open space improvements. When open space is required to be provided as part of a planned improvement, the developer shall submit with his application for approval of the planned development a plan for the improvement and maintenance of open space acres and shall follow the plan, which is approved in developing the property. 
f.  Open space maintenance. Where this article requires or allows the preservation of open space and other common areas through a homeowners' association, and if the property owners' association fails to maintain the common property in a reasonable condition, the director of planning and development shall serve written notice upon the association and upon the individual property owner of the planned development, setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain common open space in a reasonable condition. The notice shall include a demand that these deficiencies of maintenance are corrected within 30 days of the notice. If the deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the planned development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon the common open space and maintain it for one year and thereafter until the association is prepared to provide maintenance. The cost of this maintenance by the city shall be assessed against the properties within the planned development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become a lien upon the properties. 
(2)  Residential. 
a.  Minimum acres. The minimum acreage of a planned residential development is ten. 
b.  Usage. No more than 67 percent of a planned residential development shall be zoned and developed for single-family residential use. 
c.  Open space requirements. The developer of the planned residential development shall set aside and develop not less than 33 percent of the land area within the development for open space, parks or recreational use. Required streets, drives, yard areas and common parking court areas shall not be credited toward this minimum required open space allocation. Only 50 percent of this area may be developed with recreational facilities. Not more than 50 percent of the land reserved for open space purposes shall be within a floodplain. 
d.  Density. The density of the subdivision shall not exceed ten units per acre within the single-family districts, combined; however, residential density shall not exceed four units per acre in the planned development as a whole. 
e.  Lot size and setbacks. There shall be no minimum lot size, setbacks, yards or lot widths. However, no dwelling or building containing dwellings shall be erected within 20 feet of any other structure. Further, every dwelling unit shall have direct access to a street, court, walkway or other area dedicated to public use. Additionally, no individual structure shall contain more than eight dwelling units. 
f.  Minimum buffer. The minimum buffer required for this development shall be in accordance with district development standards established for the zoning district in which the residential use is located, if any. 
g.  Street frontage. Units within the planned development which front on a street may front on a public paved street or on a private paved street having a pavement width of not less than 26 feet, or, if this street is designated as being one way, 20 feet. Units within the development may front on an arterial or collector thoroughfare if parking is provided in the rear of the units or in planned parking areas located to the rear of the front building setback line and separated from these streets by an open space providing a minimum depth of 20 feet. 
h.  Subdivision. A separate parcel of land is required for each dwelling unit (except in a condominium), whether attached or detached. 
i.  Open space between units and buildings. The front or rear face of a dwelling unit shall be not less than 50 feet from the front or rear face of another dwelling unit. The unattached side face of a single-family attached building shall be not less than 40 feet from the rear face of another such building or unit. 
j.  Alignment. No dwelling unit shall be situated so as to face the rear of another dwelling unit within the development unless terrain differences or vegetation will provide effective visual separation. 
k.  Parking. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. This space shall be provided under the dwelling unit, to the immediate front or rear of the dwelling unit or in common off-street parking areas not more than 300 feet from the dwelling unit, as measured along the shortest paved route. All off-street parking spaces shall be designed and located so that vehicles will not be required to back into any public street. 
l.  Preservation of common areas. With the exception of condominiums, which shall be governed as by state law provided, a homeowners' association created by the developer, by recorded covenants, declaration and restrictions running with the land, shall preserve and maintain for the owners and occupants of the units the land set aside for open space, parks or recreational use for the subdivision. The book and page in which these covenants, declaration and restrictions are recorded shall be shown on the final plat of the subdivision. This requirement may be granted upon the developer's filing a development plan and survey to which there is entered a covenant by the developer that the minimum open space requirement shall be applied to individual lots within the subdivision. Dedication of open space to the county may also satisfy the open space requirement. 
m.  Water and sewer availability. Each planned development must have a sewer system approved by the city/county health department. 
n.  Height. No residential dwelling unit shall exceed 35 feet in height; other structures are limited to 45 feet in height. 
o.  Standards applicable to nonresidential components of planned residential development. 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  Street access requirements: These projects shall be permitted only on a site, which abuts an arterial or collector. The minimum distance between curb cuts shall be 100 feet. 
3.  Required yards: All buildings and structures including, but not limited to, service areas and access drives shall be set back not less than 50 feet from side and rear property lines and not less than 100 feet from the future street right-of-way line of an abutting street. 
4.  Screening for residential property: In addition to other buffer requirements, when the back of the development is across the street from property in a residential district, then a solid fence or hedge not less than six feet in height shall be installed and maintained by the developer to screen the back of the project from the residential property. 
5.  Development: All uses and activities shall be housed in a permanent enclosed structure with a single primary continuous facade, with the exception of two uses which may be detached from the facade and independently housed in their own permanent, enclosed structure. 
6.  Distance between buildings: Buildings within the development, if separated, shall not be less than 20 feet in apart. 
7.  Minimum buffer: The minimum buffer required for this development shall be in accordance with standards established for the zoning district in which the development is located. 
8.  Open space: 13 percent. 
(3)  Office. (Reserved). 
(4)  Commercial. 
a.  Generally. The purpose of the commercial PUD district is intended for business uses that require a location accessible to major highways and arterials that serve or will serve significant portions of the community. It is also the intent of this district to provide areas for businesses that include a greater mix of business types than allowed in areas zoned C-1 and C-2. Commercial PUD allows for better land use, economy in development and flexibility of design. These businesses may require outside storage areas and have extended hours of operations. Due to the nature of the businesses permitted within the commercial PUD district, the zoning district should be limited to property fronting on principal arterials, major arterials or minor arterials. 
b.  Development standards. The development for commercial PUD is as follows: 
1.  Minimum lot size: Five acres. 
2.  Street access requirements: These projects shall be permitted only on a site that abuts a major highway or major rural road. The minimum distances between curb cuts shall be 100 feet. 
3.  Minimum buffer: The minimum buffer required for this use shall be in accordance with standards established for the zoning district in which it is located. In addition, when the back of the development is across the street from property in a residential district, then a solid fence or hedge not less than six feet in height shall be installed and maintained by the developer to screen the back of the development from the residential property. 
4.  Distance between buildings: Buildings within the development, if separated, shall not be less than 20 feet apart, unless there is an adequate firewall. 
5.  Parking: Parking shall have five and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area designated for retail sales only for centers up to 15 acres in size and eight spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area designated for retail only for center of 15 or more acres. In addition, all parking areas must be designed following ADA regulations. 
6.  Sewer and water requirements. All developments shall be served by public sewer or by a sewer system approved by the state and city/county health departments, the Eatonton-Putnam Water and Sewer Authority, and the state department of natural resources. All specifications regarding water supply and sewage treatment design and effective disposal shall be included in the overall development plans for a planned development. 
c.  Permitted uses: Only the following uses shall be permitted in the commercial PUD district; and no structure shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted herein with the exception of (a) uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this amendment; (b) special uses as permitted herein; (c) accessory uses; or (d) other uses that are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this district. 
1.  Retail sales and service uses. 
Antique shops. 
Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics. 
Art and school supply stores. 
Art galleries. 
Automotive carwash (full service or self-service). 
Automotive parts stores. 
Auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tune-up centers (full service or self-service). 
Automotive sales lots and associated service facilities (new or used). 
Automotive service stations, with or without fuel pumps. 
Bakeries. 
Banks or financial institutions. Automatic teller as accessory or freestanding use. 
Barber and beauty shops. 
Bicycle shops. 
Boat sales establishments (new or used). 
Book or stationery stores. 
Building supply centers with outdoor lumberyards or storage areas. 
Business college or business schools operated as a business enterprise. 
Clothing sales or rental stores. 
Convenience food stores with or without fuel pumps. 
Custom dressmaking and sewing shops. 
Dance studios. 
Day care center, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area per child and the outdoor play area is enclosed with a six-foot-high fence. 
2.  Comply with all state day care requirements. 
3.  Comply with all health regulations. 
Department stores. 
Drive-in restaurants. 
Drugstores/pharmacies. 
Dry cleaning pickup and delivery stations. 
Electronic sales and service establishments. 
Emission inspection stations (accessory to an existing service station). 
Florists. 
Food catering establishments. 
Food stores and grocery stores. 
Fuel station with or without food service or autonomous service center. 
Funeral homes and mausoleums. 
Furniture rental, sales or service establishments. 
Garden supply centers and greenhouses (including accessory outdoor storage). 
Gift shops. 
Hardware stores. 
Health clubs or spas. 
Hobby shops. 
Hotels and motels (provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 zoning district). 
Ice cream shops. 
Instruction of fine arts. 
Interior decorating shops. 
Jewelry stores. 
Laundries and dry cleaning establishments including self-service laundries. 
Liquor stores. 
Locksmith shops. 
Mini-warehouse storage facilities. 
Music stores or studios. 
Office/showroom facilities. 
Parking lots and parking garages. 
Pest control business. 
Pet shops or grooming establishments. 
Photocopying, blueprinting establishments, and reproduction services. 
Photography shops and studios. 
Plant nursery sales facilities. 
Plumbing, electrical, pool and home building supply showrooms and sales centers. 
Radio and television repair shops. 
Record/video sales and rental stores. 
Recreation facilities (indoor, such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, and movie theaters, and commercial outdoor, such as miniature golf courses, driving ranges, water slides or drive-in theaters). 
Recovered materials/recycling drop off center. 
Restaurants and lounges. 
Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
Small appliance repair shops. 
Small equipment rental, sales or services. 
Sporting goods stores. 
Tailor shops. 
Taxidermists. 
Taxicab or limousine services. 
Temporary mobile buildings (while any of the permitted or special uses are under construction, but not to exceed six months). 
Toy shops. 
Vehicle rental establishments. 
Watch and clock repair shops. 
Wholesale warehouse and services. 
2.  Office uses. 
Accounting offices. 
Architecture or engineering offices. 
Contractor's offices (excluding heavy equipment contractors). 
Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
Insurance offices. 
Law offices. 
Medical clinics. 
Other public or professional offices. 
Real estate offices. 
Travel agencies. 
3.  Public and semipublic uses. 
Churches, temples, and synagogues. 
Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and meeting halls. 
Government offices. 
Post offices. 
Public or semipublic buildings and land uses, parks, playgrounds or community centers. 
Utility offices. 
4.  Residential. Caretaker or watchman quarters (site built only) as an accessory use. 
5.  Seasonal sales/uses. Within the commercial PUD district the following uses are permitted provided: (1) these uses are not located within 50 feet of any public right-of-way; and (2) adequate parking, ingress and egress are provided on-site or written permission is obtained if provided on an adjoining property. All other requirements for licenses and regulations of Putnam County shall be met. 
The sale of fruits or vegetables. 
Charitable or non-profit events not to exceed four days. 
Christmas tree sales. 
The sale of any items associated with an existing business located on the premises (i.e. sidewalk, parking lot or tent sales). 
Carnival rides not to exceed 15 days provided no structure or equipment is located within 500 feet of any residential property lines. 
Overnight recreational vehicle camper/tractor-trailer parking. 
Outdoor storage trailers/containers or any type of outside storage necessary for an existing business located in the district provided they are located to the rear or most remote portion of property and may require some type of screening and/or buffers. 
6.  Landscaping. Screening of all unloading areas and dumpster storage areas from adjacent property owners is required. 
7.  Signage. Signs and the amount of signage shall be subject to the following requirements: 

 
*1.  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
*2.  Signs must be located outside public right-of-way. 
a.  Freestanding sign. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of material such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
b.  Blinking, exposed neon, portable, inflatable and temporary signage shall be prohibited. 
c.  Internally illuminated wall signs may not be located with 150 feet of adjacent property developed for single-family residential uses. 
d.  Oversized signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  Oversized signs may be permitted as an allowed use within the commercial PUD district, if located on properties that are adjacent to principal arterial, major arterials or state or national highways. 
ii.  Oversized signs shall not be placed within 500 feet of a dwelling, residential zoning district, county building, church, school, daycare, park cemetery, or right-of-way of a parkway. 
iii.  Oversized signs shall be completely independent of any building or other structure, excluding the sign structure. 
iv.  The maximum sign area of all display surfaces shall not exceed 700 square feet per sign structure. For double-faced signs, these maximum sign areas shall apply to each side of the sign structure. 
v.  No oversized sign shall contain more than two faces per side, nor more than two sides; provided, however, that no sign face may be located above another sign face. 
vi.  The maximum height and minimum front yard setback from the street right-of-way for oversized signs are: 

 
vii.  Only signs advertising businesses in the Commercial PUD District allowed. 
(5)  Industrial. (Reserved). 
(6)  Procedures for approval. 
a.  Preapplication review. Prior to the submittal of an application for approval of a planned development, the developer shall meet with the director of planning and development for a review of the location, scope and nature of the proposed development. 
b.  Application for approval; site plan required. A preliminary site plan of the proposed development shall be submitted as prescribed in this subsection. Each site plan shall be prepared by an architect, engineer or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid, or by a professional landscape architect holding membership in the American Society of Landscape Architects, or by a professional planner holding full or associate membership in the American Planning Association. His seal or professional initials (ASLA, AICP, etc.) shall be affixed to the plan submitted. Each site plan shall be drawn at an appropriate scale and shall show the following: 
1.  Names of the proposed development, names and addresses of the owners and the designers of the site plan and his seal. 
2.  Date, approximate north arrow and scale. 
3.  Boundaries: The boundary line of the tract to be developed drawn accurately to scale and with accurate linear and angular dimensions. 
4.  Location map: A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development. 
5.  Contours: Contours with a minimum vertical interval of five feet referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. 
6.  Existing property lines: The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drainpipes and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; the name of adjoining subdivisions) or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of un-subdivided land; and the zoning of the property. 
7.  Proposed improvements: The names, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, buildings, parking, recreation areas and facilities, yards and other spaces. 
8.  Utility and drainage plans: Utility and drainage plans shall be provided, including all information required by the health, roads and drainage, water and sewer, and sanitation departments to determine what water, sewer, sanitary disposal and storm drainage improvements will be established as public facilities within the city limits by written notice and a site plan submitted to the building inspector for approval in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
9.  Buffer areas: Location, dimensions and treatment of all required buffer, landscaped or planted areas including fences. 
10.  Trees: The general location of all stands of trees in excess of approximately 12 inches in diameter at a point three feet above the surface of the ground. 
11.  Proposed protective covenants: A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provisions for the organization and financing of a property owners' association, where appropriate. 
12.  Other information: Other information required by the director of planning and development to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Approval. All planned development projects which do not require rezoning shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission and processed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this article. The planning and zoning commission as a part of this site plan approval may vary, except for use or density provisions, the terms of this chapter where, in its opinion, equal performance can be obtained by means other than those specified in this section. An applicant disgruntled with a decision of the planning and zoning commission as to its planned development may appeal to the city council as per the procedures set forth in subsection 66-64(b)(5). If approval of the planned development requires rezoning, then the amendment process described in article II of this chapter shall be followed by the planned development applicant and the planning and zoning commission and city council shall apply these standards to determine whether a planned development should be approved, as part of the rezoning process. 
(o)  Religious facilities. 
(1)  Churches and other places of worship. 
a.  When in an R district, any building or structure established in connection with these uses shall be set back not less than 75 feet from any property line, except where this adjoining property is zoned for nonresidential use, in which case the setback shall be the same as required for the adjoining nonresidential district. Where this property line is a street line, the front yard setback established for the R district shall apply. 
b.  When in an R district, these uses shall be permitted only on a lot that has access to an arterial or collector street. 
c.  The site must have frontage on a public street of at least 125 feet, and have a minimum lot width of 125 feet. 
d.  No parking area shall be established within 20 feet of another R use. 
(2)  Convent or monastery. 
a.  When in an R district, any building or structure established in connection with these uses shall be set back not less than 50 feet from any property line, except where this property line is a street line, in which case the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. 
b.  When in an R district, these uses shall be permitted only on a lot which has access to an arterial or collector street. 
c.  The site must have frontage on a public street of at least 125 feet and a minimum lot width at building setback line of 125 feet. 
d.  No parking area shall be established within 20 feet of another R use or district. 
(p)  Retail trade. 
(q)  Services. 
(1)  Ambulance and emergency medical services (private). 
a.  These uses shall be permitted only on property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to that arterial or collector. 
b.  These uses shall be located on property independent from any other use. 
c.  The proposed development shall be reviewed and written approval granted by the director of public safety and the building inspector prior to the issuance of any permit or license. 
d.  The owner of the business shall bear all costs for traffic signs and signals necessary to advise the motoring public of emergency vehicle access. The requirement for, and location of, these warning signs and signal devices shall be determined by the traffic engineer or other appropriate county personnel. 
(2)  Convalescent or nursing home. Parking shall be provided for a convalescent or nursing home at a ratio of one space per three beds, plus one space for every doctor (staff or visiting) and for every two employees. 
(3)  Hospitals. Hospitals must be located on a collector or arterial. At least 100 feet shall separate all buildings from any residential district, of which the outermost 50 feet shall be a buffer. At least 50 feet shall separate all parking areas from residential districts, of which ten feet shall be a buffer. 
(r)  Storage. 
(1)  Junkyards. Junkyards must satisfy the following standards: 
a.  Minimum area: Five acres. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 300 feet. 
c.  Access shall be limited to arterial or major thoroughfares. 
d.  Setbacks: 500 feet from any residential use other than residence of the property owner; 100 feet from all property lines. 
e.  Fence: A screened fence at least eight feet high shall be erected around the entire perimeter of the property with a gate to be opened only to access the site. The gate shall contain a lock to prevent unauthorized entry. 
f.  Minimum buffer: 50 feet. 
g.  Approval is subject to the provision of a plan for rodent/pest control. 
(s)  Transportation. 
(1)  Bus stations. Bus stations are permitted, provided that such uses are located on arterials and that 200-foot deceleration and acceleration lanes are constructed for all access points. 
(2)  Railroad stations. Railroad stations are permitted, provided that such uses are located on arterials and that 200-foot deceleration and acceleration lanes are constructed for all access points. 
(t)  Temporary uses. 
(1)  Mobile office/temporary sales center. Mobile office and temporary sales centers may be permitted as long as such use shall cease at such time as 80 percent of the lots are sold. 
(2)  Storage or occupancy during construction. A temporary structure may be used during construction for storage or security; provided, however, that it shall be removed within ten days after the sale of the last structure or issuance of a building permit to construct the last structure, whichever first occurs. 
(3)  Camper. Campers may be used by valid building permit or a camper permit (limited to 14 days a month). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 75-453. - Undefined uses. 
It is impossible to set forth each and every use of land that may exist now or in the future in the city. If approval is sought for a use not specifically identified, the building inspector shall consider the requested use to determine whether it is substantially similar to identified uses. For purposes of this section, the term "substantially similar" shall mean that the unidentified use shares the same characteristics as an identified use in terms of nature of operation, size of operation, impact from operation and requirements of the use. The director of planning and development's decision in this regard shall be subject to the appeal provisions of section 75-42. However, all decisions of the director which are not appealed, or any final decision on appeal shall be reduced to writing and kept in the official records of the city so as to ensure consistency of decision making about heretofore unidentified uses. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 75-454. - Uses limited by septic tank capabilities and water availability. 
The development standards set forth in each of the divisions delineated in article III of this chapter apply to development in zoning districts in which public or community water lines are available and in which septic tank sewer service is possible. If community or public water or septic tank service is not available, then the standards applicable to that zoning district will vary at least as to minimum lot size inasmuch as developments which utilize septic tanks may require a larger developable lot size and also requires health department approval as to its appropriateness for septic tank or well water use. The building inspector is authorized to increase minimum lot sizes and otherwise vary district development standards as per division 1, article II of this chapter to accommodate the need to use septic tanks or well water and health department regulations in this regard. The unavailability of public sewer lines or water shall preclude the ability to develop projects which cannot utilize septic tanks. Any lot upon which an individual well or septic tank are to be provided shall have a minimum area of not less than that required by state and city/county health department regulations. The site location on the lot of these facilities shall be approved by the city/county health department in accordance with applicable requirements. In the event of a conflict between the lot sizes required by this chapter, or one required by state or city/county health department regulations, the more strict requirement shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-455. - General provisions applicable to all zoning districts. 
(a)  One building on each lot. Except in the case of planned centers and planned development, only one principal building/use, together with any customary accessory buildings allowed within that zoning district, shall occupy each lot. 
(b)  Use and construction of temporary buildings. Temporary buildings other than provided in this article shall not be allowed in any district. 
(c)  Requirements for moving a building. No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be moved within or into the city unless, when relocated, it meets all requirements of this chapter and other city code requirements, and is first approved by the building inspector. This restriction shall not apply to the replacement of a mobile or manufactured home with a new mobile or manufactured home at the same location and on the same lot, provided the new structure meets current city codes governing mobile homes and manufactured housing. 
(d)  Fences and walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard, other than a retaining wall, shall be more than eight feet in height, or be constructed in a public right-of-way or future street right-of-way. Any fence in a required front yard in a residential district shall not exceed four feet in height. No fence, wall or shrubbery, which creates an obstruction to vision or traffic safety hazard, shall be erected, permitted or maintained. When this chapter requires a fence to be constructed, such fence shall be completed prior to occupancy of the primary use structure. 
(e)  Buffer area. Buffer areas required by this chapter shall be established and maintained by the property owner under the following provisions: 
(1)  Be maintained as a planted area, using existing vegetation or, when required, additional planting as provided in this subsection. 
(2)  Be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stone, rocks and other landscaping materials. 
(3)  Not be used for parking or a structure other than a fence or drainage improvements required by the city. However, a buffer area may be used for vehicular access and utility easements (only if these uses are provided approximately perpendicular to the greater distance of the buffer area) and for drainage improvements required by the city based upon competent engineering studies which show these improvements to be necessary, upon approval of the director of planning and development. 
(4)  Except as provided above, the natural topography of the land shall be preserved and natural growth shall not be disturbed beyond that which is necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin this natural growth where too dense for normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen or dangerous and decayed timbers. However, a slope easement may be cleared and graded where required to prevent soil erosion upon approval of the director of planning and development; this easement may cover no more than 20 percent of the required buffer area, and shall be immediately replanted upon completion of easement improvements. 
(5)  Where the conditions described in the preceding subsection cannot be met by reason of the topography of the land or of the prior removal of or lack of timber and foliage, the owner of the buffer area may erect a permanent wall or fence of not less than six feet in height or a screen of evergreen planting, so designed and developed as described in this subsection. These plantings shall consist of evergreen shrubs not less than six feet in height. The following plants shall be approved for this purpose but shall not be exclusive of other plants which may be suitable, provided that they can form a hardy screen, dense enough and high enough both to interrupt vision and to diffuse the transmission of sound: 
Magnolia Grandiflora (Southern Magnolia). 
Pinus Strobus (White Pine) 
Prunus Caroliniana (Cherry Laurel). 
Ligustrum Lucidyn (Glossy Ligustrum). 
Ilex Burfordi (Buford Holly). 
Elaeagnus Pungens (Elaeagnus). 
(6)  Any grading, improvements or construction adjacent thereto shall be conducted far enough from the buffer area so as not to disturb or encroach upon the buffer area except for those uses as stated in number three of this section. 
(7)  Be designated on any plat required of the development. 
(f)  Parking of trailer. Commercial vehicles with more than four wheels, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers, pickup coach, buses, motorized homes, boat trailers and haulers and boats shall not be parked in the front yard in any residential district. Travel trailers recreational vehicles, campers, motorized homes, boat trailers and haulers and boats may be parked or stored in an enclosed garage or carport or in rear or side yards, provided that they remain more than 20 feet from the rear property line and ten feet from the side property line. No such vehicle shall be occupied for sleeping or as a residence, either permanently or temporarily, when so parked. 
(g)  Open space. Open space areas required to be established by this chapter shall be permanently maintained as open space and appropriately landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stones, rocks or other landscaping materials. These areas may not be used for vehicular access, parking or similar uses except as otherwise permitted in this article. 
(h)  Determination of development standards from private streets. When this chapter requires the establishment of minimum building setback lines, frontages and related development standards, these measurements for property not abutting a public street shall be made from or along a private street, except in apartment developments, where these measurements shall be made from public road frontages or as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(i)  Site plan preparation. Site plans and other development plans required to be submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be prepared only by those currently registered for this work in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 75-456. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Residential; single-family. 
(1)  A buffer area with a minimum width of 50 feet and a six-foot fence or wall which provides visual screening shall be established and permanently maintained by the developer of any nonresidential or multifamily property when adjoining any R district. The requirement for a fence or wall may be waived by the building inspector upon presentation of data by the property owner or developer which shows that construction of the fence or wall would destroy existing vegetation which, in itself, provides visual screening between the development and the residential district, or when the development abuts undeveloped property. Additionally, an earthen berm not exceeding two feet in height may count towards the prescribed height of any fence, wall or dense landscaping. 
(2)  In a residential single-family subdivision of ten or more lots for detached housing units, up to ten percent of the lots may have a minimum lot width at the setback line of less than that required by the zoning district; however, the lot width shall not be less than 90 percent of that required by the zoning district and the lot area shall not be less than that required by the zoning district. 
(b)  Nonresidential and multifamily. 
(1)  Maximum height of structures. All buildings in excess of three stories must be approved by the building inspector to ensure adequacy of fire protection facilities and service. Requests for height variances shall be pursued pursuant and subject to division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(2)  Spacing. No building shall be located closer than listed in this subsection (b)(2) to any part of another building or to a property line: 
AG-2, C-1, C-2, I-L, I-H. None except 20 feet to a property line; a minimum of 50 feet, unless otherwise provided in this section, if it abuts a residential use or district. 
RM (all). A minimum distance of 20 feet will be observed between the sides of apartment and other buildings; 40 feet between the front of an apartment and a side which it faces; and 60 feet between the front and rear of buildings; and between separate buildings which face each other. 
(3)  Buffer area. A buffer area with a minimum width by zoning district as provided in this subsection (b)(3) and a six-foot fence or wall which provides visual screening shall be established and permanently maintained by the developer/owner when adjoining an R district: 
AG-2, C-1, C-2, I-L, I-H. 50 feet. 
The requirement for fence or wall may be waived by the director of planning and development upon presentation of data by the property owner or developer which shows that construction of the fence or wall would destroy existing vegetation which, in itself, provides visual screening between the development and the R district, or when the development abuts undeveloped property. Additionally, an earthen berm not exceeding two feet in height may count towards the prescribed height of any fence, wall or dense landscaping. 
(4)  Service areas. All service areas for nonresidential uses shall be established so as not to infringe upon any yard requirement and shall be visually screened from adjacent residential properties. 
(5)  Fire safety requirements. Accessibility for firefighting equipment on a hard-surfaced subbase (subgrade plus an asphalt first layer or bound crushed stone aggregate) shall be maintained in all nonresidential districts (assuming city water is available) and planned developments. Minimum widths of private access driveways within such a development, excluding parking, shall be 20 feet, and the minimum turning radii shall be 35 feet. Fire hydrants and water service shall be installed to within 500 feet of units under construction before proceeding with framing. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 75-457. - Exceptions to general development standards. 
(a)  Substandard lots of record. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of the effective date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, and these lots have a frontage or lot area of less than two-thirds of what is required by the district in which they are located, these lots shall be re-plotted or re-parceled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district. Those lots, which have been approved for septic tank use before the effective date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, shall not be required to be re-platted for reasons of any change in minimum lot size required for septic tank use. 
(b)  Double buffer. When a required buffer area would abut and be continuous to an established buffer area, which meets all requirements of this chapter, then this additional required buffer area need not be established. 
(c)  Height requirements. The height limitations as stated in this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Barns, silos or other farm structures when located on farms, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio or television towers, masts and aerials; and 
(2)  Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks and scenery lofts and similar structures, provided that these structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which these structures are located. 
(d)  Yard requirements. When the setback of existing buildings which are located within 100 feet of each side of a lot and are within the same block and zoning district and which front on the same street as this lot is less than the minimum required setback, the setback of this lot may be the average of the existing setbacks, but in no event less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way upon which such lot fronts. 
(e)  Double frontage and corner lots. Lots, which adjoin a public street in the rear, shall provide the minimum required front yard on each street. The side yard setback for corner lots shall be no less than one-half of the front yard requirements applicable to that lot. 
(f)  Projections into yards. 
(1)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features, provided that these features do not project more than three feet into any required yard. 
(2)  An open, unenclosed porch or hard-surfaced terrace, steps, stoops and similar fixtures of a building may project into a required front yard or rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet, and into a side yard to a point not closer than five feet from any side lot line. 
(3)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street sides of lots shall violate the visibility provisions of this chapter, and that any fence in a required front yard in a residential district shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 75-458. - Traffic and parking requirements. 
Each use shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Street access. Except as provided in this chapter, each building shall be located on a lot or parcel which abuts a public paved street or has access to a public street by means of a recorded and paved access easement. However, should an owner of a tract of property subdivide it so as to provide smaller parcels only to other family members for their residential use, then the new parcels so created may be accessed by recorded, permanent and private easements between the original owner (grantor) and his grantees, upon approval of the director of planning and development. 
(2)  Right-of-way dedication and reservation. Future street rights-of-way, shall be deeded to the city by the developer pursuant to all applicable law. Street rights-of-way not providing access to the affected property (such as an interstate highway) shall be reserved by means of a recorded plat, but no dedication of these facilities shall be required. However, this reservation shall not be required for a period to exceed six months. 
(3)  Street improvements. Street improvements required to accommodate traffic generated by a use and improvement of new street rights-of-way, as established by the transportation plan or this chapter shall be made in accordance with city policy, which may include requiring the rezoning applicant to bear part or all of the cost of the same, based upon the need for such improvements caused by such new development. 
(4)  Extension of existing streets. Existing streets shall be connected and extended within the limits of a new development. However, streets or portions of streets adjacent to a proposed nonresidential or multifamily use which are developed and are being used exclusively for residential access shall not be connected, extended or in any way provide access to a nonresidential or multifamily use. 
(5)  Street access/curb cuts in other than R district. Curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits and other similar facilities on public streets in other than R districts shall not be located within 20 feet of any intersection or within 40 feet of another curb cut. A curb cut shall be no greater than 30 feet in width and no closer than 20 feet to any property line, unless approved by the director of planning and development as necessary for vehicular and access safety. 
(6)  Traffic control devices. If the traffic forecasted to be generated by a use within a nonresidential district will necessitate traffic control devices for that use to ensure public safety, the developer shall install such devices as are necessary to handle the traffic generated by the development pursuant to all applicable law. This determination shall be made by city council based upon standard traffic planning procedures of the Institute of Traffic Engineers using traffic warrants of the Federal Highway Administration and the state department of transportation. 
(7)  State department of transportation approval. All entrances or exits of any street or drive, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state department of transportation prior to the construction of this street or drive, or the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by this street or drive. 
(8)  Corner visibility clearance. In any district, no fence, structure, sign, planting or other obstruction (above a height of three feet) shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in this chapter. 
(9)  Private streets. Private streets within any district shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. Private streets within any district shall be assigned names and locations, and names of these streets shall be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in this chapter. The Eatonton Post Office or other appropriate authority to avoid conflicting names shall approve all private street names. Private drives which provide access to a nonresidential or multifamily use shall not be permitted in any residential district. 
a.  All private streets must be recorded as a permanent access easement. 
b.  No private street shall be approved if its existence shall create a fire protection or prevention problem for future residents of the area to be accessed by private way. 
c.  Satisfactory and sanitary provision shall be made for refuse disposal by residents to be serviced by the private street. 
d.  Private ways shall be wide enough to permit two motor vehicles safely to pass each other. 
e.  With the exception of width, as provided in this section, private streets shall be constructed in full accordance with city standards for public road construction. 
(10)  Off-street automobile parking. Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
a.  Plans required. A parking plan for all but detached single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the building inspector with the building plans. He shall review the proposed parking plan to ensure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The building inspector shall not allow occupancy or use of a building until he ascertains that its related parking facilities are completed in accordance with the approved plan. The provision of the required spaces on a temporary basis on a hard-surfaced subbase (subgrade plus an asphalt first layer or bound crushed stone aggregate) shall satisfy this requirement. 
b.  Design standards. All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.  Shall have access to a public street unless otherwise provided in this section. 
2.  Shall be graded and paved, including access drives, and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control. 
3.  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curbstones or other similar designations. 
4.  Each space shall have not less than 153 square feet, and shall be not less than eight and one-half feet wide and 18 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. The size of the parking spaces may be reduced to a minimum area of not less than 120 square feet and shall be not less than eight feet wide and 15 feet deep, exclusive of passageways on not more than 40 percent of the number of spaces required for any one use. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street. Handicap spaces shall be provided in compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
5.  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting property or public streets. 
6.  Shall be separated from sidewalk and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and by a strip of land at least ten feet wide reserved as open space and planted in grass or landscaped. 
7.  Design of the parking area, including space and driveway arrangement, shall conform to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers. 
8.  Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. This lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. 
9.  No parking or loading area shall be established within the required front yard of any multifamily or O-I district. 
10.  No parking or loading area shall be established in the required front yard of any R district except for a single-family residential use, nor shall more than 35 percent of this required front yard be paved or used for parking under any circumstances except as provided in section 75-457(f), "exceptions to development standards." 
11.  The parking area shall be permanently maintained by the owners or the occupants for their invitees or licensees so long as the uses exist. The provisions of subsections (10)b.2—8 of this section shall not apply to single-family residential uses where three or less spaces are required. 
c.  Location. All parking facilities shall be located on the same plot with the use it serves, unless otherwise provided in this section. 
d.  Joint use of parking facilities. The required parking spaces for a number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night and on Sundays. 
e.  Use of area. No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long term storage of any vehicles or equipment unless permitted by the district in which the area is located. 
f.  Surface of parking areas. The parking of any vehicle on any lot in any district on other than a surface treated and hardened to accommodate this vehicle is prohibited except as provided in this section. 
g.  Parking of business vehicles. The parking of business vehicles other than ordinary passenger automobiles shall be within a garage or carport or within a side or rear yard except for official government vehicles. The parking of any business vehicle other than a pick-up or panel truck used to provide daily transportation to and from work and any vehicle with a carrying capacity or more than one and one-half tons is prohibited in the R-1 district. 
h.  Required spaces. The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 

 
(11)  Off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading shall be established in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
a.  Design standards. Where required, one or more off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building. A loading berth shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 35 feet by 14 feet overhead clearance. A loading space need not be a full berth but shall be sufficient to allow normal loading of a magnitude appropriate to the property served. The building inspector shall determine the sufficiency of loading space, but in no case shall this space or its use hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
b.  Required spaces. The number of spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 
1.  Hospital, retail operations, including restaurant and dining facilities within hotel and office buildings, with a total usable floor area of 20,000 square feet 
or more: One loading berth for every 40,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; one loading space for every 20,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
2.  All other hospitals and retail operations with a gross floor area less than 20,000 square feet, all wholesale and light industrial operations with gross floor area less than 10,000 square feet: one loading space. 
3.  Office buildings: One loading birth per 1,000,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
4.  Industrial and wholesale operations, gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or over: 
10,000—40,000 square feet: 1 
40,000—100,000 square feet: 2 
100,000—160,000 square feet: 3 
160,000—240,000 square feet: 4 
240,000—320,000 square feet: 5 
320,000—400,000 square feet: 6 
Each 90,000 square feet above 400,000: 1 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 75-459. - Manufactured housing site requirements. 
(a)  No structure not now located within the county shall be used as a residence and individually sited unless it has been constructed at least in conformity with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development under 42 USC 5401, currently meet all fire and safety requirements of such standards, and has more than 500 square feet of living area. 
(b)  Any manufactured home or mobile home shall be completely enclosed (skirted) with materials of brick, finished block, or finished concrete. Any manufactured or mobile home with an interior width measurement of 16 feet or less may be skirted with other material approved by the city council provided the owner of the structure pay an administration fee of $200.00, or other sum approved by the city council, for the monitoring and enforcement of this provision. Failure to use the approved skirting or to keep the same properly maintained and in repair shall be a violation of this section subjecting the owner of the structure to a citation being issued and punishment pursuant to the general penalty provisions articulated in section 1-12 of this Code. Payment of the administration fee outlined herein shall constitute a waiver of personal jurisdiction by the owner of the structure. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be sited with the front entrance facing the street. Manufactured homes located on two streets must site the home facing the street on which the address has been issued. 
(d)  All manufactured homes and mobile homes individually sited must have at each door a landing that is a minimum of 36 inches by 36 inches; be attached to a permanent foundation; and have all towing devices, wheels, axles and removable hitches removed. 
(e)  All manufactured homes that meet or exceed the following requirements, in addition to the construction or manufactured standards required, shall be considered standard residential dwelling units subject to all standards and setback minimum lot sizes in the R-1 single-family residential district: 
(1)  Minimum width in excess of 16 feet interior measurement. 
(2)  Roof with minimum pitch of 2:12 and with surfaces of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass, built-up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the building inspector. 
(f)  All manufactured homes and mobile homes to be individually sited which do not meet or exceed the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, in addition to other requirements in this section, shall be permitted in the R-2 residential district and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  In existing subdivisions that have specific covenants providing for individual siting of such homes, the setbacks provided in the covenants shall control, but shall not be less than the standard residential setback provided in this section. 
(2)  In existing subdivisions that allow the siting of such homes, the standard residential setbacks provided in this section shall apply. 
(3)  Siting at any other location other than an R-1 district and an R-3 district shall require that such homes are located upon a lot not less than one acre per dwelling unit. 
(g)  All manufactured homes and mobile homes individually sited must be placed upon permanent foundations constructed in accordance with applicable building codes and state law. All manufactured homes and mobile homes shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers' instructions and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131 and state fire marshal rules and regulations. 
(h)  The following items must be completed before final power inspection for manufactured homes and site-built homes: 
(1)  Completion of skirting/underpinning as sited in (b) above; 
(2)  Construction of porches/decks at each exit as sited in (c) above; 
(3)  Installation of driveway pipe and 50 feet of gravel at driveway entrances onto city/state/federal roads; 
(4)  Construction of well house, if applicable; 
(5)  Permanent posting of street number; and 
(6)  Connection to water and sewer facilities. 
(h)  Fines for dealers who deliver and set up a home without valid building and electrical permits shall be a minimum of $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006; Amd. of 6-15-2009) 
Sec. 75-460. - Minimum standards for pre-owned manufactured homes. 
These standards are applicable only to those pre-owned manufactured homes built under the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code) and defined as a manufactured home under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(3). Construction and safety standards for a pre-owned HUD Code manufactured home should not exceed the HUD Code standard in effect at the time the home was produced. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Pre-owned manufactured home. Any manufactured home as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(3) that has been previously utilized as a residential dwelling. 
(2)  Retailer. A retailer shall be synonymous with dealer as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(2). 
(3)  Assignee. Any bank, financial institution or any person purchasing a retail installment contract, that has as security, a manufactured home. 
(b)  Facilities required. 
(1)  Sanitary facilities. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in working conditional when properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstructions. 
(2)  Hot and cold water supply. Every kitchen sink, lavatory and tub or shower in a pre-owned manufactured home must be connected to a supply of both cold and hot water. 
(3)  Water-heating facilities. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall have water-heating facilities in a safe, working condition. 
(4)  Heating facilities. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall have heating facilities in a safe, working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each manufactured home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. 
(5)  Smoke detector. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall be provided with a State of Georgia approved smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. 
(6)  Windows. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways, shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. 
(7)  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight that can be opened or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
(8)  Electrical. 
a.  Distribution panels. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
b.  Electrical system. The electrical system (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed, wired and shall be in working condition. The pre-owned manufactured home shall be subjected to an electrical continuity test(s) to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
c.  Third party inspection. The retailer, assignee, or city may, in lieu of inspecting the electrical system of a pre-owned manufactured home, request an electrical inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such a person will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein, which pertain to electrical systems. The city will not be responsible for any cost incurred by or due to a qualified third party. 
(9)  Exterior walls. The exterior of the home shall be free of loose or totting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls to the occupied spaces of the pre-owned manufactured home. 
(10)  Exterior siding. The exterior siding of the pre-owned manufactured home shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(11)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(12)  Interior floors, walls and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be kept in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain or moisture. 
(c)  Homes purchased for repair. No home may be placed on a lot for occupancy until standards herein are met. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-461—75-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 75-481. - Intent of article. 
Within the districts established by this chapter, as amended from time to time, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or become subject to this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, intensified or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-482. - Permits in progress. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans of any building or structure that has been duly permitted prior to the effective date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-483. - Special conditions. 
Nonconforming legally existing lot uses and buildings may be continued or occupied except that they may not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use or usage classification. 
(2)  Extended or enlarged. 
(3)  Reestablished after discontinued for six months. 
(4)  Continued unless properly registered or exempted as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-484. - Destruction/reconstruction. 
When a nonconforming structure is razed or destroyed by fire, or when it is proposed that work be performed on such structure such that more than 50 percent of the value of the structure is involved in such destruction or reconstruction, then the structure shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-485. - Registration. 
To have the benefit of this article allowing the continuance of nonconforming uses and structures, it shall be necessary that the property owner of each such nonconforming use and/or structure register that use and/or structure with the planning and zoning commission within one year of the date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived and renew such registration on an annual basis. Required registration shall be effected by submitting to the planning and zoning commission, upon such forms as provided by them, a description of the existing nonconforming use and payment on an annual basis of the registration fee in an amount found in the schedule of fees and charges. The following nonconforming uses and/or structures are not required to submit to such registration because such uses are already evidenced on an annual basis by other means: 
(1)  A commercial use if the structure is taxed as a realty item with record thereof in the office of the tax assessors or the use has had issued to it a federal tax identification number and/or a state sales tax number; 
(2)  Residential uses involving a manufactured home if the proper annual decal is affixed, taxes paid, and the unit contains not less than 400 square feet; or 
(3)  Residential uses that comply with applicable health and safety codes, contain more than 400 square feet and are listed and taxed as realty items in the office of the tax assessors. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-486. - Restoration. 
Any nonconforming building or any building containing a nonconforming use, which has been damaged by fire or other causes, may be reconstructed and used as before, if it is done within one year of this damage, unless such building or structure has been declared by the building inspector to have been damaged to an extent exceeding 60 percent of its then reproducible value, in which case any repair, reconstruction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-487—75-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 75-501. - Purposes, repealer, severability. 
The governing authority of the City of Eatonton, Putnam County, Georgia, to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of provisions affecting signs, does hereby adopt this "City of Eatonton Sign Ordinance" and hereby repeals all ordinances or portions thereof which are in conflict with this article, to include article VI of the City of Eatonton Zoning Ordinance. Every provision of this article shall be severable from all other provisions. A finding by any court of the illegality or unenforceability of any provision or provisions hereof shall not operate to void this article but, instead, all provisions not specifically and explicitly held to be illegal or unenforceable shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-502. - Applicability and effect. 
This article shall be effective on November 18, 2002. After said date, no sign shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained in the unincorporated area of the City of Eatonton unless it is in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this article. The effect of this article, as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
(1)  To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones and a limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this article; 
(2)  To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this article, but without a requirement for permits; 
(3)  To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this article; and 
(4)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-503. - Interpretation and definitions. 
Words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth in this section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in section 75-504, Computations. No provision of this article shall be interpreted or construed as limiting or directing the contents of any sign in the City of Eatonton. No provision of this article shall be interpreted or construed to permit commercial signage in a situation or location in which noncommercial signage is prohibited. [See charts [appendices] A and B for types of signs.] 
Animated sign: Any sign that uses movement or change or lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. 
Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source, also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Box cabinet sign: A sign designed so that the display surface and its sides create depth, generally so that the display surface may be lighted by bulbs or channeling inside the cabinet. 
Building marker: Any sign indicating only the name of a building and/or date and/or incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other similar permanent material. 
Building sign: Any sign that is part of or is attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. 
Canopy sign: Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for the purposes of this article. sign or portion thereof on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time and/or temperature shall not be considered a changeable copy sign under this article. 
Commercial message: Any wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Flag: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive color, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
Freestanding sign: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and which are independent from any building or other structures. 
Identification sign: A sign that contains only information that identifies only the owner and/or the address of the premises on which sign is erected. 
Incidental sign: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking", "entrance", "loading only", "telephone", or other similar directive. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position not located on the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental. 
Inspector: The chief building inspector of the city/county or his/her designee. 
Institutional sign: A sign that identifies a school, church, or hospital. 
Lot: Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of the subdivision, the boundaries that have been established by some legal instrument of record. 
Marquee: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Marquee sign: Any sign attached to in any manner or made a part of a marquee. 
Nonconforming sign: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
Off-premises sign: Any sign advertising a business not located at property where sign is placed. To acquire a permit, there must be a letter giving permission from the property owner. 
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, and designed to move in the wind. 
Person: Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a permanent structure; signs converted to "A" or "T" frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; or, umbrellas used for advertising. 
Projecting sign: Any sign affixed to a building or a wall in such a manner that any part of it extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
Public right-of-way: A portion of land over which a local, state, or federal government has designated a right of use. Within the City of Eatonton, the right-of-way will be defined as the area between the street and the sidewalk or where no sidewalk exists, any area between the street and the utility poles. 
Residential sign: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses. 
Right-of-way: See Public right-of-way. 
Roof sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof of a building, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Roof sign, integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Sign: An inscribed board, plate, space, surface, or the like that provides information, identification, or advertisement and which is not part of a vehicle capable of movement. 
Streamer: A streamer is defined the same as a pennant for the purposes of this chapter. 
Suspended sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
Temporary sign: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted to a structure or affixed to the ground. 
Trailer sign: Any sign designed to be transported by means of wheels, whether or not the wheels remain attached, located on the ground and permanently attached thereto, and which is usually an illuminated, two-sided sign and including any single- or double-surface painted or postered panel type sign, or any variation thereof. 
Tri-Vision signs: An advertising display usually the size of a traditional billboard that uses moving panels to rotate its surface. This shows three different messages in predetermined order and for set amounts of time each, usually six or seven seconds. These signs are prohibited inside the city limits, including the Highway 441 Bypass. 
Wall sign: Any sign attached generally parallel to a wall and within 12 inches of said wall or that is painted on the wall surface of a building or that is erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building of structure and that is supported by such wall or building and that displays only one sign surface. 
Window sign: Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service and that is placed inside a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
Zone lot: A parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations or a nonconforming lot as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-504. - Computations. 
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(1)  Computations of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, or triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblems, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. In the case of a freestanding sign, this area shall include not only the sign face as described above, but also the area of the sign structure that is flat, contiguous thereto, and which comprises the framework or decorative background for the sign. 
(2)  Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for the sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same structure and are not more than 48 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(3)  Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the normal grade at the base of the sign to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of the existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases where the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower. 
(4)  Computation of maximum total permitted sign area for a zone lot. The permitted area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be computed by applying the standards contained in the appendices which are at the end of this article and which pertain to the various zoning districts in the city. The maximum area for freestanding signs shall be dependent in part on the road frontage of the zone lot in which such sign is located. Lots fronting on two or more arterial streets shall be allowed to allocated the permitted sign area to each street frontage, without increasing the total sign area allowed. When multiple freestanding signs are erected on a single zone lot under this provision, each shall be placed at the midpoint of the applicable road frontage. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-505. - Signs allowed on private property. 
Signs shall be allowed on private property in the city only in accordance with Appendices B through I, which are located at the end of this article and which pertain to the various zoning districts in the city. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no person shall erect a sign of any type on any zone lot unless there is located on said lot a building with an area of 1,000 square feet or more unless said sign is exempt from the requirement of obtaining a permit pursuant to section 75-514. 
(2)  New signage along the Scenic Byway (State Route 16) shall be regulated by the Georgia Department of Transportation (D.O.T.) regarding new signage along a scenic byway. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-506. - Sign permit required. 
(1)  If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this article is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot shall obtain a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of section 75-513. Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain, at all times, a sign permit for such sign in accordance with sections 75-514, 75-515, or 75-516. No sign shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in accordance with section 75-509 and the permit requirements of section 75-516. No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for a proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this article (including those protecting existing signs) in every respect and with the master signage plan in effect for the property. 
(2)  All signs located within 660 feet of a state or federal highway must apply for a permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation before a permit can be issued by planning and development. 
(3)  Signs located inside the corporate limits of a municipality cannot be placed within 100 feet of each other unless signs are separated by buildings so that only one sign face within the 100-foot zone is visible from the highway at any on time. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-507. - Design, construction, and maintenance. 
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of "the state minimum standard codes" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20. 
(2)  Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this article, all signs shall be constructed of permanent material and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. 
(3)  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this Code, at all times as well as be in compliance with any structural requirements. For larger signs, a structural integrity inspection is recommended every three to five years or more frequent as standard practice dictate. So as to maintain a clean and attractive cityscape, all signs that have deteriorated or are in general disrepair or damaged must be repaired, replaced, or removed. A citation may be issued for all such signs. A sign must then be replaced or repaired within 90 days of notice to avoid penalties as stated in section 75-520. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-508. - Master signage plan. 
No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless and until a master signage plan for the zone lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the inspector and approved by the inspector as conforming to this section. 
(1)  Master signage plan. For any zone lot on which the owner purposes to erect one or more signs requiring a permit, the owner shall submit to the inspector a master signage plan containing the following: 
(a)  An accurate plot plan of the zone lot, at such scale as the inspector may reasonably require; 
(b)  Location of building, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such zone lot; 
(c)  Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual sign, the height of signs and the number of freestanding signs allowed on the zone lot(s) included in the plan under this article; and 
(d)  An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that incidental signs need not be shown. 
(2)  Limit on number of freestanding signs under master signage plan. The master signage plan for all zone lots with multiple uses or multiple users shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each street on which the zone lots have frontage and shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs. 
(3)  Other provisions of master signage plans. The master signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the owners of the zone lots may reasonably determine. 
(4)  Consent. The master signage plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the inspector shall require. 
(5)  Procedures. A master signage plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other official plan required by the city for the proposed development and shall be processed simultaneously with such other plan. 
(6)  Amendment. A master signage plan may be amended by filing a new master signage plan that conforms with all requirements of the ordinance then in effect. 
(7)  Binding effect. After approval of a master signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any other provision of this article. In case of any conflict of interest between the provisions of such a plan and any provision of this article, this article shall control. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-509. - Signs in the public right-of-way. 
No sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way, except for the following: 
(1)  Permanent signs. Permanent signs, including: 
(a)  Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, or direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(b)  Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company; and 
(c)  Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities. 
(2)  Emergency signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing work within the public right-of-way which has been authorized or permitted by a governmental agency. 
(3)  Other signs forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property except in conformance with the requirements of this section shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such signs. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-510. - Signs exempt from regulations under this article. 
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this article: 
(1)  Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, ordinance, or court order; 
(2)  Historical or memorial plaques, tables, or markers; 
(3)  Signs which are not an integral part of or are painted on or attached to vending machines, gas pumps, ice machines, or similar devices and which indicate the contents of the machine, name or logo of the supplier, price, or operating instructions; 
(4)  Window signs painted on or attached to a window or glass door; 
(5)  Traffic control signs on private property, such as "Stop," "Yield," and similar signs, the face of which meet department of transportation standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-511. - General permit procedures. 
The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of all sign permits under this article and the submission and review of master signage plans: 
(1)  Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind, for variances, and for approval of a master signage plan shall be submitted to the inspector on an application form or in accordance with application specifications published by the inspector. 
(2)  Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a master signage plan shall be accompanied by the application fees as established by Appendix A, Fees. 
(3)  Completeness. Within five working days of receiving an application for a sign permit, a variance, or for a master signage plan, the inspector shall review it for completeness. If the inspector finds that it is incomplete, the inspector shall, within such five-day period, send the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this article. 
(4)  Action on sign permit application or application for variance. Within ten workings days of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit or variance, the inspector shall either: 
(a)  Issue the sign permit or variance, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this article and of the applicable master plan; or 
(b)  Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform to the requirements of this article and of the applicable master signage plan. In case of a rejection, the inspector shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the article or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is inconsistent. 
(5)  Action on master signage plan. On any application for approval of a master signage plan the inspector shall take action on the application on one of the following dates: 
(a)  Fourteen days after the submission of a complete application if the application is for signs for an existing building; or 
(b)  On the date of final action on any related application for building permit, site plan, or development plan for signs involving new construction. 
On or before such applicable date, the inspector shall either: 
(a)  Approve the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan and the plan itself conforms in every respect with requirements of this article; or 
(b)  Reject the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan or the plan itself fails in any way to conform to the requirements of this article. In case of a rejection, the inspector shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the article with which the plan is inconsistent. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-512. - Permits to construct or modify signs. 
(1)  Application. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawing to show the dimension, design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a master signage plan in effect for the zone lot. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same zone lot. 
(2)  Inspection. The inspector shall cause an inspection of the zone lot for which each permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign has been issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such permit or at such earlier date as the owner may request. If the construction is not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is complete and in full compliance with this article and with the building and electrical codes, the inspector shall affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying the sign(s) and the applicable permit by number or other reference. If the construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance with this article and applicable codes, the inspector shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the construction is then completed, the inspector shall affix to the premises the permanent symbol described above. 
(3)  Lapse. In the event that a permitted sign has not been substantially completed within six months of the date of the issue of the permit, said permit shall lapse and be void and of no effect. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-513. - Sign permit—Continuing. 
The owner of a zone lot which contains signs requiring a permit under this article shall at all time maintain a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for individual zone lots, notwithstanding the fact that a particular zone lot may be included with other zone lots in a master signage plan. 
(1)  Initial sign permit. The inspector, upon final inspection of the completed sign installation, construction, or modification, shall automatically issue an initial sign permit. 
(2)  Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor owner of the property, subject only to filing such application as the inspector may require and paying any applicable fee. The assignment shall be accomplished by this filing and shall not require approval by the inspector. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-514. - Temporary sign permits (private property). 
Temporary signs on private property shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Term. A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary sign for a specified period not to exceed a 60-day period. 
(2)  Number. No more than two temporary sign permits shall be issued to the same registered business on the same zone lot in any calendar year. 
(3)  Other conditions. A temporary sign shall be allowed under conditions of and subject to all requirements for temporary signs as noted herein. 
(4)  Exceptions to the requirement of obtaining a permit for certain temporary signs. Any person or entity which has a recurring requirement to place temporary signs, such as real estate for sale, construction, or political, shall not be required to obtain a permit for each individual sign, provided that said business adheres to all other requirements of this article and the following requirements: 
(a)  The maximum square footage of any sign in a residential zone shall not exceed six square feet. The maximum total square footage for all such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(b)  The maximum square footage of any sign in any nonresidential zone shall not exceed 64 square feet. Only one sign shall be placed within the front yard of any zone lot. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-515. - Nonconforming signs and signs without permits. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any zone lot or other premises on which exists a sign that does not conform with the requirements of this article or for which there is no current and valid sign permit shall be obligated to remove such sign or, in the case of nonconforming sign, to bring it into conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Signs existing on effective date. For any sign existing in the city on the effective date hereof [November 18, 2002] and for which a permit is required, an application for a sign permit shall be submitted to the inspector before May 18, 2003. Said application shall be exempt from the initial fees adopted under authority of this article, but not from renewal and subsequent fees. Furthermore, no person shall be liable under the penalty provisions of this article prior to May 18, 2003, for a violation of the provisions of this article providing for permits. 
(2)  Nonconforming existing signs, permits, and terms. A sign that would be permitted under this article only with a sign permit, but which was in existence on the effective date hereof [November 18, 2002] and which was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which for any reason is not in conformance with the requirements of this article or of the zoning ordinance, shall be issued a nonconforming sign permit if an application in accordance with subsection (1) of this section is timely filed. Said application is in addition to those applications required by sections 75-511, 75-512, 75-513, and 75-514 hereof. 
Such permit shall allow any sign subject to such permit and which was made nonconforming by the adoption of this article to remain in place and be maintained, but pursuant to the provisions of section 75-517 hereof, provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of the nonconformity. Such signs are also subject to the provisions of subsection (3), below. A change in the information on the face of an existing nonconforming sign shall not be deemed to be an increase in the degree or extent of the nonconformity. However, any nonconforming sign shall either be eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this section when any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than 50 percent of the lesser of the original value or replacement value of the sign. 
(3)  Lapse of nonconforming sign permit. A nonconforming sign permit shall lapse and become void under the same circumstances as those under which any other sign permit may lapse and become void. 
(4)  Sign removal required. A sign that was constructed, painted, installed, or maintained in conformance with a permit under this article, but for which the permit has lapsed or not been renewed or for which the time allowed for the continuance of a nonconforming sign has expired, shall be forthwith removed without the requirement of notice or action from the city. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-516. - Variances. 
When, in specific cases, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in unusual hardship because of extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the size, shape, or topography of a zone lot, the inspector may, after application, grant a variance from the requirements of this article in regard to the placement or height of a sign. 
(1)  Variances, conditions required. The inspector may grant a variance only after making findings that the following conditions exist: 
(a)  There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography and which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(b)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by the owners of similar properties; 
(c)  Granting the variance would not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges that are denied to similar properties; 
(d)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(e)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
(f)  The variance requested is the minimum variance which will make possible the logical use of the land, building or structure; and 
(g)  The variance is not a request to permit a type of sign which otherwise is not permitted in the zoning district involved. 
(2)  Actions of inspector on receipt of an application for variance. In addition to those actions required of the inspector in subsection 75-511(4), the inspector shall enter written findings that address each condition referred to in subsection (1), above. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-517. - Appeals. 
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the inspector in regard to any provision of this article may appeal said decision to the city council, provided that a notice of appeal is filed with the inspector within ten days of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee required by Appendix A (Schedule of Fees). The city council shall take action on the appeal after a public hearing to be conducted pursuant to the rules for a public hearing found in the zoning ordinance then in effect. The city council shall hear all such appeals within 30 days of filing the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council may be further appealed by certiorari to the superior court taken with ten days of the decision being appealed. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-518. - Violations. 
Any of the following shall be a violation of this article and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this article, by the zoning ordinance, and by state law. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this article and each day's violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this article. 
(1)  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the sign is located. 
(2)  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit. 
(3)  To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portion of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-519. - Enforcement and remedies. 
Any violation or attempted violation of this article or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more that $500.00 or six months imprisonment or both. Each day's violation shall be considered to be a separate offense. 
All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX A. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX B. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE A-1 
A-1 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
A-1 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Along Scenic Byway - Highway 16. See subsection 75-505(2). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX C. - SPECIFICATION FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE R-1 
R-1 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
  
R-1 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Along Scenic Byway - Highway 16. See subsection 75-505(2). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX D. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE R-3 
R-3 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
R-3 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Along Scenic Byway - Highway 16. See subsection 75-505(2). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX E. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE R-4 
R-4 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
R-4 DISTRICT SPECIFICATION FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Along Scenic Byway - Highway 16. See subsection 75-505(2). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX F. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, SETBACK, AREA, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL AREA 
OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL AREA SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL AREA SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Along Scenic Byway - Highway 16. See subsection 75-505(2). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX G. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONES C-1 AND C-2 (For all parcels with road frontage on Highway 441 Bypass) 
C-1 and C-2 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
C-1 and C-2 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Signage is allowed in addition to other computation of freestanding signage. May be lit only with external lighting. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX H. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONES C-1 AND C-2 
C-1 and C-2 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
C-1 and C-2 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Signage is allowed in addition to other computation of freestanding signage. May be lit only with external lighting. 
(5)  Along Scenic Byway - Highway 16. See subsection 75-505(2). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
APPENDIX I. - SPECIFICATION FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONES I-1 AND I-2 
I-1 AND I-2 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
I-1 AND I-2 DISTRICT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign that would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Signage is allowed in addition to other computation of freestanding signage. May be lit only with external lighting. 
(5)  Along Scenic Byway - Highway 16. See subsection 75-505(2). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
ARTICLE VII. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 75-551. - Purpose and intent of article. 
This article is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  Encourage economically sound and stable land development. 
(2)  Ensure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to land developments. 
(3)  Ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments. 
(4)  Ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other purposes. 
(5)  Ensure that land is developed in conformity with the comprehensive plan for the city. 
(6)  Ensure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by the subdivider, the sanitarian, the city and the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-552. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-553. - Jurisdiction. 
The city council grants the planning and zoning commission the right to exercise the power and authority to review, approve and disapprove plats of land subdivision prior to the recording of such plats in the office of the clerk of the county superior court, within the city, which show lots, blocks or building sites with or without new streets. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-554. - Conflict with public and private provisions. 
(a)  Public provisions. These regulations of this article are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annual any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. Where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of this article or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive, or imposes higher standards, shall control. 
(b)  Private provisions. The regulations of this article are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where such provisions exercise the power and authority to review, approve and disapprove plats of land subdivided prior to the recording of such plats in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county within the city, which show lots, blocks or building sites with or without new streets. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-555. - Saving provision. 
This article shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue or affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-556. - Repeal of existing regulations. 
Upon the adoption of the resolution from which this article is derived, the existing land subdivision regulations of the city, as amended, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-557. - Resubdivision of land. 
For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, including vacation of part or all of any plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on each map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be reviewed, approved, or disapproved by the planning and zoning commission by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-558. - Variances—Generally. 
Where the planning and zoning commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this article and/or the purpose of this article may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve a variance to this article's regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided the planning and zoning commission shall not approve a variance unless it shall find, based on the evidence presented, that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or injurious to other property. 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not generally applicable to other property. 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surrounding, shape or topography of the specified property, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of this article was carried out. 
(4)  The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of this chapter, comprehensive plan or official map, should any or all of these exist. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-559. - Same—Conditions. 
In approving a variance, the planning and zoning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-560. - Same—Procedure. 
A petition for any variance shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the zoning department by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is submitted for the consideration of the planning and zoning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the request and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The granting of any variance shall be made concurrent with the approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-561. - Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce this article, and to bring to the attention of the city any violation or lack of compliance herewith. 
(b)  No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision, or an existing subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision had been approved by the planning and zoning commission in accordance with provisions of this chapter and filed with the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(c)  The subdivision of any lot or parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease, shall not be permitted except as provided for by the requirements set forth in this article. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot site subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with or violates any of the regulations of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-562. - Civil enforcement. 
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of this article; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages to restrain, correct or abate a violation; to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in section 75-532. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-563. - Planning standards and procedures. 
The following criteria shall be used to evaluate and determine the recommendations for the proposed amendments and or variances to the this article: 
(1)  The current zoning and existing use. The following considerations shall be given to surrounding and nearby property: 
a.  Current nonconforming uses. 
b.  Any home occupations. 
c.  Transitional trends. 
(2)  The effect of property values. The following considerations shall be given to the effects on property values: 
a.  Loss or gain to proposed property. 
b.  Loss or gain to surrounding property. 
(3)  Desirability of property for proposed use. The following considerations shall be given to the desirability of the property for the proposed use: 
a.  The intended use of the property. 
b.  Site planning adaptation to topography, watershed and vegetation. 
c.  Parking, buffer zones, open spaces, utility services and external accessibility. 
(4)  Effect on the public welfare. The following considerations shall be given to the effect on the public welfare: 
a.  Living conditions. 
b.  Traffic. 
c.  Noise and lights. 
d.  Pollution. 
e.  Health and safety of the general public. 
(5)  The length of time the property has been vacant as currently zoned. The following considerations shall be given to the length of time the property has been vacant as currently zoned: 
a.  Marketability as zoned, versus proposed zoning. 
b.  Highest and best use of property as permitted by zoning, present and future. 
(6)  Conformity with current land use. The following considerations shall be given to the proposed use's conformity with current land use: 
a.  Availability of alternative sites. 
b.  Effect on municipal services. 
c.  Effect on future annexation. 
(7)  Public health and safety. The consideration of any other factors relevant to the protection of or promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare as to the unrestricted use of property. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-564. - Meeting format. 
At any public hearing held under this article, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  Minutes of the meeting will be taken by the board secretary. Should a complete transcript of the meeting be requested, it will be provided at the expense of the person making the request. 
(2)  No set time limit will be set for each person to talk, but it is suggested that remarks be kept short and to the point. 
(3)  The following chart is an outline of how the meeting will be held: 
a.  Hearing called to order. 
b.  Proposal or ordinance summarized. 
c.  Applicant or proponent states their case. 
d.  Persons in favor testify. 
e.  Persons in opposition testify. 
f.  Rebuttal and cross examination. 
g.  Hearing closed. 
h.  Recommendations submitted by the planning and zoning commission to official body. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-565. - Criteria. 
The criteria of section 75-563 shall be used to evaluate and determine if changes proposed by the city council and/or planning and zoning commission are to be recommended. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-566. - Publication of standards. 
The criteria of section 75-563 shall be printed and made available to the public to aid in the preparation for a change in this article, a zoning change or a request for subdivision approval. The building inspector shall have such criteria, along with a checklist of procedures to follow, to request any of the above changes. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-567. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the city planning and zoning commission shall have the right of appeal to city council, if such appeal is filed with the building inspector within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of city council regarding any subdivision matter shall have the right of appeal to a court of law if such appeal is filed with the clerk of court within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-568—75-580. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPROVEMENT, RESERVATION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 75-581. - General requirements. 
(a)  Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established in this article, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations: 
(1)  The Georgia Plat Act. 
(2)  All applicable statutory provisions. 
(3)  The city land use regulations, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions. 
(4)  The comprehensive plan, official map, and capital improvements programs of the city, if any of these exist and are in effect. 
(5)  Any and all rules of the city health department and/or appropriate state agencies. 
(6)  The rules of the state highway department, if the subdivision, or any lot contained therein, abuts a state highway. 
(7)  The Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
(b)  Plats straddling political boundaries. Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land in another governmental jurisdiction, the planning and zoning commission may request assurance from the city attorney that access is legally established, and from the city that the access road is adequately improved. In general, lot lines shall be laid out so as to not cross-jurisdictional boundary lines. 
(c)  Suitability of the land. Land subject to flooding, inadequate drainage or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use, nor for any other use that will continue to increase the danger of health, safety and property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected prior to the final plat approval. 
(d)  Rejection of land dedication. Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning and zoning commission finds not suitable for such public use, the planning and zoning commission shall refuse to approve the plat. Should the planning and zoning commission find that a proposed dedication of land to public use on the preliminary plat or final plat is not required, the planning and zoning commission shall strike such dedication from the plat prior to its approval. Should the planning and zoning commission find that a proposed dedication of land to public use on the final plat is not required, the planning and zoning commission shall refuse to approve that plat. 
(e)  Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not be duplicated, nor closely approximate phonetically or visually, the name of any other subdivision in the city. The planning and zoning commission shall have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at preliminary plat approval. 
(f)  Large-scale developments. The requirements of this article may be modified in the case of a large-scale community, commercial or neighborhood development which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks and streets. Such modifications shall conform to the purpose and intent of this article, and shall follow the requirements for a planned unit development (PUD) as included in this chapter. 
(g)  Required improvements. The requirements of this subsection shall apply to every major subdivision and shall be planned for and provided by the subdivider by installation and/or payment prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(1)  Street names. All streets be named and marked with MUTCD signs. Street names shall have the approval of the post office and shall not duplicate, nor closely approximate phonetically or visually, the name of any other street in the city, nor the name of any other street within the applicable postal service delivery area. A street that is in alignment with an existing street shall continue the name of the existing street. 
(2)  Streets. All streets shall be designed, constructed and paved in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. No street shall be accepted by the city until it shall have been in public use for one year (one-year warranty period) and all repairs required by the city have been completed to the satisfaction of the city. To initiate the one-year warranty period the city must conduct an inspection of the road, grading, grassing, and so forth to determine its suitability and the developer/owner must post a warranty bond or irrevocable letter of credit for at least double of the cost of paving the road or a mutually agreed upon cost. It is the responsibility of the developer to maintain all streets until they are accepted by the city, and issue a surety bond to the city, to provide for such maintenance and repair, should the developer not be able to conduct the required repairs, as provided by this article. The developer shall install all necessary traffic control signs as required by the city. In addition, the subdivider shall provide suitable ground cover, such as grass, on all unpaved areas of street right-of-way or other public areas. All grassing shall be done to DOT specifications. If at the end of the one-year warranty period, the road is not in good maintenance, the city will require the developer/owner to make such repairs to bring the road into good maintenance. If after 30 days' notice from the city the developer/owner has not made the required repairs, the city may seek to obtain the warranty bond or irrevocable letter of credit. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  Generally. All water, sewer and natural gas lines shall be along street rights-of-way, underground and located on back slopes of rights-of-way across drainage ditches away from pavements in order to prevent damage to the pavement during utility construction or maintenance. Where required, because of topography, location of existing utilities or other factors, the planning and zoning commission may allow the installation of utilities in other areas. 
b.  Water. If a public water system is located reasonably near the proposed subdivision, water mains shall be installed by the subdivider within the subdivision with connections to each lot extended to the lot lines. If a public water system is not available, the subdivider shall provide a water supply through a community water system or individual wells in conformity with the regulations of the city health department and this chapter. 
c.  Sewer. If a public sanitary sewer system is located reasonably near the proposed subdivision, sewer mains shall be installed by the subdivider within the subdivision with connections to each lot extended to the lot line. If a public sewer system is not available, the subdivider shall provide a community sewage collection and treatment system or individual septic tank systems in conformity with the regulations of the city health department and the state department of natural resources. 
(4)  Storm drainage. 
a.  Design. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots and any drainage feature must be capable of handling at least the 25-year storm event. Sensitive or high-risk areas will require handling larger storm events, which will be the responsibility of the designing engineer. 
b.  Design certification. A registered engineer must certify that the proposed storm drainage improvements and other proposed construction is adequate. 
c.  Connection to existing systems. If a storm system is located reasonably near the proposed subdivision, then the subdivision must contain an underground storm drainage system, which will be connected to the existing system. Should a storm drainage system not exist then adequate surface drainage facilities shall be installed. 
d.  Stormwater management. Stormwater detention facilities or other forms of suitable storage features will be required where more than a five percent increase in runoff occurs between the calculated pre-developed flows and the calculated post-developed flows. The maximum "C" factor to be utilized while calculating flows by the rational method shall be 0.25 for flat and rolling terrain and 0.30 for hilly (seven percent plus) terrain. Calculations shall be shown for the two-, five-, ten-, and 25-year storm events. Emergency spillways shall be sized to handle at least the 100-year storm event. For pre-developed flows, the time of concentration (TOC) shall not be less than ten minutes. 
e.  Roadside ditches. Front and back slopes for roadside ditches shall be 3:1 or flatter. Ditches shall be designed to handle at least the 25-year storm event and velocities within the ditch are recommended to be held below five feet per second. Velocities above five feet per second will require additional stabilization practices. Erosion matting meeting DOT specifications is recommended and may be required within any ditch. Check dams or other suitable structures shall be placed in accordance with the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", latest edition. 
f.  Drainage structures. Where drainage pipes, curb inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, and other structures are utilized, these shall conform to the Georgia DOT Standard Detail Manual, latest edition. 
g.  Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter meeting Georgia DOT Standard Detail Manual specifications, is recommended for any new development. In residential areas, curb and gutter may either be 24-inch standup ("L" backing) or roll-back type. In commercial and industrial areas, 30-inch standup is recommended. Associated junction boxes, piping, transitions, and other appurtenances shall meet Georgia DOT specifications. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-582. - Design standards for block and lots. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet, nor less than 400 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots for minimum depth except where abutting arterial streets or railroads or other situations make these requirements impractical. 
(3)  Blocks shall have pedestrian walkways of not less than four feet in width where deemed essential by the planning and zoning commission to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other public or community facilities. 
(4)  Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, as determined by the planning and zoning commission, cul-de-sacs (dead-end streets) should not be greater than 1,200 feet in length. It is recommended that they be not greater than 500 feet in length in multifamily areas. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 60 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 40 feet for residential developments and a larger radius for commercial and industrial developments. Temporary paved turnarounds shall be provided for dead-end streets, which are scheduled to be extended at a later date. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-583. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial or industrial development. Alleys in single-family residential subdivisions shall not be permitted, unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission of the need for alleys. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-584. - Development along arterial street. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street or railroad right-of-way, the planning and zoning commission may require a street approximately parallel to, and on either side of, such right-of-way as an access road, or it may require a non-access buffer zone reserved strip. Lots shall not have direct access to an arterial street, but only to the access street. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-585. - Lot sizes. 
Residential lots shall meet the lot requirements of this chapter. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide services areas and off-street parking suitable for the intended use, and shall be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. Corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from all abutting streets. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-586. - Lot lines. 
All side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless topographic or other features are more practical. All lot lines should follow a logical pattern. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-587. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of development from an arterial street or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-588. - Easements. 
The planning and zoning commission may require easements having an adequate width and located along rear or side lot lines for utility lines, drainage and underground cables, with provision for access from a public way. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-589. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips which control access to street and public grounds shall be permitted only when the reserve strip is deeded to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-590. - Design standards for streets. 
In order to provide for roads suitable in location, width and improvement, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads are hereby required and shall be planned for and provided by the subdivider, prior to the approval of the final plat. Road classifications may be indicated in the comprehensive plan; otherwise, they shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-591. - Rights-of-way. 
(a)  Minimum street rights-of-way. Minimum street right-of way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Collector street, 64 feet; 
(2)  Sub-collector street, 60 feet; 
(3)  Lane, 60 feet; and 
(4)  Alley, 24 feet. 
(b)  Additional rights-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in this article shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional widths are necessary to provide adequate cut slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-592. - Street pavement widths. 
Street pavement widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Collector street, 24 feet without curb and gutter and 22 feet of pavement excluding extra width for curb and gutter (24-inch curb and gutter shall be 26 feet back of curb to back of curb); 
(2)  Sub-collector street, 20 feet without curb and gutter and 18 feet of pavement excluding extra width for curb and gutter; 
(3)  Lane, 20 feet and 18 feet with curb and gutter; and 
(4)  Alley, 18 feet (residential); 20 feet (commercial or industrial). 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-593. - Paving requirements. 
(a)  Clearing and grubbing right-of-way. This work shall consist of removing and disposing of all vegetation and debris within the right-of-way to a depth of at least three feet below the existing grade for any fill sections and three feet below finished sub grade for any cut sections. Topsoil shall be stripped and stockpiled for later use. All stump holes shall be backfilled and compacted to 98 percent of the Standard Proctor density with a suitable material, class I or II material. All compaction tests and their associated costs, as described herein, shall be the responsibility of the contractor/developer. 
(b)  Subgrade. This work shall consist of placing, mixing, compacting and shaping the top six inches of soil. This work also includes subgrade stabilization. The subgrade shall be compacted to 98 percent of the Standard Proctor Density and tests shall be conducted at least once for every lift for every 500 feet of road. Proof-rolling of the entire area may be required consisting of a ten-ton payload on a standard tandem axle dump truck or other mutually agreed upon piece of loaded machinery. 
(c)  Base. All streets shall have a six-inch crusher run stone base or a four-inch compacted graded aggregate base (GAB) at 100 percent of the Standard Proctor density. Compaction testing intervals shall be as prescribed in subsection (b). 
Proof-rolling may also be required per the same paragraph. 
(d)  Prime. All roadways shall be primed in accordance with DOT specifications. 
(e)  Paving. 
(1)  Residential/subdivision street. A one and one-half-inch plant mix asphalt type E or F top wearing surface is to be applied over a two and one-half-inch type B binder surface. 
(2)  Major rural and arterial roads. The minimum paving design for major rural and arterial roads shall be compacted subbase at 98 percent of the Standard Proctor density, a six-inch graded aggregate base, three inches of type B binder, and two inches of type E or F top wearing course. Accel/decel lanes or a center turn lane may be required if deemed necessary by the city/county engineer. (Note: DOT roads must meet DOT specifications/approval.) 
(3)  Driveway turnouts/curb cuts. These shall be paved in accordance with the applicable receiving street/road and shall have a minimum radius of 15 feet. Suitable concrete paving is also acceptable for turnouts or curb cuts. Turnout/curb cuts serving single driveways shall have a minimum width after radius of 12 feet with commercial/industrial turnouts/curb cuts meeting sub-collector requirements of section 75-592. 
(4)  Commercial/industrial entrance and lots. Due to the American[s with] Disability [Disabilities] Act, any and all ingress, egress, and parking lots/area including internal roads to and from, shall be paved by suitable conventional asphalt paving or concrete paving. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-594. - Shoulder requirements. 
The street right-of-way shall be graded to provide at least a five-foot, two percent sloped (sloped away from road) strip, measured from the back of the curb or edge of pavement on both sides of the street. At least eight feet of gentle sloped area shall be provided where sidewalks are to be placed. Shoulders shall have topsoil spread and adequate amounts of seed and fertilizer shall be applied to establish a suitable stand of grass. The shoulders are to be smooth and free of rocks and debris. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-595. - Culverts. 
Pipe size shall be determined by standard engineering practices, but in no case be sized to handle less than a 25-year post-developed storm event. All cross drainpipes for driveways shall be either fully bituminous coated, concrete, or corrugated high-density polyethylene pipe with the appropriate bedding, inlet/outlet protection, and headwalls/flared-end sections. Installations shall be in accordance with DOT standards. Supporting calculations/hydrology study shall be submitted for all flows for which a culvert is to handle. Pipe gauge (thickness) shall be as determined by the height of the fill. Minimum cover pipes shall be 12 inches. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-596. - Design guidelines. 
(a)  Continuation of existing streets. Where feasible, existing streets shall be extended for access into the subdivision. Such extensions shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall be less than the required width. 
(b)  Linear street grades. Maximum and minimum linear street grades shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial street: Not more than ten percent. 
(2)  Collector street: Not more than six percent. 
(3)  Sub-collector street, lanes and alleys: Not more than 12 percent. 
(c)  Horizontal curvature. The minimum radii of centerline road curvature shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial street: 300 feet. 
(2)  Collector and sub-collector street: 200 feet. 
(3)  Lanes: 100 feet. 
(4)  Alleys: to be determined by the planning and zoning commission for each subdivision. 
(d)  Tangents. Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length not less than 100 feet. 
(e)  Vertical alignment. There shall be a horizontal sight distance at all intersections, when measured from a height of six feet, according to the following: 
(1)  Arterial street: 400 feet. 
(2)  Collector street: 300 feet. 
(3)  Subcollector street: 250 feet. 
(4)  Lanes: 200 feet. 
(5)  Alleys: 150 feet. 
Where two or more streets of different classifications intersect, the sight distance requirements for the highest shall be used. 
(f)  Intersection design. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Opposing street intersections must be separated for each other by at least 125 feet. 
(g)  Cross slope. Street and road cross slopes shall be at least two percent (one-fourth inch per foot) measured tangent to the center run of the road. Appropriate cross slope design considerations shall be made for transitions into and through super elevations at curves. 
(h)  Driveway turnouts/curb cuts. Any driveway or entrance (residential or industrial) shall have a paved turnout, meeting Georgia DOT specifications. Commercial driveways or entrances shall have a paved turnout, meeting Georgia DOT specifications, extending from the edge of the existing pavement of at least 20 feet into the property. Turnouts/curb cuts shall be designed and constructed so as not to release runoff waters onto the roadway but rather into curb inlets or roadside ditches before reaching the existing street/road. Runoff waters from a 25-year or less storm event are not allowed to drain off a driveway onto a street/road. In high traffic/volume areas (typically major rural roads and arterial roads) designs accommodating larger storm events will be required. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-597. - Flag lots. 
Flag lots are those parcels of land that do not have adequate width for development and have at least a driveway corridor from the road frontage to a larger portion of property and are situated behind other parcels. Flag lots shall have the following requirements: 
(a)  The driveway corridor (pole section of a flag lot) which provides access to the larger portion of the property shall be at least 30 feet in width. 
(b)  Whenever deemed necessary, the driveway portion in the right-of-way shall be a shared driveway. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-598. - Development plans. 
(a)  Development plans shall contain detailed maps, drawings and sketches showing: 
(1)  Name of subdivision or proposed name whichever is applicable. 
(2)  List the name, address and telephone number of legal owner of the property. 
(3)  Covenants, new or existing, on the property. (Provide separately.) 
(4)  Name, address and telephone numbers of the professional persons of firms responsible for subdivision design, design of public improvements and for surveys. 
(5)  Location of property by governmental district. 
(6)  Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds, historical sites natural areas of aesthetic beauty or interest, railroad rights-of-way, and, watercourses. 
(7)  Location, width, type and name of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract. 
(8)  Name and location of adjoining developments, and property owners. 
(9)  Location and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, bridges or underground structures within the tract and adjacent thereto. 
(10)  Locations and sizes of existing permanent buildings and utility stations on and adjacent to the tract. 
(11)  Topography of the site, existing and proposed, at a contour interval sufficient to accurately portray the nature of the land and extending 100 feet from the property. (Two-foot interval unless otherwise approved.) 
(12)  A location sketch of the project relative to roadways, municipalities, major streams and other identifiable landmarks. (Cover/Title page) 
(13)  Soils boundaries including name, texture, slope, depth, drainage and structure. 
(14)  Location, nature, size, and zoning classification for the project and/or phases. 
(15)  The proposed alteration of the area including limits of clearing and grading, roads, buildings and structures. 
(16)  Location and extent of temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures including both vegetative and structural practices. 
(17)  Location and extent of storm water management facilities. 
(18)  Other significant features including legend, map scales, north arrow, title blocks, seals and signatures. 
(19)  Starting dates of initial land disturbing activities and date of expected final stabilization. 
(b)  Supportive data for development plans. Supportive data shall include reference to the applicable standards and specifications, calculations, charts, graphs, maps and any other data used in the design and layout of the measures installed. Data shall include calculated flow rates for at least the two- and 25-year storm events, as well as strength of pipe for anticipated designed burial depths and calculations for stormwater management facilities, such as pre-developed, post-developed flows, routing, calculations, etc. 
(c)  Construction specifications. The following specifications are to be included in the development plans: 
(1)  All timber, which shall have a marketable value, shall be salvaged. Timber logs, brush, rubbish, and vegetable matter which will interfere with the grading operations or affect the planned stability of fill areas shall be removed and disposed of according to the plan and in accordance with all local and state laws. 
(2)  Topsoil is to be stripped and stockpiled in amounts necessary or available on site to complete final grading of all exposed areas. 
(3)  Fill material is to be free of brush, rubbish, large rocks, logs, and stumps in amounts that are detrimental to constructing stable fills. 
(4)  Cut slopes, which are to be top soiled, will be scarified to a minimum depth of three inches prior to placement of topsoil. 
(5)  Compaction of fills will be as required to reduce slipping, erosions or excess saturation. 
(6)  Frozen mixtures of soft, mucky or easily compressible materials are not to be incorporated in fills intended to support buildings, parking lots, road, structures, sewers, or conduits. 
(7)  Maximum thickness of layers to be compacted by sheepsfoot rollers is not to exceed nine inches. 
(8)  All disturbed areas shall be left with a neat and finished appearance and stabilized with the appropriate permanent protective cover. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-599. - Surety for completion of improvements. 
In lieu of the completion of the required improvements in a subdivision, the subdivider may deposit surety for the completion of such improvement with the city, and present a final plat for approval. In no case shall any building be occupied or otherwise utilized until all required improvements are completed. 
(1)  Requirements. To ensure the construction and installation of required improvements, the subdivider shall deliver to the city a certified check, surety bond or other acceptable security in such aggregate amount as is estimated by the building inspector to be the total cost of the construction and installation of all required improvements. In addition, the subdivider shall, if applicable, deposit surety for road maintenance for a period of one year. 
(2)  Conditions. Bonds or other surety posted shall run to the city and provide the subdivider, his heirs, successors, assigns and their agents shall comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions and requirements of these and other regulations and final plat; will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing all required improvements; that the subdivider shall be responsible to the city for any necessary expenses incurred through the failure of the subdivider, his heirs, successors, assigns or their agents to complete the work of such installation and construction in an acceptable manner, and from any damages growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform such installation and construction. Before acceptance, any surety shall be approved by the city. If a bond is offered it shall be executed by a surety of a guaranty company qualified to transact business in the state. Where a bond is required for a road construction project and is to be other than a bond issued by a commercial fidelity bonding company, the surety must meet the following conditions: 
a.  The surety must be an individual or group of individuals, 
b.  The sureties must all be residents of the city/county, 
c.  Collectively, the sureties must be worth at least double the estimated cost of paving the road in equity in real property located in the city, 
d.  The bond must be accompanied by an affidavit setting forth the facts in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section, 
e.  The bond must be double the amount of the estimated cost of the road project; and 
f.  If there is more that one surety, all sureties shall be jointly and severably liable. 
(3)  Duration and release. Bonds and/or other surety posted pursuant to this article shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. Acceptances shall be in writing accurately identifying the improvements covered. Facilities shall not be accepted unless they conform to the applicable specifications and requirements. 
(4)  Default procedures. If the construction or installation of any improvements of facilities for which a bond or other surety is posted is not completed within three months after substantial completion of any buildings or structures which such improvements or facilities are designed to serve, or within three years after the date of recording of the final plat, whichever is sooner, or if such construction and installation is not in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements, the city shall, using the proceeds from such surety deposits, pay for such work. Such work may be done under contract or by city personnel. To the extent that any portion of a cash deposit is not required or used, such excess cash shall be repaid to the person making the deposit. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-600—75-610. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PREAPPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE 

Sec. 75-611. - Informal consultation. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land is proposed, the subdivider should consult early and informally with the building inspector. Failure to do so may lead to disapproval of the preliminary or final plat. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-612. - Discussion of requirements. 
Before preparing a sketch plat for a subdivision, the applicant should discuss with the building inspector the procedure for the adoption and filing of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets, reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, utilities, etc., as well as to the availability of existing services. The building inspector shall also advise the applicant, where appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision coming within their jurisdictions. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-613. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  Application. The subdivider shall notify the building inspector of his desire to have a pre-application sketch plat review. 
(b)  Classification. Tentative classification of the subdivision and existing and proposed streets shall be made by building inspector. The subdivider may then submit a final plat for approval, as provided for in this article, if the development is classified as a minor subdivision. In the case of classification as a major subdivision, the applicant may file for approval of a preliminary plat as provided for in this article. 
(c)  Field trip. The planning and zoning commission or the building inspector may visit the site of the proposed subdivision accompanied by the subdivider or his agent. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-614—75-630. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW 

Sec. 75-631. - Application procedure and requirements. 
Based upon the approval of the building inspector of the sketch plat for a major subdivision, the applicant should file for approval of a preliminary plat. The application shall: 
(1)  Include a letter requesting approval of the preliminary plat, 
(2)  Include the payment of a fee listed in the schedule of fees and charges to be used for the advertising of the public hearing on the preliminary plat, 
(3)  Include eight copies of the preliminary plat and construction plan for a major subdivision, 
(4)  Comply with the sketch plat; and 
(5)  Be presented to the building inspector with completed application and fee by noon Friday following the second Monday of the month. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-632. - Public hearing. 
The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing to discuss and review the preliminary plat within 45 days of the date of application. Such hearings shall be advertised in the official city newspaper at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The procedure and criteria shall be the same as outlined under section 75-65. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-633. - Preliminary plat approval. 
After the planning and zoning commission has reviewed the preliminary plat and construction plans, the report of the building inspector, recommendations from the city and/or the sanitarian, approval from local postmaster, and testimony and exhibits submitted at the public hearing, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and or additions. At this time the planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat. If approved, the preliminary plat will be signed and dated by the chairman of the planning and zoning commission, the director of planning and development, and the local postmaster. The developer may then begin the construction of the subdivision based on the approval of the preliminary plat, construction plans (land disturbance permit) and general stormwater NPDES permit. The building inspector must approve all changes prior to any work. The construction will be inspected at various stages to verify compliance with the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-634. - Effective period of preliminary plat approval. 
After obtaining approval of a preliminary plat, construction must begin within one year. Any subdivision preliminary plat where construction has not started within one year shall be null and void, and the subdivider shall be required to submit a new preliminary plat for approval prior to the approval of a final plat. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-635. - Exemption from changes in zoning. 
Any subdivision, which has received preliminary plat approval, shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to this chapter, provided that final plat approval is obtained within the one-year period. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-636. - Model homes. 
For the purpose of allowing the early construction of model homes in a subdivision, the planning and zoning commission, at its discretion, may permit a portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to be created in accordance with the procedures for minor subdivision, provided such portion derives access from an existing paved city or state highway or street, and provided no future road or other improvements are anticipated where such lots are proposed. The final plat for the minor portion shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission simultaneously with the preliminary plat for the entire major subdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-637—75-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FINAL PLAT REVIEW 

Sec. 75-651. - Application procedure and requirements for requests for inspection. 
Prior to receiving final plat approval by the building inspector, a request for final inspection of the subdivision must be submitted. For the application for request for final inspection the subdivider shall submit the following: 
(1)  Include a letter requesting final inspection to the building inspector. 
(2)  Submit two redlined copies of the preliminary plat and construction plan. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-652. - Final plat approval. 
The building inspector will review for approval the sketch plat for minor subdivision. After the building inspector has completed the final inspection, for a major subdivision the redlined preliminary plat will be approved or returned to the subdivider for changes and/or additions. The subdivider will then submit the following for final plat approval: 
(1)  Submit an application for final plat approval, 
(2)  Submit the required fee with completed application; and 
(3)  After final inspection approval submit eight copies of the appropriate final plat and documents relative to road approval. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-653. - Signing of the plat. 
Following approval of the final plat by the director of planning and development and satisfaction of all requirements of this article, the subdivider shall submit eight copies of the final plat, as approved. The director of planning and development, the chairman of the planning and zoning commission, and the local postmaster shall endorse all documents in the space provided. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-654. - Recording of the plat. 
Following the signing of the final plat, the applicant shall have three copies of the final plat to file with the clerk of the superior court of the city within five days of the date of signature. The building inspector shall keep five copies of the final plat: one copy for the plat file, one copy for the subdivision file, one copy to be forwarded to the tax assessor, and one copy to be forwarded to the postmaster, and one copy for the address coordinator. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-655. - Vested rights. 
No vested rights shall accrue any plat by reason of preliminary or final approval until the actual signing of the plat by the director of planning and development, the chairman of the planning and zoning commission, the postmaster or the city applicable to the subdivision or to all subdivisions in general shall be deemed a condition for any subdivision prior to the time of the signing of the final plat. Where the planning and zoning commission has required the installation of improvements prior to the signing of the final plat, the planning and zoning commission shall not unreasonably modify the conditions set forth in the preliminary approval. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-656. - Sectionalizing major subdivision plans. 
The planning and zoning commission may permit the plat to be divided into two or more sections and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the sections as it may deem necessary to ensure the orderly development of the plat. The planning and zoning commission may require that the performance bond or other surety be in such amount as to commensurate with the sections of the plat to be filed and may defer the remaining sections of the plat as offered for approval. Such sections must contain at least ten percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision. All sections must receive final approval as per the preceding requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-657—75-670. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIFICATIONS OF DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 75-671. - Preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall be prepared and sealed by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer licensed in the state, at a convenient scale of not more than one inch equals 200 feet, shall be prepared in ink, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence and referenced to an index sheet if more than one is used. Such sheets as the preliminary plat is drawn upon shall be consistent with current engineering practices. It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary plat is drawn upon and shall be consistent with current engineering practices. It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary plat might also be used for the final plat and, therefore, should be easily modified and reproduced. Plat details shall conform to requirements of the state board of professional registration and the Plat Act. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-672. - Features. 
The preliminary plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision if the property is within an existing subdivision, or the proposed name if the property is not within an existing subdivision. 
(2)  A notarized affidavit which includes the name, address and telephone number of the legal owner or agent of the property, and a citation of the last instrument conveying the title of each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
(4)  Reference existing covenants on the property, if any. 
(5)  Name and address, including the telephone number, of the professional persons of firms responsible for subdivision design, design of public improvements and for surveys. 
(6)  Location of property by governmental district, graphic scale, north arrow and date. 
(7)  Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds, historical sites, natural areas of aesthetic beauty or interest, railroad rights-of-way, and watercourses. 
(8)  Location, width, type and name of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract. 
(9)  Name and locations of adjoining developments and property owners. 
(10)  Locations and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, bridges or underground structures within the tract and adjacent thereto. 
(11)  Locations and sizes of existing permanent buildings and utility stations on and adjacent to the tract. 
(12)  Reserved. 
(13)  For estate planning etc., the director or his/her designee may waive certain requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-673. - Proposed improvements. 
The following proposed improvements shall be indicated: 
(1)  Location and width of all proposed streets, easements, and other public ways, including rights-of-way. 
(2)  Proposed building setback line. 
(3)  Locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed and existing lots. 
(4)  Total area of the subdivision expressed in acres and decimals of an acre. 
(5)  Location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public dedication or private reservation, with designation of purpose thereof. 
(6)  Indications of the use of any lot and all uses proposed by the subdivider. 
(7)  Proposed names of all streets. 
(8)  Blocks shall be constructively numbered and lettered. The blocks in numbered additions to existing subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered and lettered consecutively throughout the various additions. 
(9)  All lots in each block shall be numbered consecutively. 
(10)  For estate planning etc., the director or his/her designee may waive certain requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-674. - Endorsements. 
The following endorsements shall be included on each preliminary plat and shall be endorsed prior to the subdivision of the preliminary plat for approval. Upon the required revision of any improvement ordered by the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider shall have the endorsements initialed by any party whose area of responsibility may be affected. The determination of affected parties shall be made by the planning and zoning commission and indicated on the preliminary plat that is returned to the subdivider following action by the planning and zoning commission. 
(1)  Engineer's certification. An engineer's and surveyor's certification stamp or seal. 
(2)  Owner's certification. 
"Owner's Certification: 
"The owner of this land, as shown on this plat, or his agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, and accurately portrays the existing land and its features and the proposed developments and improvements thereto. 
"Date _______ 
"Owner (or Agent) ___________" 
(3)  Sanitarian certification. 
"Certification of approval of Water System and Sewer System: 
"I hereby certify that the proposed water system and sewer system of this subdivision meet the requirements of the City of Eatonton Health Department. Those lots not approved for septic tank installation are (if any) _______. 
"Date ________ 
"Sanitarian ___________" 
(4)  City certification. The designer must certify this, not the city. Review for compliance stamp. 
"Certification of Approval of Streets and Utilities: "I hereby certify that the proposed streets and utilities in this subdivision meet all the requirements of the city and the Subdivision Regulations of City of Eatonton. 
"Date ________ 
"Signature/Designer ___________" 
(5)  Postmaster certification. 
"Certification of Subdivision and street names: 
"I hereby certify that the proposed name of this subdivision and proposed street names are original names to this city and comply with the City of Eatonton Code of Ordinances Section 75-581(e)—Subdivision name and Section 75-581(g)(1)—Street names. 
"Date ________ 
"Postmaster ___________" 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-675. - Certification of preliminary plat approval. 
The following endorsement shall be placed on the preliminary plat to be endorsed at the time of preliminary plat approval. 
"Preliminary Plat Approval: 
"NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING 
"We hereby certify that this preliminary plat and attached construction plans were approved by the City of Eatonton Planning and Zoning Commission on _______ and found to comply with the requirements of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Subdivision Regulations of City of Eatonton. 
"Date ________ 
"Building Inspector ___________ 
"Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission ___________" 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-676. - Construction plans. 
Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals 100 feet; details at a scale sufficient for the purpose. Plans sheets shall be the same as used for the plat. Construction plans shall follow the format as follows. The following shall be shown: 
(1)  Cover sheet. The cover sheet shall contain: 
a.  The subdivision name. 
b.  The owner's name, address and phone number. 
c.  All endorsements required under section 75-664. 
d.  A site location sketch to aid in location of the subdivision. 
e.  A revision block that shows the date and description of all revisions and the initials of the person making the revision. The format for the revision block is: 
______________ 
Revision Date Description By Checked Approved 
______________ 
(2)  Plan sheets. Plan sheets showing all street alignment, station number, curve data, angles of intersections, curb and gutter locations, sidewalks and improvement location. 
(3)  Profile sheets. Profile sheets showing all proposed and existing elevations and vertical curve data along the centerline of all streets. 
(4)  Cross-section sheets. Cross-section sheets of all streets at an interval of 100 feet. 
(5)  Utility plan sheets. Plan sheets showing the location, size and specification of all water, sewer and natural gas and other utilities to be installed by the subdivider, or others showing connections to existing systems. 
(6)  Grading and contour plan sheets. Plan sheets showing the proposed grading of existing and finished contours. The contour interval shall be two feet. 
(7)  Construction detail sheets. Construction detail sheets showing the details of all construction to include, but not be limited to: Road paving, cross sections, sewers details, fire hydrants, thrust blocks, dams, retention ponds, retaining walls, junction boxes, pavement patches, culverts, sidewalks, French drains, ditches, slope protection, energy dissipation pads and other details needed to clarify the requirements of the design. The designer shall use state DOT standards available to simplify the construction. At all times the designer shall obey good engineering practices. 
(8)  Seal of engineer. Each construction plan profile, detail and cover sheet shall bear the seal of the registered engineer under whose supervision the design was done. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-677. - Final plat. 
The final subdivision plat shall be prepared at the same scale and contain the same information, except for any changes or additions required by the planning and zoning commission, as shown on the preliminary plat. The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed by the state, or a registered professional engineer in the state, and contain the following information: 
(1)  Endorsements. The final plat shall include all endorsements required under section75-674. In addition, the plat shall show the following endorsements executed prior to the presentation of the final plat for approval: 
"Certificate of Dedication of Ownership: 
"I (we) hereby certify that I (we) adopt this plan of subdivision, establish the minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all streets and other designated areas to public use. 
"Date ________ Owner (or Agent) ___________" 
(2)  Certificate of approval. The following endorsement shall be placed on the final plat for the execution. 
"Certificate of Final Plat Approval: 
FOR FILING 
"We hereby certify that this final plat and construction plans were approved by the City of Eatonton Planning and Zoning Commission on _______ and were found to comply with requirements of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the subdivision requirements of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Subdivision Regulations of City of Eatonton. 
"Date ________ 
"Building Inspector ___________ 
"Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission ___________" 
(3)  Certificate of receipt of surety. When the subdivider shall be required to post a bond or surety for the construction, installation or maintenance of improvements, the following endorsements shall appear on the plat and be executed by the planning and zoning commission: 
"Certificate of Receipt of Surety: 
"I hereby certify that a security bond or certified check in the amount of _______ has been received by the city to ensure completion of all required improvements in the subdivision plat attached hereto in the event of default by the subdivider. 
"Date ________ 
"Signature ___________ 
"Chairman, City of Eatonton City Council" 
(4)  Other conditions. 
a.  Remaining land. Whenever a plat covers only a part of the subdivider's continuous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at a sufficient scale, a map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the total holding and indication of any future development planned for the remainder of the trace. 
b.  Rejection of documents. The lack of information required by this article or the planning and zoning commission, or improper, erroneous or fraudulent information supplied by the subdivider or his agent, shall constitute ground for the disapproval of any plat. 
c.  Overall design. The planning and zoning commission shall follow accepted design practices in reviewing and directing the development of any subdivision, in addition to following the requirements of this article. 
d.  Miscellaneous. Driveway entrances shall only be approved and constructed utilizing approved materials of the proper size. No side ditches may be filled in without the prior written consent of the city. Any driveways that are installed illegally are subject to removal at the owner's expense. Driveway locations are as determined by the building inspector and the city/county engineer, including requirements for acel/decel lanes, pipe sizes and other improvements as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-678—75-690. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 75-691. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, covered or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this article, the building inspector, or any other appropriate authority of the city may, in addition to other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this article and require the presence of the violator in the municipal court; or institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent this unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate this violation or to prevent the occupancy of this building, structure or land. Where a violation of this article exists with respect to a structure or land, the building inspector may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service be withheld until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-692. - Penalties. 
Any firm, person or corporation that shall do anything prohibited by this article as they exist or as they may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Any violation hereof shall be regarded as a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year's imprisonment and/or a fine of $500.00. Each day that this violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-693—75-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TREE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 75-711. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these standards is to facilitate the preservation and/or replacement of trees as part of the land development, building construction process within the city. Benefits derived from tree protection and replanting include: 
(1)  Improved control of soil erosion. 
(2)  Moderation of storm water runoff, and improved water quality. 
(3)  Interception or airborne particulate matter, and the reduction of some air pollutants. 
(4)  Enhanced habitat for desirable wildlife. 
(5)  Reduction of noise and glare. 
(6)  Climate moderation. 
(7)  Aesthetics, scenic amenity. 
(8)  Increased property value. 
(9)  Preserve the unique identity and environment of the city. 
(10)  To encourage the preservation of existing trees and vegetation. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-712. - Applicability. 
Terms and provisions of Article VIII - Tree Preservation Regulations established herein, shall apply to all activity that requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the city. Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  Permits are not required by public utility companies and government agencies for the conduct of operations having the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility and governmental services and unobstructed passage on public right-of-ways. 
(2)  Permit requirements are waived where the planning and development department determines that trees to be removed are dead or damaged to the extent that public safety is endangered. 
(3)  Permits are not required for single lot development (not within a subdivision) for a single-family dwelling and/or detached dwelling. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-713. - Definitions. 
All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definition except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. Technical terms used in this manual are defined in Appendix A. 
(1)  Buildable area. The portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a building may be located. 
(2)  Buffer. A natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a 100 percent visual barrier between the use on the lot an adjacent lots and/or uses. A buffer is achieved with natural vegetation, and must be replanted subject to the approval of the planning and development department when sparsely vegetated. Cleaning of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited excepted when accomplished under the supervision of an Arborist or a Landscape Architect. (Refer to Landscape Strip and Buffer Standards, Appendix D. See also Zoning Resolution Section 4.23.4) 
(3)  Caliper. American Association of Nurseryman standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock, diameter. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six inches above ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
(4)  Crown drip line. A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips down to the ground. 
(5)  DBH. Diameter-at-breast-height is a standard measure of tree size, and is a tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
(6)  Land disturbance permit. An official authorization issued, allowing defoliation or alteration of the site, or the commencement of any land distributing activities. 
(7)  Planning and development department. The agent having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of article VIII - Tree Preservation. 
(8)  Protected zone. All lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all area of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all areas required as landscaping strips and/or buffers. 
(9)  Revegetation. The replacement of trees and landscape plant materials into the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the article VIII - Tree Preservation Regulations. 
(10)  Specimen tree or stand. Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined to be of a high value by the city because of its species, size, age, or other professional criteria. 
(11)  Tree. Any self supporting woody plant, usually having a single woody trunk, and a potential DBH of two inches or more and normally attaining a mature height of 40 feet. 
(12)  Tree density factor. A unit of measure used to prescribe and calculate required tree coverage on a site. Unit measurements are based upon tree size. (Appendix B) 
(13)  Tree protection zone. Shall include as a minimum the setback areas from property lines or right-of-ways plus strips required for buffers, permitting only the encroachment of driveways necessary to serve the property. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-714. - Procedures. 
(1)  Land disturbance permit. 
(a)  A tree protection plan shall be submitted with other permit drawings as part of the land disturbance permit process. This plan may either be a separate drawing, or part of the landscape plan, and shall include the following information. 
1.  Definition of spatial limits. 
a.  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
b.  Tree protection zones. 
c.  Specimen trees or stands of trees. 
d.  Areas of revegetation, and tree density calculations. 
2.  Detail drawings of tree protection measures and landscaping (whichever is applicable, or both). 
a.  Protective tree fencing. 
b.  Erosion control fencing. 
c.  Tree protection signs. 
d.  Transplanting specifications. 
e.  Staking specifications. 
f.  Other applicable drawings. 
g.  Landscape installation plans, planting details, plant list. 
3.  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of tree protection measures. 
(b)  These plans shall be reviewed by the planning and development department for conformance with applicable zoning conditions, article VIII - Tree Preservation Regulations and will either be approved, or returned for revisions. Reasons for denial shall be noted on the tree protection plan, or otherwise stated in writing. 
(c)  Issuance of the land disturbance permit is contingent upon approval of the tree protection plan. 
(d)  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to land disturbance, and inspected by the planning and development department. 
(e)  The planning and development department will conduct follow-up site inspections for enforcement of article VIII - Tree Preservation Regulations. 
(2)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the planning and development department to enforce this article and, in addition, shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any land disturbance permit and to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof. 
(3)  Violation and penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. Upon being found guilty of violation, a violator shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each separate offense. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, and/or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try offenses to these regulations. 
(4)  Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the planning and development department relating to the application of these regulations may file an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the city planning and zoning commission through the planning and development department. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the city planning and zoning commission relating to the application of these regulations may file an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the city council through the planning and development department. 
(c)  Appeals shall only be granted for errors of interpretation or where the unique natural features of the site are such that application of these regulations would create an undue hardship to the property owner, and in other instances where an undue hardship is created for the owner of the property. 
(d)  Appeals from decisions of the city made pursuant to this article may be taken to the municipal court. 
(5)  Easements. The mayor and city council are hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within their respective jurisdiction for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees or such property, in consideration for which said private property owner shall acquire ownership of such trees as the city may plant. Provided, however, that any such agreement shall limit the duration of the easement to a time period of two years and shall limit the property interest acquired by the city to that distance sufficient to allow the planting of trees, in no case to exceed a maximum of a 15-foot setback from the property line or right-of-way held by the city. Provided further that under such agreement the private property owner shall agree to maintain the trees planted thereon and shall also agree to hold the city harmless for any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees on the private property. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-715. - Tree and site related disturbances. 
(1)  Tree protection zones, specimen trees or stands of trees designated to be saved must be protected from the following damages which may occur during all phases of land disturbance and construction processes. Methods of tree protection and disturbance prevention are provided in section 75-716. 
(a)  Direct physical root damage. 
(b)  Indirect root damage. 
(c)  Trunk and crown disturbances. 
(2)  Direct physical root damage most frequently occurs during site clearing and grading operations, where transport or feeder roots are cut, torn, or removed. 
(a)  Transport and feeder roots tend to tangle and fuse among the roots of adjacent trees. The removal of trees with heavy machinery along the outer periphery of a tree save area can result in considerable damage within the tree save area. 
(b)  The most substantial form of root damage for all root types occurs in the form of cut roots. Roots are cut in grade reduction, or from trenching for underground utilities, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer lines. 
(c)  A more subtle form of root damage is the loss of feeder roots. Feeder roots normally occur within the organic layer, and the surface four inches of topsoil, subsequently, these roots can be easily damaged by the track action from a single bulldozer pass. The stripping of topsoil within a tree's critical root zone can totally eliminate its feeder root system. 
(3)  Indirect root damage through site modification can result from positive grade changes, temporary storage or fill material, the sedimentation of erosion materials, soil compaction, and soil chemical changes. 
(a)  Positive grade changes from fill and sedimentation causes a decrease in soil oxygen levels. An increase in soil carbon dioxide and other toxic gases can also occur, leading to large areas of anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic soil conditions cause a decrease in the root respiration process that is essential for the uptake and transport or minerals and nutrients. 
(b)  Anaerobic soil conditions are also produced by soil impaction, the increase in soil bulk density with a decrease in soil pore space. Compacted soil is also impervious to root penetration, and thus inhibits root development. Soil compaction is generally caused by the weight and vibrations of heavy machinery, vehicle parking, and the storage of fill and/or construction materials within the critical root zones of trees. 
(c)  Changes in soil chemistry will adversely affect tree survival. The most frequent occurrence is the change (decrease) in soil acidity by concrete washout. Most trees native to the city area prefer slightly acid soils; concrete residues are highly basic. The leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints can be fatal for trees. 
(4)  Trunk and crown disturbances are generally mechanical in nature and are either caused directly by clearing and grading machinery, or indirectly by debris being cleared and falling into trees marked for protection. 
(a)  Common forms of damages include stripped bark and cambium, split trunks, and broken limbs. 
(b)  Damage also occurs from the posting of signs as building permits, or survey markers on trees. 
(c)  Indirect damage can be caused by the placement of burn holes or debris fires too close to trees. The possible range of damages include scorched trunks with some cambiall dieback, the loss of foliage due to evaporative heat stress (leaf desiccation), and completely burned trunks and crowns. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-716. - Methods of tree protection. 
(1)  Planning considerations. Tree space is the most critical factor in tree protection throughout the development process. The root system of trees can easily extend beyond the drip line of the tree canopy. The root system within the drip-line region is generally considered to be the critical root zone. Disturbance within this zone can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. To protect these critical root zones the following standards shall apply: 
(a)  The use of tree save islands and stands is encouraged rather than the protection of individual (non-specimen) trees scattered throughout a site. This will facilitate ease in overall site organization as related to tree protection. 
(b)  The protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees or otherwise designated tree save areas shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree(s) canopy as defined by the farthest canopy drip line of the tree(s). In some instances, the planning and development department may require a protective zone in excess of the area defined by the tree's drip-line. 
(c)  Layout of the project site utility and grading plans should accommodate the required tree protective zones. Utilities must be placed along corridors between tree protective zones. 
(d)  Construction site activities such as parking, material storage, concrete washout, burn hole placement, etc., shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within tree protective zones. 
(e)  No disturbance shall occur within the protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees without prior approval by the planning and development department. 
(f)  No tree shall be planted close to a building foundation, water line, sewer line, electrical line or natural gas line as follows: 
1.  Five feet for a mature small tree. 
2.  Ten feet for a mature medium tree. 
3.  Fifteen feet for a mature large tree. 
4.  No trees shall be planted under overhead utility cable lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. 
(2)  Protective barriers. 
(a)  Active protective tree fencing shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely surrounding the critical root zones of all specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones, prior to any land disturbance. 
(b)  These fences will be a minimum four feet high, constructed in a post and rail configuration. A two-inch by four-inch post and a double one-inch by four-inch rail is recommended. Four-foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing is also acceptable. 
(c)  Passive forms of tree protection may be utilized to delineate tree save areas that are remote from areas of land disturbance. These areas must be completely surrounded with continuous rope or flagging (heavy mill, minimum four inches wide). All passive tree protection must be accompanied by "Keep Out" or "Tree Save" signage. 
(d)  All tree protection zones should be designated as such with "tree save area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced area. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. Signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with tree protection standards are recommended for site entrances. 
(e)  All specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones must be protected from the sedimentation of erosion material. 
1.  Silt screening must be placed along the outer uphill edge of tree protective zones at the land disturbance interface. 
2.  Silt screening should be backed by 12-gauge two-inch by four-inch wire mesh fencing in areas of steep slope. 
3.  All erosion control must comply with the City of Eatonton Erosion Control Standards. 
(f)  All tree fencing and erosion control barriers must be installed prior to and maintained throughout land disturbance process and building construction, and should not be removed until landscaping is installed. 
(3)  Encroachment. Most trees can tolerate only a small percentage of critical root zone loss. If encroachment is anticipated within the critical root zones of specimen trees, stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones, the following preventive measures shall be employed: 
(a)  Clearing activities: Roots often fuse and tangle amongst trees. The removal of trees adjacent to tree save areas can cause inadvertent damage to the protected trees. Wherever possible, it is advisable to cut minimum two-foot trenches (e.g. with a "ditch-witch") along the limits of land disturbance, so as to cut, rather than tear, roots. Trenching may be required for the protection of specimen trees. 
(b)  Soil compaction: Where compaction might occur due to traffic or materials storage, the tree protective zone must first be mulched with a minimum four-inch layer of processed pine bark or wood chips, or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
(c)  Trenching: The installation of utilities through a protective zone should occur by way of tunneling rather than trenching. If roots must be cut, proper root pruning procedures must be employed. 
(d)  Grade changes: Moderate fill can be tolerated within a tree's critical root zone with the prior installation of an aeration system. Commercially available aeration systems are subject to approval by the planning and development department. A decrease in grade is best accomplished with the use of retaining walls or through terracing. 
(e)  Where the planning and development department has determined that irreparable damage has occurred to trees within tree protective zones, the trees must be removed and replaced. 
(4)  Remedial procedures. Remedial site reclamation and tree care procedures shall be implemented when encroachment within protective zones has caused damage to either the tree or the tree's growing site, and that damage is reparable. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-717. - Re-vegetation. 
(1)  Tree replacement. 
(a)  The replacement of trees in the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by this article, must occur under the following conditions: 
1.  To establish the minimum tree density requirements for the site. 
2.  Where grading occurs outside the buildable area of the lot. 
3.  If the lot's buildable area leaves no protected zone. 
4.  If no trees are present within an existing protected zone. 
5.  Where specimen trees or stands of trees within the buildable portion of the lot are to be removed. 
6.  Where specimen trees or stands of trees, and trees within otherwise designated tree protective zones have been irreparably damaged or removed through land disturbance or construction activities. 
(b)  The quantity of replacement trees into a site must be sufficient so as to produce a total site-tree density factor of no less than 15 units per acre. (Note: The terms unit and tree are not interchangeable.) Procedures for determining the site density requirements and the subsequent tree replacement requirements are provided in Appendix B. 
(c)  The spacing of replacement trees must be compatible with spatial limitations, and with responsible considerations towards potential species size. 
(d)  Where the planning and development department has determined that site spatial constraints result in an absolute inability to provide tree density, as many trees as possible must be planted on site. The remaining balance of required trees must be provided for planting on public properties. Tree bank arrangements will be made through the planning and development department. 
(e)  Species selected for replacement must be quality specimens, and must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. Standards for transplanting, and selecting quality replacement stock, are provided in Appendix C. 
(f)  Specimen trees and stands of trees must be replaced by species with potentials for comparable size and quality. Tree replacement in addition to the minimum site tree density may be required in recompense for the removal of specimen trees. 
(g)  Species selection and replacement densities are subject to approval by the planning and development department. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 75-718. - Appendices A through F. 
Appendix A. Technical terms. 
(1)  Cambium. Tissue within the woody portion of trees and shrubs which gives rise to the woody water and nutrient conducting system, and the energy substrate transport system in trees. Cambium growth activity results in a tree's radial development, i.e., increase in diameter. 
(2)  Cambial dieback. The irreparable radial or vertical interruption of a tree's cambium, usually caused by mechanical damage, such as "skinning bark" or from excessive heat. 
(3)  Coniferous. Belonging to the group of cone-bearing evergreen trees or shrubs. 
(4)  Critical root zone. The rooting area of a tree established to limit root disturbances. This zone is generally defined as a circle with a radius extending from a tree's trunk to a point no less that the furthest crown drip line. Disturbances within this zone will directly affect a tree's chance for survival. 
(5)  Deciduous. Not persistent; the shedding of leaves annually. 
(6)  Feeder roots. A complex system of small annual roots growing outward and predominantly upward from the system of "transport roots". These roots branch four or more times to form fans or mats of thousands of fine, short, non-woody tips. Many of these small roots and their multiple tips are 0.2 to 1 mm or less in diameter, and less than 1 to 2 mm long. These roots constitute the major fraction of a tree's root system surface area, and are the primary sites of absorption of water and nutrients. 
(7)  Major woody roots. First order tree roots, originating at the "root collar" and growing horizontally in the soil to a distance of between three and 15 feet from the tree's trunk. These roots branch and decrease in diameter to give rise to "rope roots". The primary function of major woody roots includes anchorage, structural support, the storage of food reserves, and the transport of minerals and nutrients. 
(8)  Root collar. The point of attachment of major woody roots to the tree trunk, usually at or near the ground-line and associated with a marked swelling of the tree trunk. 
(9)  Root respiration. An active process occurring throughout the feeder root system of trees, and involving the consumption of oxygen and sugars with the release of energy and carbon dioxide. Root respiration facilitates the uptake and transport of minerals and nutrients essential for tree survival. 
(10)  Rope roots. An extensive network of woody second order roots arising from major woody roots, occurring within the surface 12 to 18 inches of local soils, and with an average size ranging from .25 to one-inch in diameter. The primary function or rope roots is the transport of water and nutrients, and the storage of food reserves. 
(11)  Soil compaction. A change in soil physical properties that includes an increase in soil weight per unit volume, and a decrease in soil pore space. Soil compaction is caused by repeated vibrations, frequent traffic and weight. As related to tree roots, compacted soil can cause physical root damage, a decrease in soil oxygen levels with an increase in toxic gasses, and can be impervious to new root development. 
(12)  Transport roots. The system or framework of tree roots comprised of major woody roots and rope roots. 
Appendix B. Procedure for calculating the required tree replacement density factor. (Ref. section 75-717(1)(b) and TABLE 1.) 
Step 1. Calculate the required density factor for the site (RDFS) by multiplying the number of site acres by 15. 
EXAMPLE: A 2.2 acre site has a DFS of 2.2 x 15 = 33. 
Step 2. Calculate the existing density factor (EDF) of trees that will remain on site to be protected during construction. EDF is determined by converting the DBH of individual existing trees to density factor units, using Table 2. These units are then totaled to determine the EDF for the site. 
EXAMPLE: A total of 15 trees will remain on the 2.2 acre site in Step 1. These trees include: 
7—12-inch pines 
3—14-inch pines 
3—18-inch oaks 
1—20-inch hickory 
1—30-inch oak 
When converted to density factor units using Table 3, we arrive at the following values: 

 
The sum total of units, 21.4, is the EDF. 
Step 3. Calculate the required replacement density (RDF) by subtracting the EDF (Step 2) from the DFS (Step 1). RDF = DFS - EDF 
Example: RDF = 33 - 21.4 
RDF = 11.6 
Step 4. The RDF can be converted back to caliper inches using Table 3. Any number or combination of transplantable size trees can be used so long as their total density factor units will equal or exceed the RDF. 
Example: On the 2.2 acre site the following number and size of trees will be planted: 

 
11.8 is greater than the RDF of 11.6 thus the minimum requirements (Subsection 75-717(1)(b)) have been met. 
TABLE 1. SAMPLE TREE DENSITY CALCULATION 
Required DFS 
2.2 acres x 15 units/acre = 33 units required 
EDF (Existing Density Factor) 

 
RDF (Replacement Density Factor) 

 
EDF + RDF = x > or = DFS 
29 + 45.0 = 74.0 > or = 33, therefore DENSITY SATISFIED 
TABLE 2. EXISTING TREES TO REMAIN. Conversion from DBH to density factor units for trees remaining on site. 

 
TABLE 3. REPLACEMENT TREES. Conversion from caliper to density factor units for replacement trees. (1, 2) 

 
(1)  Container grown pine trees are given replacement credit as follows: 

 
* The use of one- and three-gallon pines is permitted only with prior approval. 
(2)  Tree relocation: Replacement units will be granted to trees relocated on site. Tree relocation is subject to approval by the planning and development department. 
Appendix C. Standards for selecting quality replacement stock. 
(1)  Trees selected for planting must meet the minimum requirements as provided in the "American Standard for Nursery Stock", (ANSI Z60.1, 1980). 
(2)  Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, or nutritional disorders. 
(3)  Trees selected for planting must be of good vigor. The determination of vigor is a subjective evaluation, and dependent upon species variability. The following criteria is generally used for the determination of vigor: 
(a)  Foliage should have a green or dark green color. Vigorous trees will have large leaves and dense foliage when compared to trees with poor vigor. 
(b)  Shoot growth for most vigorous trees will be at least one foot per year. At least one-half of the branches should arise from points on the lower two-thirds of a trunk. 
(c)  Bark texture can denote vigor. Smooth or shiny bark on the trunk and branches of a young tree usually signifies good vigor, conversely, rough and dull bark could indicate poor vigor. 
(d)  Trunk taper. The trunks of vigorous trees will generally have an increase in diameter with a decrease in height. Trees with reverse tapers or no taper should be avoided. 
(e)  Root color. Young roots of most trees will be light in color. 
(4)  Trees selected for planting must be free of root defects. Two types of root defects generally occur: 
(a)  Kinked roots, in which taproots, major branch roots, or both are bent more than 90 degrees with less than 20 percent of the root system originating above the kink. A tree with such roots will probably bend at the soil line when released from a supporting stake. 
(b)  Circling or girdling roots which circle 80 percent or more of the root system by 360 degrees or more. A tree with such roots would ultimately have less than 20 percent of its system available for support. 
TABLE 4. CALIPER TO HEIGHT RATIOS FOR DECIDUOUS TREES 

 
TABLE 5. HEIGHT TO SPREAD RATIO FOR CONIFEROUS NURSERY TREES 

 
*Generally the Height to Spread ratio should be no less than 2:1. 
Appendix D. Landscape strip and buffer standards. 
(1)  Landscape strips/islands. 
(a)  The width of landscape strip must as a minimum, must be such that a five-foot diameter circle fit inside and be at least 50 square feet. 
(b)  The following permanent structures are not permitted within landscape strips: pavement, retaining walls, curbing, dumpsters, or major utility boxes. 
(c)  Curb stops must be used to prevent vehicle overhang into required landscape strips and parking islands. 
(d)  Signs within required landscape strips are to be approved by the planning and development department. These signs may only be located in areas of turf or groundcover, and must not conflict with the growth potential of trees and shrubs. Signs are not permitted within required undisturbed buffers. 
(e)  The deposition of storm water runoff into, or drainage swales through landscape strips is generally not permitted. Exceptions will be considered only if this standard will create an undue hardship to the property owner. Under no circumstances may the length of a drainage easement through a landscape strip exceed the width of the strip. 
(f)  Parking lot landscape islands must, as a minimum, be planted with at least one shade tree for every 20 linear feet. All other landscape standards apply. 
(g)  When fencing is required as a condition of rezoning, the finished surface of the fence must face externally to the project. The fence or wall must be located interior to the landscape strip or buffer such that the strip is outside of the enclosed area. 
(h)  All species within required landscape strips must be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. Ornamental trees may not be used to satisfy tree density requirements. All plant materials are subject to approval of the planning and development department. 
(i)  Trees within required landscape strips shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Landscape strips 25 feet wide or less; a minimum of one tree for every 30 linear feet of landscape strip. 
2.  Landscape strips greater than 25 feet wide; a minimum of one tree for every 20 linear feet of landscape strip. 
3.  Clumping is permitted. 
(j)  All required landscape strips must be designated with at least 60 percent coverage in trees and shrubs, and no more than 40 percent coverage in grass and ground cover. Landscape strip coverage will be calculated as follows: 
1.  Calculate the total spatial area of the landscape strip. 
2.  Count the number of trees within the landscape strip and multiply by 50 square feet for trees less than six-inch caliper and 100 square for trees six-inch in caliper or greater. (This will allow some credit for the spatial coverage of the tree canopy). 
3.  Calculate the coverage provided by the shrubs: shrubs planted three feet on center equal nine square feet of coverage; shrubs planted four feet on center equal 16 square feet of coverage; shrubs planted five feet on center equal 25 square feet of coverage. Shrub species and spacing is subject to approval of the planning and development department. 
4.  Grass may not exceed 40 percent coverage within the strip. 
(k)  The total area of all islands shall comprise at least five percent of parking lot area in commercial, office/institutional, residential and industrial zoning districts' plus one percent of other vehicle use area on the property such as loading, storage, or display area. 
(2)  Planting within right-of-ways. Approval from the planning and development department (and D.O.T. where applicable) is required as planting is generally not permitted in the right-of-way. Where approval is received, the following conditions must be met: 
(a)  Indemnification and maintenance agreements must be recorded with the city city clerk, prior to permitting irrigation or plantings within city right-of-ways. 
1.  These agreements must be recorded in the name of a homeowner's association (along with documentation attesting to that association's existence), for subdivisions. 
2.  These agreements must be recorded in the property owner's name for all other types of projects. 
(b)  Trees planted within rights-of-way cannot be counted towards the tree density requirement for a site, unless otherwise approved by the planning and development department. 
(3)  Buffers. 
(a)  Required undisturbed buffers must remain undisturbed, and actively protected (under the auspices of article VIII - Tree Preservation Regulations), except where otherwise stipulated in conditions of rezoning. 
(b)  Buffers must be replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and approved utility crossings, to meet the following standards: 
1.  Must provide a 100 percent visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. To accomplish this screening, the plant materials must be a minimum three and one-half to four feet in height at time of planting, moderately growing, and evergreen. Slower growing trees may be used if larger materials are planted. All buffer plant materials are subject to approval of the planning and development department. 
2.  The number of planting rows for trees replacement in buffers is determined by the buffer width. 

 
(c)  Drainage within or through buffers is subject to the approval of the planning and development department. 
(d)  Encroachment into buffers for the construction of retaining walls footings, or wall supports is not permitted unless otherwise specified in the conditions of rezoning, all encroachments into buffers require zoning modifications. 
(e)  A ten-foot improvement setback is required interior to all buffers. Clearing and grading are only permitted within that setback. 
Appendix E. Checklist for landscaping/tree protection plan review 
(1)  Landscape drawings. 
(a)  There shall be a separate sheet submitted with a landscape plan for the site, to include: 
1.  All required undisturbed buffers, landscape strips, parking islands, and landscape buffers, with the required dimensions. 
2.  Planting schedules with proposed plant material names (common and botanical), quantity, size, and any special planting notes. 
3.  Planting and staking details. 
4.  Location of proposed irrigation systems, if applicable. 
5.  Drawings for irrigation systems within the rights-of-ways must show the locations of lines, heads, spray radius, timers, and an emergency 24-hour contact number. 
(b)  All required landscape strips must be planted at a density so as to provide at least 60 percent spatial coverage of trees and shrubs. 
(c)  Parking islands must be planted with shade trees. 
(d)  Permanent structures cannot be permitted in landscape strips, landscape islands, or buffers; including, but not limited to, headwalls, drop inlets, catch basing, riprap, light fixtures, phone booths, etc. 
(e)  Curb stops must be used to prevent vehicle overhang into required landscape strips and parking islands. 
(f)  The following notes shall be indicated on all landscaping plans in large letters: 
1.  All landscaping for each phase shall be completed prior to the recording of the final plat for that phase, prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy for that phase, or prior to connection of permanent power for that phase. 
2.  Contact the planning and development department at (706)485-2776 for a site inspection upon completion of landscape installation. 
(2)  Tree protection plans. 
(a)  Provisions for tree protection on the site shall be, as a minimum, in conformance with the requirements of the City of Eatonton, Chapter 75 - Zoning Code, article VIII - Tree Preservation Regulations. 
(b)  A tree protection plan shall be submitted whether as part of the landscape plan or as a separate drawing to include the following: 
1.  All tree protection zones, and areas of revegetation. 
2.  Approximate location of all specimen trees or stands of trees. 
3.  Exact location of all specimen trees when their preservation is questionable, or might result in a change of the site design. 
4.  Indicate those specimen trees to be removed. Removal of specimen trees is subject to approval of the planning and development department. 
5.  Limits of clearing and land disturbance such as grading, trenching, etc. where these disturbances may affect tree protection zones. 
6.  Proposed location of underground utilities. 
7.  Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree protection zones, including tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signage, etc. 
8.  This plan should indicate staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, and debris burn and burial holes where these areas might affect tree protection. 
9.  The required site tree density factor must be satisfied. Compliance shall be demonstrated on the tree protection plan. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculation must be indicated on the drawing. 
10.  Flowering ornamental replacement trees may not be used in density calculation. 
11.  Replacement trees used in density calculations must be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. 
(c)  The following notes shall be indicated on both tree protection plans and grading plans in large letters: 
1.  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to grading. 
2.  Undisturbed buffers shall be replanted to buffer standards where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed at approved utility crossings. (Replantings are subject to approval of the planning and development department.) 
Appendix F. Tree Species Selection List. Trees generally acceptable for credit in density calculation are as follows: 

 
Other trees may be approved on a case-by-case basis. The general criteria for replacement trees to be used in tree density calculation are: large growing (+40' tall), and ecologically compatible with the site. All planting and replanting plans are subject to approval of the planning and development department. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 75-719—75-730. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - APPENDICES A—B 

Sec. 75-731. - Appendices A—B. 
Appendix A. Use Chart. 
Appendix A is on file with the Putnam County Planning and Development Dept. 
Appendix B. Zoning Resolution Fee Schedule 
Appendix B is as follows: 
(1)  Rezoning application: 
Five acres or less: $50.00 per district requested 
Over five acres to 25 acres: $100.00 per district requested 
Over 25 acres to 100 acres: $300.00 per district requested 
Over 100 acres: $500.00 
(2)  Variance/conditional use permit application/question of interpretation: $50.00 
(3)  Subdivision fees: 
(a)  Minor (four parcels or less): No charge 
(b)  Major: 
Preliminary plat: $100.00 per meeting 
Final plat: $100.00 per meeting 
(4)  Appeal fee: $50.00 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 