CODE OF ORDINANCES 
____________ 
KENNESAW, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1997 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 
Adopted: July 20, 1998  Effective: July 20, 1998 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KENNESAW, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Derek Easterling 
Mayor 
____________ 
Nimesh Patel 
Mayor Protem 
____________ 
James Eaton 
Yvette Daniel 
Jimmy Dickens 
Jim Sebastian 
City Council 
____________ 
Jeff Drobney 
City Manager 
____________ 
Randall Bentley 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Debra Taylor 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KENNESAW, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
John R. Haynie 
Mayor 
____________ 
Pat Ferris 
Mark Mathews 
Ben Robertson 
Jack Rowland  Jerry Worthan 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert M. Hail 
City Manager 
____________ 
Fred D. Bentley, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Susan Rackley 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Fred D. Bentley, City Attorney, Mr. Ken Griffin, former City Administrator, Mr. Robert M. Hail, City Manager, and Ms. Susan Rackley, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 1997. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
RESOLUTION 1998-14 
A Resolution to Comprehensively Amend the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia 
A resolution and ordinance by the City of Kennesaw to comprehensively amend the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, to provide for the clarification of definitions, to provide for the recodification of certain general and permanent ordinances of the City of Kennesaw, to provide for a new part and chapter system, to provide for new phraseology, to provide for a new prefix page numbering system, to provide for amendments to ordinances since the recodification of certain ordinances, to provide for the readoption of certain ordinances and ordinance amendments, to provide for the adoption of new ordinances since the recodification of certain ordinances, to provide for General Provisions; Administration; Alcoholic Beverages; Amusements and Entertainments; Animals; Buildings and Building Regulations; Businesses; Cable Communications; Cemeteries; Civil Emergencies; Courts; Elections; Environment; Fire Prevention and Protection; Historic Preservation; Law Enforcement; Offenses; Parks and Recreation; Personnel; Solid Waste; Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places; Subdivisions; Taxation; Traffic and Vehicles; Utilities; Zoning; Utility Franchises; Museum and Services Provision; and Development Standards; Sign Ordinance and to provide for clarification upon conflicting ordinances. 
Now therefore, be it resolved and ordained that the following shall be adopted, approved, and amended in addition to the existing Code of Ordinances, City of Kennesaw, Georgia, as follows: 
Section 1. There is hereby adopted to the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, as recodified by the Municipal Code Corporation, 1997, which includes the following provisions: Preface; Table of Contents; Chapter 1, General Provisions; Chapter 2, Administration, Articles I, II, IV, V, VI and VII; Chapter 6, Alcoholic Beverages; Chapter 10, Amusements and Entertainments; Chapter 14, Animals; Chapter 18, Buildings and Building Regulations; Chapter 22, Businesses; Chapter 26, Cable Communications; Chapter 30, Cemeteries; Chapter 38, Courts; Chapter 42, Elections; Chapter 46, Environment; Chapter 50, Fire Prevention and Protection; Chapter 54, Historic Preservation; Chapter 58, Law Enforcement; Chapter 62, Offenses; Chapter 66, Parks and Recreation; Chapter 70, Personnel; Chapter 74, Solid Waste; Chapter 78, Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places; Chapter 80, Subdivisions; Chapter 82, Taxation; Chapter 86, Traffic and Vehicles; Chapter 90, Utilities; Appendix A, Zoning; Appendix B, Georgia Power Company Franchise; Appendix C, Atlanta Gas Light Company Franchise; Appendix D, Cobb Electric Membership Corporation Franchise; Code Comparative Table; State Law Reference Table; Code Index. 
Section II. The following Ordinances adopted in 1998: 1998-01 Ordinance Amendment to Chapter 62 {1997 recodification}, Offenses, False Alarm Ordinance, approved February 2, 1998; 1998-02 Ordinance Amendment to Chapter 62 {1997 recodification}, Offenses, Amendment to add additional fines for violation of False Alarm Ordinance to Bond and Fee Schedule, approved February 2, 1988; 1998-03 Ordinance Amendment to Chapter 78 (1997 recodification), Streets, Sidewalks, and Other Public Places, approved March 6, 1998; 1998-04 Ordinance Amendment to Sec 3-1-20 Purchasing and expenditure procedures, (1989 Ordinance), approved June 1, 1998; and 1998-05 Ordinance Amendment to Article B Personnel (1989 Ordinance), approved June 1, 1998. 
Section III. The following Ordinances adopted in 1997: 1997 Ordinance Amendment to Sec. 3-1-19 {1989 Ordinance}, Finance, Dual Signature Requirements, approved February 3, 1997; 1997-01 Ordinance Amendment to Section 11-3-12 {1989 Ordinance}, Offenses, Duty to Keep Dog Under Control, approved February 17, 1997; 1997-02 Ordinance Amendment to create Article XX {1997 recodification}, New Section 2005 relating to Self Service Storage Facilities, adopted February 17, 1997; Ordinance to create Article XX {1997 recodification}, New Section 2006 relating to Mobile and Manufactured Homes, adopted February 17, 1997; 1997-03 Ordinance Amendment to Sec. 800 and 881 {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Regulations and Use Requirements by District, Adding Self Storage Facilities as permitted uses under 880.3(88) and 881.3(87); 1997-04 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A {1997 recodification}, Zoning, the "Permitted Uses (Overall)" chart, approved February 17, 1997; 1997-05 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A, Sec. 850, 850.9 {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Setback Requirements for Mobile Home Park District, approved February 17, 1997; 1997-06 Ordinance Amendment to Section 9-11-69(b) {1989 Ordinance}, Licensing and Regulation, Sale of Distilled Spirits by the Drink for On-Premise Consumption, approved March 17, 1997; 1997-07 Ordinance Amendment to Chapter 46 {1997 recodification}, Environment, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, approved April 21, 1997; 1997-08 Ordinance Amendment to Chapter 86 {1997 recodification}, Traffic and Vehicles, Speed Detection Device Ordinance, approved July 21, 1997; 1997-10 Ordinance Amendment to Section 2-2-3(b) {1989 Ordinance}, General Government, Residency Requirements for Candidate for Municipal Office, Elections, approved September 2, 1997; 1997-11 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Article XVIII, Section 1805.1, Soil Erosion Requirements, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-12 Ordinance Amendment to Section 8-2-13 {1989 Ordinance}, Planning and Development, Soil Erosion Inspection Fee for Residential New Construction in Development Standards, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-13 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Section 800, Historic District, Deadline for Submission of Application for Certificate of Appropriateness, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-14 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Section 1909, Variance Applications, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-15 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Section 841, RM-12 Multiple Family Districts, Use Limitations, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-16 Ordinance Amendment to Section 301.01 {December 2, 1996 Ordinance} Developmental Standards, Securities and Enforcement, Maintenance and Performance Securities, To Clarify When Performance Bonds Are Required, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-17 Ordinance Amendment to Section 301.03 {December 2, 1996 Ordinance}, Developmental Standards, Securities and Enforcement, Maintenance and Performance Securities, Soil Erosion/Sediment Control Performance Security - To Change the Performance Security Amount, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-18 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A, {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Section 1440, Flood Damage Prevention, To Change Residential Floor Level Requirements, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-19 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Section 877, Planned Shopping Center District, To Clarify the Intent for the Number of Buildings Required to be Built, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-20 Ordinance Amendment to Appendix A {1997 recodification}, Zoning, Section 2002, Communication and Radio Transmission Antennae and Towers, To Exempt Additional Users on Existing Towers, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-21 Ordinance Amendment Section 420 {December 2, 1996 Ordinance}, Developmental Standards, Technical Standards, Cemeteries, To Clarify Location of Cemeteries, approved September 15, 1997; 1997-22 Ordinance Amendment to Article XXII, Zoning, Sign Ordinance (effective date March 16, 1997), to add new types of signage and to correct the fee schedule, adopted October 20, 1997; 1997 Ordinance Amendment to update the Bond and Fee Schedule {1997 recodification}, Courts, Section 38-46, to approve new bond amounts, approved November 17, 1997; 1997 Comprehensive Ordinance Amendment to Sign Ordinance, approved March 16, 1997. 
Section IV. The following Ordinances which were adopted in 1996: 1996-01 Ordinance Amendment to Section 8-4-4 {1989 Ordinance}, Planning and Development, Elimination of the Dedication of 5% Subdivision Land for Park Purposes, approved February 19, 1996; 1996-02 Ordinance Amendment to Amend the Zoning Ordinance {February 16, 1971 Zoning Ordinance, as amended}, Ordinance approved March 18, 1996; 1996-03 Ordinance Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance {February 16, 1971 Zoning Ordinance, as amended}, Ordinance to provide for proper limitations, controls and zoning restrictions for 1996 Summer Olympic Games, approved March 18, 1996; 1996-04 Ordinance Amendment to Section 8-2-11 {1989 Ordinance}, Planning and Development, Updating the Adopted Editions off [of] the Building Codes, and Related Construction Codes, approved July 15, 1996; 1996-05 Ordinance Amendment to Section 8-2-63 {1989 Ordinance}, Planning and Development, Self Inspection of Water & Sewer Projects Not Authorized, approved July 15, 1996; 1996-06 Ordinance Amendment creating Section 2002.7, {1989 Ordinance}, Standards for Television, Land Mobile, Communication, Microwave, and Radio Transmission Antennas and Towers, Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers, approved August 19, 1996; 1996-07 Ordinance Amendment to a June 6, 1994 Ordinance Amendment regarding the city administrator position, {June 6, 1994 Ordinance Amendment}, City Manager, Appointment, Qualifications and Compensation, approved September 3, 1996; 1996-08 Ordinance Amendment to the February 16, 1971 Zoning Ordinance, as amended, {February 16, 1971 Ordinance Amendment}, Article XI, Administration, Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies, approved November 18, 1996; 1996-09 Ordinance Amendment to Section 8-2-13 {1989 Ordinance}, Planning and Development, Building Permit Fee Changes, approved December 16, 1996; 1996 Comprehensive Ordinance Amendment to Developmental Standards, approved December 2, 1996. 
Section V. The following Ordinances which were adopted in 1995: 1995-14 Ordinance Amendment to Section 2-4-3 {1989 Ordinance}, General Government, Organization of City Hall Staff, approved August 21, 1995; 1995-19 Ordinance to create Section 8-2-91 {1989 Ordinance}, Planning and Development, Historic Design Review Guidelines, adopted August 21, 1995; 1995-22 Ordinance to create Section 2-4-4 {1989 Ordinance}, General Government, to expand the City's museum and historic preservation activities, adopted September 5, 1995; 1997-27 Ordinance Amendment to an Ordinance approved January 3, 1980, to establish a retirement plan for the employees of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, and setting forth the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of said plan, adopted October 1, 1995. 
This 20th day of July, 1998. 



___________(Attest)  Diane Coker, Clerk of the City of Kennesaw 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I. - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— H.B. 629 repealed the former City Charter, §§ 1.01—6.07, and added a new City Charter as set out herein. The former City Charter derived from Ga. L. 1971, p. 3620, as amended. Historical notes in parentheses at the end of sections indicate the source of any amendatory acts. Numbering, including subsection designations, is that of the act, as amended. Any information appearing in brackets has been supplied by the codifier for clarification and is not part of the original act. Severability and repealer clauses have been omitted from this printing. 

ARTICLE I. - CHARTER, CITY LIMITS, AND CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Reincorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the whole Charter of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. The City of Kennesaw, Georgia, in the County of Cobb, and the inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Kennesaw, Georgia," and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may contract and be contracted with, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at its pleasure. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter and any other property properly annexed under Georgia law. 
(b)  Alterations may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated: "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map. 
(c)  The mayor and city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.03. - Corporate powers. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the mayor and council, include the following: 
(a)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation for state and county purposes and to contract with any city, county, or other governmental and political subdivisions for the ministerial acts of billing and collection of city ad valorem taxes, or other fees, assessments, or taxes, as the mayor and council may by resolution authorize. 
(b)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(c)  To appropriate and borrow money, to provide for payment of the debts of the city, and to authorize the expenditure of money for any municipal purpose, or for matters of national or state interest, and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of this state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. Whenever the city shall desire to create a bonded debt for the purpose of carrying into effect any of the powers and provisions of this Charter, it shall have the right and authority to do so when authorized by a majority of the qualified voters of the city voting in an election. 
(d)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the city. 
(e)  To condemn property, inside or outside of the corporate boundaries of the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the mayor and council, utilizing procedures enumerated in the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(f)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, distribute, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a waterworks system, sewerage system, natural gas system, electrical power system, storm-water management system, and a community antenna television system, both inside and outside the corporate limits, and any other public utility subject to the provisions of applicable general law. For water, gas, and electricity furnished, for storm-water utility and for all sewerage and sanitary service rendered, the city may prescribe the charges, rates, fares, fees, regulations, and standards and conditions of service to be provided, and shall have a lien against any property of the persons served; such lien to be enforceable in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
(g)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services but not limited to those stated above, not to exceed periods of 30 years. The mayor and council may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with laws of the State of Georgia. 
(h)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, public grounds, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, and hospitals; charitable, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, correctional, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city; and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation pursuant to the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(i)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(j)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to provide power and authority to take all necessary and proper means for keeping the city limits free from garbage, trash, and filth. The city may contract with customers outside of city limits subject to valid intergovernmental agreement. Charges or fees may be imposed to cover the costs of such services, which if unpaid, shall constitute a debt which shall be subject to a lien against any property of persons served which shall be enforceable in the same manner, and under the same remedies, as a lien for city property taxes. 
(k)  To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental or likely to be detrimental to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience, or general welfare of inhabitants of the city. 
(l)  To define a nuisance in the city and to provide for its abatement. The municipal court judge of the city shall have jurisdiction of all nuisance abatement proceedings in the city. The city may provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this state or any valid ordinance of the city, to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expense upon his or her failure or refusal to abate the same within ten days after written notice from the city to do so and after an opportunity to be heard on same. 
(m)  To establish minimum standards for, and to regulate the building, construction, and repair of electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards based on standards as outlined in the International Building Codes standards and other similar standards. 
(n)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the public streets of the city to maintain public facilities and grounds as provided by ordinance; or the mayor and council may provide for the commitment of city prisoners to any county work camp or other governmental agency or jail by agreement with the appropriate county or governmental officers. 
(o)  To regulate, license, tax, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, in violation of any ordinance or lawful orders, and to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder. 
(p)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles, or any other reasonable regulations as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(q)  To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the cost for any public improvements. 
(r)  To provide that upon conviction for violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation, or order, the offender may be punished within limitations prescribed by the mayor and council in such ordinance, rule, regulation, or order but not exceeding the limitation prescribed by this Charter or state law. 
(s)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under the Constitution or general laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Act shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to cities under the Constitution or applicable public acts of this state. 
(t)  To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising the city and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital and commercial and manufacturing and other enterprises into the city, and also to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for the support of public hospitals and libraries, arboretums and museums. 
(u)  To regulate and control public streets, public alleys, and ways; and in the discretion of the mayor and council by ordinance to alter, open, or close public streets and public alleys and ways. 
(v)  To contract with any state department or agency or any other political subdivision for joint services or the exchange of services; and to contract with such agencies or subdivisions for the joint use of facilities or equipment; and to contract with any such agency or subdivision to perform any service or execute any project in which the municipality has an interest. 
(w)  To authorize the providing of surety bonds for employees, such bonds to be payable to the city, with premiums payable by the city, when necessary or proper. 
(x)  Internet Service Provider and Wireless (Wi-Fi) Internet Service Provider. The city shall have the power and authority to construct, acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate, and contract for an Internet systems network in order to provide Internet services, including but not limited to wireless (Wi-Fi) Internet service and other associated and related technologies; to interconnect its system to community needs; to finance such system, from time to time, through the issuance of revenue bonds as may be permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia or through public or private contracts or both; to make any contract for and furnish the services of any such system to consumers within the city limits or pursuant to intergovernmental agreement for locations outside the city limits; and to recoup and defray the costs associated with providing such services through the leasing, selling, or sponsoring of web space for advertisement purposes. 
Sec. 1.04. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, rules, regulations, and acts now in force in the city, not inconsistent with this Charter, are hereby declared valid and of force until amended or repealed by the mayor and council of the city. 
Sec. 1.05. - Gender. 
The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 2.01. - Establishment of city government. 
The corporate governmental powers of the City of Kennesaw shall be vested in a mayor and five councilmembers to be known as the "Mayor and Council of the City of Kennesaw." The mayor and council shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the city and shall exercise their powers in such manner as prescribed by this Charter, the Constitution, and applicable general laws of the State of Georgia, or if not prescribed, in such manner as prescribed by the duly established ordinances of the City of Kennesaw. 
Sec. 2.02. - Qualification for mayor and councilmembers. 
To be eligible for the office of elected or appointed mayor or councilmember a person must be at least 21 years of age and must meet the requirements of a qualified voter of the city as described by state law, and must be a bona fide resident of the City of Kennesaw for one year prior to election day, subject to all applicable state and federal laws. No person shall be qualified to hold the office of mayor or councilmember who shall have been convicted of a felony unless such person has received a full pardon and has had all rights of citizenship restored. 
Sec. 2.03. - Election of mayor and councilmembers. 
(a)  The mayor and city councilmembers serving on the effective date of this Charter shall continue to serve until the expiration of their terms of office and until their successors are duly elected and qualified as provided by law. 
(b)  The mayor and each city councilmember shall be elected at large by all city residents qualified to vote at city elections. 
(c)  On Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2015, and on said date quadrennially thereafter, an election shall be held for the position of mayor. The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes shall be declared elected as mayor. 
(d)  (1)  Councilmembers shall be elected to one of the following posts: Post 1, Post 2, Post 3, Post 4, or Post 5. None of the posts shall be tied to any geographical boundaries of or within the city. 
(2)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2013, and on said date quadrennially thereafter, an election shall be held for those councilmembers who are to serve as "Councilmember, Post No. 3," "Councilmember, Post No. 4," and "Councilmember, Post No. 5." The candidate for each post receiving a plurality of the votes cast shall be declared elected as councilmember for the post for which he or she qualified. 
(3)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2015, and on said date quadrennially thereafter, an election shall be held for those councilmembers who are to serve as "Councilmember, Post No. 1," and "Councilmember, Post No. 2." The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes shall be declared elected as councilmember for the post for which he or she qualified. 
(e)  Any person possessed with the qualifications as required by law may qualify for any council post or for mayor. 
Sec. 2.04. - Terms of office. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the terms of office for mayor and councilmembers shall begin on the first regularly scheduled council meeting in January following their respective elections and shall continue for four years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.05. - City council. 
(a)  The governing body of the city shall be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers, in which is vested all corporate, legislative, and other powers of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The mayor and council shall hold regular public meetings at a stated time and place as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or mayor pro tem and two members of the city council. It shall be the duty of the clerk, deputy clerk, and/or the city manager to present, personally, in writing, by telephone, or by electronic communication, such notice of a special meeting at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in councilmembers' presence. Only the business stated in the written call or stated as being the purpose in the oath or affidavit required in special sessions convened under the telephone notice provision of this Charter may be transacted at a special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members of the council. 
(c)  All meetings of the council and of the committees and of every agency, board, commission, and authority, or similar body of the city, shall be public in the same manner and to the same extent as required by Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to open and public meetings, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. Any person shall have access to the minutes and records thereof at reasonable times in the same manner and to the same extent as required by Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to inspection of public records, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(d)  Four members of the governing body of the city shall constitute a quorum. 
(e)  The mayor and council shall exercise their powers in public meetings. The mayor and council may by ordinance adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business, including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for punishment of contemptuous behavior conducted in its presence. 
Sec. 2.06. - Mayor as presiding officer; additional powers. 
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council; shall have a vote only in the case of a tie vote by councilmembers; shall have veto power, and shall have five business days after the meeting with the council in which to file with the clerk, in writing, his or her dissent, but the council may, at the same meeting or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and council, pass any such ordinance, order, or resolution, notwithstanding the veto, by a vote of four-fifths of the total number of councilmembers, to be taken by ayes and nays, and entered upon the minutes. The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall have the authority to appoint councilmembers to advise the various departments of the city through the direction of the city manager. The mayor shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage; may obtain short-term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the council to do so; shall sign deeds, bonds, and contracts when authorized by the council to do so; and shall perform all other duties imposed by this Charter and by duly adopted ordinances. 
(H.B. 1111, § 1, eff. 4-28-16) 
Sec. 2.07. - Mayor pro tem. 
At the first regular meeting, and after the newly elected councilmembers have taken office following each regular election, the council shall elect from its membership a mayor pro tem for a term of one year. Upon the council's failure to elect a mayor pro tem by its first meeting of each year, the incumbent councilmember who received the highest number of votes when last elected shall be declared mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor during his or her absence from the city or his or her medically diagnosed disability. 
Sec. 2.08. - Vacancy in office of mayor or council. 
(a)  A vacancy shall exist if the mayor or a councilmember resigns, dies, moves his or her residence from the city, or is absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the mayor and council, except if granted a leave of absence by the council and such leave of absence is entered on the minutes; or if he or she is adjudged incompetent; or is convicted of malfeasance in office or of a felony. 
(b)  In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the council from any cause other than the expiration of a term of office, the vacancy shall be filled in the following manner: 
(c)  If the vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled by the mayor and council electing a qualified person to serve out the unexpired term of office. If the vacancy occurs within 30 days prior to the regular city election, the vacancy shall be filled at such regular election under the same rules and regulations and provisions of law pertaining to the election of councilmembers. 
(d)  If the vacancy occurs at any other time not provided for above, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election pursuant to a call of a special election as provided by this Charter. At no time shall there be more than one councilmember so appointed holding office; and if a vacancy occurs on the council with one member so appointed on the council, a special election shall be held within a period of 45 days after the office becomes vacant pursuant to a call of a special election as provided by this Charter; however, if a special election is called pursuant to this Charter, the vacancy previously filled by appointment as well as the existing vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired terms in a special election: provided, however, if a regular election for the city shall be held within three months after the second vacancy occurs, the first vacancy previously filled by appointment and the second vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired terms at such regular election. 
(e)  In the event a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor, a special election shall be called and held in the manner prescribed by the Georgia Election Code (Title 21, Ch. 2, O.C.G.A.) as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, so long as the vacancy occurs at least three months prior to the regular expiration date of the term. If the vacancy occurs within three months of the expiration date of the term, the mayor pro tem shall serve until the expiration date, and shall be authorized during such period to exercise all of the powers of the mayor provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.09. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and council may determine the salary of the mayor and councilmembers by ordinance, provided that salary changes enacted shall not become effective until the first regular meeting after the next calendar year. Each councilmember and the mayor, when authorized by the mayor and council and upon presentation of itemized vouchers, shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.10. - City clerk. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at their pleasure, supervision, and direction. The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the council; attending meetings of the council and keeping a journal of its proceedings at such meetings, including the names of members present and absent, the vote of each member on each question, each motion considered, and the text of each resolution or ordinance considered; preparing and certifying copies of official records in his or her office, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinance; and performing such other duties as may be required by law or as tasked or directed by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The mayor and council may require the clerk, before entering upon discharge of his or her duties, to give good and sufficient bond in the amount to be decided by the mayor and council, but not less than $2,500.00, such bond payable to the City of Kennesaw, for the faithful performance of his or her duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful expenditures. Such surety bond shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and approved by the mayor and council, and the premium thereon shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 2.11. - City legislation. 
Any action of the council having a regulatory or penal affect or required to be done by ordinance under this Charter shall be done only by ordinance. Each resolution and ordinance shall be in written form before being introduced. The affirmative vote of at least three members of the council shall be required to pass any resolution or ordinance. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall copy them into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose; and the city clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book, which may include electronic files. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk. 
Sec. 2.12. - Public reading of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall be approved until a summary of such shall have been read at a regular public meeting of the mayor and city council of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Sec. 2.13. - City manager. 
The city manager shall serve at the pleasure and direction of the Kennesaw mayor and council and shall assume the position and duties as the chief administrative officer of the city and such other duties as may be assigned by the mayor and council from time to time, including but not limited to director of finance and administration, purchasing agent for all departments, coordinator of commissions and departments of the city, and the general management of city business under the direction and guidance of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2.14. - Suspension and removal of officers. 
(a)  If the mayor or any member of the council is indicted for any felony in any court in the United States, the council, by majority vote of its members, may direct the city attorney to file a petition with the Superior Court of Cobb County to suspend such officer with pay pending the resolution of such indictment and shall serve a copy of such petition upon such officer. Upon the filing of such a petition, the Superior court of Cobb County shall conduct a hearing on such petition, and if the court finds that the continued service by such officer would not be in the best interest of the public, the court shall issue an order suspending such officer with pay until such indictment is resolved. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers may be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By an order of the Superior Court of Cobb County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by the city attorney. Such action shall only be undertaken by the city attorney upon the adoption of a resolution directing the city attorney to file such complaint by a majority of the members of the council; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Cobb County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the city of Kennesaw. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other provisions of law for removal or suspension of officers. 
(H.B. 1111, § 1, eff. 4-28-16) 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL 

Sec. 3.01. - Organization. 
The city government shall continue as presently organized. The city manager, with approval of the mayor and council, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city; may provide that the same person shall fill a number of offices and positions of employment, and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
Sec. 3.02. - Administrative duties of the mayor. 
The mayor shall be the executive head of the city government. Together with the city council, the mayor shall appoint a city manager who shall be responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. The mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, and franchises in the city. The mayor may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter. 
Sec. 3.03. - City attorney. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city attorney together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; and shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs. 
Sec. 3.04. - Oath of office. 
Before a person takes any office in the city government, he or she shall take, before an officer of the state authorized to administer oaths, the following such oath or affirmation: "I swear that I will faithfully and impartially uphold the Constitution of this State and of the United States, and will conduct myself faithfully as mayor (or councilmember, as the case may be) during my continuance in office. I have not, in order to influence my election to this office, directly or indirectly promised my vote or support to any person or officer in the government of the City of Kennesaw, nor for any other office. I will not knowingly permit my vote in the election or appointment of any persons to a position in this government to be influenced by fear, favor, or the hope of reward, but in all things pertaining to my office I will be governed by what in my judgment is for the public good and for the best interest of the city, so help me God." 
Sec. 3.05. - Political activity prohibited. 
No officer or employee of the city, other than the mayor and councilmembers, shall continue in the employment of the city after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any city office. 
Sec. 3.06. - City planning and renewal. 
The council may create and establish a planning commission pursuant to the provisions of general law as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. 
ARTICLE IV. - FISCAL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 4.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of October and end on the 30th day of September of each year. Such fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for fiscal accounting and reporting of every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
Sec. 4.02. - Mayor to submit annual budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the council, but not later than October 31, the city manager shall submit to the council through the mayor a proposed operating budget for the new fiscal year, showing separately for the general funds, each utility, and other funds, the following: (a) the revenue and expenditures during the preceding fiscal year; (b) appropriations, estimated revenue, and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year; (c) a comparative statement of the assets, liabilities, reserves, and surplus at the end of the current fiscal year; and (d) such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 4.03. - Action by council on budget. 
Before the end of the second month of the current fiscal year, the council shall adopt an appropriate ordinance based on the mayor's budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable. Appropriations need not be in more detail than a lump sum for each department, office, and agency unless otherwise directed by the council. The council shall not make any appropriations in excess of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property, or lives, safety, or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city; provided the council unanimously agrees that there is such an emergency. If conditions prevent the adoption of an appropriation ordinance before the second month of the current fiscal year, the appropriations for the previous fiscal year shall become the appropriations for the new fiscal year, subject to amendment as provided by ordinance specifically passed for such purpose. 
Sec. 4.04. - Additional appropriations. 
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budgets at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations shall be made for any public purpose only from an existing undesignated cash fund balance. 
Sec. 4.05. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year and following review of revenues, any net surplus, shall be closed into the applicable undesignated fund balance. 
Sec. 4.06. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before a date fixed by the council, but not later than the first regularly scheduled meeting of the new fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council through the mayor a proposed capital improvements budget with his or her recommendations as to the means of financing such improvements. The council shall have power to accept such budget with or without amendments or reject the proposed budget and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such projects are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency in the lives, health, or property of inhabitants, when passed by a four-fifths vote of the membership of the council. Such capital improvements budget may be revised and extended each year with regard to the capital improvements still pending on or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(b)  Before November 30 of the current fiscal year, the council shall adopt an appropriate ordinance based on the proposed capital improvements budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided that, the mayor and council may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority vote of the council. 
Sec. 4.07. - Sale of city property. 
Subject to other provisions of state and federal law, the mayor and council may sell any city property which is obsolete, surplus, or unusable at public sale with no less than 15 days' written notice to the public following the appropriate action declaring the property obsolete, surplus, or unusable at a regular meeting of the mayor and council, for such consideration as received; provided, however, the mayor and council shall not be obligated to sell such property unless the mayor and council consider the price to be equitable and just. In accordance with Code Section 36-37-6(b) of the O.C.G.A., as amended, surplus property with an estimated value of $500.00 or less, as determined by the finance director, city manager, or his or her designee, may be sold in the open market without advertisement and without acceptance of bids. Notice of the sale of surplus property may be posted on city bulletin boards so as to make it open market. 
Sec. 4.08. - Annual audit. 
The mayor and council shall employ a certified public accountant to make an annual audit of all financial books and records of the city. The accountant shall file his or her report with the mayor and council and shall prepare a summary of the report which shall be furnished or made available to the mayor and every councilmember within 180 days of the closed audited fiscal year. 
Sec. 4.09. - Publication of financial statement. 
As soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year, but within six months after the close thereof, the mayor and council shall cause to be published in a local newspaper or on the city's website an annual report which shall contain a general statement of revenues and expenditures showing all municipal accounts as of the close of the preceding fiscal year. Such annual report shall be prepared so as to fairly represent the general financial condition of the city as of the close of the preceding fiscal year. 
Sec. 4.10. - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January 1 in each year, shall be returned for taxes each year on or before April 1. Failure to make a tax return in a timely manner, as defined by city ordinance, will result in a penalty on the taxes due on such property, along with interest on delinquent taxes and penalties, all as described by city ordinance. The board of tax assessors appointed by the Cobb County Board of Commissioners shall evaluate and assess all city property for tax purposes as provided by Georgia law. Appeals involving city property assessments may be taken as now or as may hereafter be provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 4.11. - Tax levy. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, and for any other public purpose as determined by the mayor and council, and is also authorized to provide for sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligation. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall establish by ordinance a millage rate for the city property tax; a due date; and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 4.12. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk or finance director and executed by the chief of police or any person designated by ordinance under the same procedure provided by laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state, or county taxes. 
Sec. 4.13. - Transfer of executions. 
The clerk of the city or finance director of Kennesaw shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi. fa. or execution issued for street, sewer, or any other assessment in the same manner, upon the same terms, and to the same effect, and thereby vest the purchaser or transferee, with the same rights as in cases of sales or transfers of tax fi. fas. as now provided by law; and in all sales of property hereafter made under execution on behalf of the city for the collection of street, sewer, and other assessments, the owner or owners, as the case may be, are authorized to redeem same within the same time and on compliance with the same terms and payment of the same premium, interest, and costs, as in cases of redemption of property where sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fa. as the same now exists, or as may from time to time be provided by law. 
Sec. 4.14. - Special assessments. 
The council may assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates, and shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to interest at the rate of 1 percent per month from due date until paid. Upon payment becoming 90 days past due from the due date, a penalty of 10 percent or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, shall be added to the total balance. A lien for such amount plus fi. fa. charges, interest, and penalties, shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and such lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided in this article for city property taxes. 
Sec. 4.15. - Investment, preservation, and use of proceeds from sale of water and sewer system. 
(a)  In the event the City of Kennesaw shall cause the water and sewer system to be sold, the city shall invest a minimum of $9,000,000.00 of the net proceeds therefrom in state approved investment vehicles. The principal balance shall neither be spent nor sold without first putting the same question describing such use of the principal balance on a public referendum. Such expenditure of the principal balance shall be spent or sold only upon its approval by a majority of the voters casting a vote in such public referendum. 
(b)  The provisions set forth in the paragraph above shall not affect the right of this mayor and council, or any succeeding mayor and council, to use any accumulated interest generated by the chosen investment vehicle for whatever lawful purposes the mayor and council so determine, including, but not limited to, the repayment of bonded indebtedness and other municipal obligations. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.01. - Regular elections. 
The regular elections for mayor and councilmembers shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of the election year as their terms fall. Except as otherwise provided by law, officials elected at any regular election shall take office at the first regularly scheduled council meeting in January following their respective elections. 
Sec. 5.02. - Qualification of candidates. 
(a)  As provided in state law, each candidate for municipal office or a designee shall file a notice of candidacy in the office of the election superintendent during the city's qualifying period. The election superintendent shall designate the days of the qualifying period, which shall be no less than three days and no more than five days. The days of the qualifying period shall be consecutive days. 
Qualifying periods shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday; and in the case of a special election, the municipal qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of the call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. 
(b)  As provided in state law, the hours of qualifying each day shall be from 8:30 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. with one hour allowed for the lunch break; provided, however, that should the city have normal business hours which cover a lesser period of time, it shall conduct qualifying during its normal business hours. Except in the case of a special election, notice of the opening and closing dates and the hours for candidates to qualify shall be published at least two weeks prior to the opening of the qualifying period. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the qualification period shall be no less than that required by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132(d)(3), as amended. 
Sec. 5.03. - Qualification of electors. 
Any person meeting the qualifications of an elector of members of the General Assembly under state law who is a bona fide resident of the City of Kennesaw shall be qualified to register as an elector in any city election held under this Charter. 
Sec. 5.04. - Applicability of general laws. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the election of all officials of the City of Kennesaw where provision is made for election by the qualified voters thereof, shall be conducted as to special or general elections in conformity so far as applicable with the provisions of the Georgia Election Code in Title 21, Chapter 2 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. Whenever any time period established by such code is altered so as to change or supersede any time period provided in this Charter, it shall be considered that such periods in this Charter shall be correspondingly changed so as to avoid any conflict between the Charter and the general law. 
Sec. 5.05. - Time of election; polls. 
At all primaries and elections the polls shall be opened at 7:00 a.m. eastern standard time or eastern daylight time, whichever is applicable, and shall remain open continuously until 7:00 p.m. eastern standard time or eastern daylight time, whichever is applicable, at which time they shall be closed as provided by state law. 
Sec. 5.06. - Place of elections. 
The polling place or places for holding elections shall be prescribed by the mayor and council and shall be published in the election notice; provided, however, any change in a polling place shall be effected as provided by the Georgia Election Code in Title 21, Chapter 2 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
Sec. 5.07. - Voter registration. 
In all elections held in the City of Kennesaw, whether special or general elections, the voters, in addition to the qualifications already prescribed, shall be registered as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.08. - Rules. 
The mayor and council are hereby authorized to enact by ordinance such additional rules consistent with this Charter and general laws as are deemed necessary for the conduct of elections. 
Sec. 5.09. - Absentee ballots. 
The mayor and council in their discretion are authorized to provide by ordinance for absentee ballots for any city election. 
Sec. 5.10. - Call for elections. 
Any call for an election which is required to be made by the laws of this state shall be made by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 5.11. - Contract to hold elections. 
The city may contract with other local government entities to hold elections for the city. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 6.01. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a court to be known as the "Municipal Court," City of Kennesaw, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against laws and ordinances of the city and to punish for violations of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before such court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the City of Kennesaw constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof; to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations and to prescribe the condition of forfeiture of the same; and to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary and proper to the conduct of such court. The presiding officer of such court shall be known as the municipal court judge. Such court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. The court shall sit at a place designated by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 6.02. - Municipal court judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as municipal court judge unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, and shall be qualified to vote in Cobb County. The municipal court judge shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve at their discretion. The compensation of the municipal court judge shall be fixed by the mayor and council. Nothing in this Charter shall disqualify the mayor or any councilmember from serving as municipal court judge or municipal court judge pro tem. 
(b)  The municipal court judge pro tem shall serve in the absence of the municipal court judge, shall have the same qualifications as the municipal court judge, and shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Before commencing the duties of his or her office, the municipal court judge or municipal court judge pro tem shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state that he or she shall truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. This oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the meeting of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 6.03. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court judge shall have power to impose fines, costs, and forfeitures for the violation of any law or ordinance of the City of Kennesaw passed in accordance with this Charter for each offense in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00, to imprison offenders for a period of not more than six months, or both, or such lesser or greater punishment as may be prescribed by state law. Such municipal court judge shall not have the authority to inflict a greater punishment for contempt than to impose a fine not exceeding $200.00, imprisonment not exceeding ten days, or both, or such lesser or greater punishment as may be prescribed by state law. The municipal court judge shall be for all intents and purposes a magistrate, so far as to enable him or her to issue warrants for offenses committed within the limits of the City of Kennesaw, which warrants shall be executed by an officer of the city, and to commit the offenders to jail or admit them to bail in bailable cases for their appearance at the next term of court of competent jurisdiction to be held in the city. The municipal court shall also have concurrent jurisdiction with that of the magistrate over offenses against the criminal laws of the state committed within the corporate limits. Except as may be otherwise specified in this Charter, the municipal court judge is vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers as to the entire area within the corporate limits of the City of Kennesaw. The municipal court is specifically invested with all jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area within the corporate limits granted by state laws generally to mayors, municipal court judges, and police courts, and particularly such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. The municipal court judge is hereby authorized to administer oaths. 
Sec. 6.04. - Right of appeal. 
The right of appeal and procedures pertaining to appeal bonds to the Superior Court of Cobb County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Sec. 6.05. - Court costs. 
In all cases in the municipal court of the City of Kennesaw the costs incurred and allowable by this Charter may be computed under the provisions of the laws of the State of Georgia fixing costs in the magistrate courts of this state, or the mayor and council may establish a schedule of fees to defray costs of operation, and the city shall be entitled to reimbursement of the costs, meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the superior court for violations of state law. The mayor and council may also provide a uniform scale of costs of the clerk and police officers of the city for all services in the arrest and prosecution of offenders in the municipal court and in the issuance and collection of tax and other executions; and for their collection and payment into the city treasury. The municipal court judge is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses to such municipal court, and to issue such other processes as may be necessary for the proper administration of such court. 
Sec. 6.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the mayor and council, the municipal court judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the business of such court; provided, however, that the mayor and city council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations relative to the procedures for the operation of the superior courts under the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 6.07. - Probation. 
In addition to the provisions of Section 6.03 of this Charter, the municipal court shall have the authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of a traffic law or ordinance of the City of Kennesaw on probation and to suspend or modify any sentence. In addition to such punishment, the court may require attendance at safety education schools, alcohol or drug risk reduction schools, or other training and educational programs. The municipal court shall have the authority to order any person placed on probation to pay a probation fee to the City of Kennesaw Probation Department or to any corporation, enterprise, or agency to which the City of Kennesaw has contracted to perform probation services. In addition, any person required to attend a safety education school, alcohol or drug risk reduction school, or other training or educational programs shall pay all the costs thereof. The municipal court shall further have authority to require any person found guilty of a violation of a traffic law or ordinance of the City of Kennesaw to submit to random drug or alcohol testing and to pay all costs of such tests. The mayor and council shall have the power to set probation fees. 
CHARTER ORDINANCES COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
City manager. The words "city manager" shall mean the city manager of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Council. The word "council" shall mean the mayor and council of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Cobb County, Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing body. Whenever the words "governing body" or "elected officials" are used, they shall mean the mayor and council of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of those persons or officers; provided, that for any provision to be adopted by the mayor and council, at least three affirmative votes are required. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Limits or corporation. The word "limits" or "corporation" shall mean the corporate limits, or legal boundary, of the city. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Municipality. Wherever the word "municipality" appears in this Code, it shall mean the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Other officials, boards and commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., city clerk, chief of police, etc., such reference shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia; and shall also include duly authorized deputies or assistants of such officers, etc. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, corporations, associations, clubs, trustees, receivers, organizations, and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
Public park means any public property that contains a grassy area or wooded area and upon which any recreational facilities and equipment are located. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place including, but not limited to, buildings or conveyances to which the public has or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement. 
Public property means any land or lands controlled by, operated by, or owned by the city, any county of this state, any municipality of this state, the state, the United States of America, or any subdivision of any of them. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Recreational facilities and equipment means one or more of the following: baseball diamond, basketball court, bicycling trail or road, dog park, a dock or pier, football field, golf cart trails or roads, golf course, jogging trail or road, lacrosse field, permanent grill to be used by the public, picnic shelter, picnic table, playground equipment of any type, skate board park, skating rink of any type, skeet or trap range, soccer field, tetherball equipment, swimming pool, tennis court, or walking trail. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. Official copies of such resolutions are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
Sponsor or sponsored means the city is providing access to public property for the event or activity or paying for some or all of the services provided at the event or activity, and the city produces advertising or marketing materials indicating in tangible form that the city is a sponsor of the event or activity. In referring to entities or persons other than the city, an entity or person is a sponsor of an event or activity within the city if the entity or person provided goods, services, or labor at no cost to city, the event or the activity. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way, unless otherwise stated. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, that building or land, either alone or with others. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-2; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the mayor and council of Kennesaw, Georgia, as follows:" 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-5) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise provided by state law, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months, and to work on the city streets and public works not exceeding 60 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-8) 
State Law reference— Violations of the dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; limitations on home rule powers of municipalities with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); confinement of violators of municipal ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); authorization of municipal courts to impose any punishment up to the maximum specified by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 
Sec. 1-12. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Whenever the regulations of this Code as adopted on July 20, 1998 are in conflict with any previously adopted ordinance or amendment, the regulations of this Code shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1998-07, 7-20-98) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 42; personnel, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IX, ¶ II; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e); supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Claims against city officers and departments. 
(a)  If a claim or lawsuit is filed against any employee or official of the city that relates to the performance of his duty with the city, such claim or lawsuit shall be defended or settled if such claim or lawsuit is not covered by liability insurance or unless the mayor and council shall direct otherwise. 
(b)  A claim or lawsuit against a city official or employee shall not be defended or settled if the employee has been grossly negligent or engaged in willful or wanton misconduct in the performance of his duties. If liability insurance covers a portion of the defense of such employee but not all of the defense, then the city attorney shall defend that portion not covered by insurance, subject to the approval of the mayor and council. 
(c)  If a claim or lawsuit against a city official or employee results in damages or costs being assessed against such employee or official, the city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to reimburse or indemnify such employee or official from such loss. 
(d)  The city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to provide for reimbursement to a city officer or employee for reasonable legal fees and other expenses in the successful defense of a criminal action arising out of the performance of official duties. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-2) 
Sec. 2-2. - Administration and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the mayor and city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or by law, the directors of departments, agencies, and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officials shall receive such compensation as approved by the mayor and council. Department and agency heads shall receive compensation approved by the city manager. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department and agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his/her department or agency. 
(e)  All directors shall be selected by the city manager with confirmation by the mayor and council. The city manager may suspend or remove directors under his/her supervision, but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for three calendar days following the city manager's giving written notice of such action and the reasons therefore to the director involved and to the mayor and council. The director involved may appeal to the municipal court judge, which, after a hearing, may override the city manager's action. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2004-55, § 1, 11-15-04; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-3. - Records. 
(a)  Record retention. The city adopts the record management plan and record retention schedules recommended by the Georgia Secretary of State pursuant to Georgia Records Act, Article 5, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90, as amended from time to time, by resolution by the mayor and council of the city of Kennesaw. A copy of such management plan and record retention schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The city clerk shall be the records officer and assistant city clerk as authorized deputy records officer (O.C.G.A. 50-18-71(b)(1)(B)) and shall coordinate all records management for the city including storage, archiving and destruction of records, excluding the police department and municipal court. 
The support services commander has been designated as the records manager for the police department as approved in the police department standard operating procedures manual. The municipal court clerk shall be designated as the records manager for the municipal court. 
Records shall be maintained according to the approved retention schedule, and no record shall be destroyed except as provided in the approved retention schedule. Any changes to the retention schedules shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Open record request. All requests made under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, as may be amended from time to time, shall be made to the records officer. 
(c)  Minutes. The official record of the City of Kennesaw meetings shall consist of the written meeting minutes voted and accepted by the council at their next regularly scheduled meeting. The official record of every committee, agency, board, commission and authority shall consist of the written meeting minutes voted and accepted at the next regularly scheduled meeting of said committee, agency, board, commission and authority. 
(Ord. No. 2003-11, § 1, 4-4-03; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-36, § 1, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 2012-05, 7-2-12) 
Secs. 2-4—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Personal liability of council members and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1. 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meeting place and time. 
The mayor and council shall meet at the city hall in regular session on the first and third Mondays of each month at 6:30 p.m., except on the holidays enumerated in the city's employee personnel manual, which dates shall be set in advance by the mayor and council. In addition thereto, the mayor and council may set such additional regular meeting dates by providing at least seven days' notice of their intention and upon majority vote of the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-1; Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1, 3-4-02; Ord. No. 2006-23, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-27. - Parliamentary rules. 
When any question arises which is not provided for in the rules of the council, the question, as far as practicable, shall be controlled by Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-2; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Secs. 2-28—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-7, adopted 9-3-96, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 2-51—2-59 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 6-6-4, §§ 2-5-1—2-5-9. 
State Law reference— Power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

Sec. 2-51. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his/her compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-52. - Removal. 
(a)  The mayor and council may remove the city manager from office upon a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(1)  After a majority vote to remove the city manager, the city manager shall have the right to request a public or private hearing within two weeks of the request. Such request shall be made within 48 hours after dismissal. After said hearing, the mayor and council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the membership of the council and office of mayor or reinstate said city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-53. - Acting city manager. 
The mayor and council may designate, an acting city manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his/her temporary absence or disability. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-54. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. S/he shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his/her charge by or under this or other ordinance or resolution. S/he shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The city manager, with the express approval of the mayor and council, shall appoint department heads other than city clerk, and city auditor, judge and solicitor of the municipal court and city attorney which shall be appointed by the mayor and council; 
(2)  S/he shall appoint and, when s/he deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all other city employees, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this chapter. S/he may authorize any department head who is subject to his/her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(3)  S/he shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by the City Charter or by law; 
(4)  S/he shall attend all council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but s/he may not vote; 
(5)  S/he shall see that all laws, provisions of the City Charter, and acts of the mayor and council subject to enforcement by him/her or by officers subject of his/her directions and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(6)  S/he shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the mayor and council; s/he shall prepare and submit monthly financial reports and list of bills for each department to the mayor and council. 
(7)  S/he shall submit to the mayor and council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(8)  S/he shall make such other reports as the mayor and council may require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his/her direction and supervision; 
(9)  S/he shall keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the affairs of the city as s/he deems desirable; and 
(10)  S/he shall perform such other duties as are specified in this article or as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-55. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the mayor and members of the city council shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the mayor nor members of the city council shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. In the case of a city emergency involving public health or safety and in the absence of the city manager, the mayor or a member of council may direct activities as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-56. - Bond. 
The city manager shall be bonded, with the bond premium paid by the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her duties and secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriation, or unlawful expenditures, by a bonding company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, and approved by the mayor and council, in an amount not less than $50,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Secs. 2-57—2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, AUTHORITIES AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-71. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the mayor and city council deem necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this ordinance or by law. 
(c)  The mayor and city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter, ordinance, or by other law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this chapter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until s/he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating such member to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his/her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by state law, any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the mayor and city council. Cause shall be defined as malfeasance or misfeasance in office or failure to attend three consecutive regular, scheduled meetings or failure to attend a minimum of 70 percent of such regularly scheduled board, commission, or authority meetings within any calendar year. While attendance in person is preferred, a member of a board, commission, or authority may attend a meeting by telephonic means. All votes in which a member is present via telephonic means shall require a roll call vote which shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-7, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Secs. 2-72—2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authority created, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-4. 

Sec. 2-76. - Declaration of need. 
It is determined and declared that there is a present, continuing and future need for a downtown development authority, as more fully described and defined in the Downtown Development Authorities Law as set forth, to function within the city as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 36-42 dated 2012 as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-1; Res. of 7-5-95(1); Ord. No. 2013-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 2-77. - Activation. 
There is reactivated in the city a public body corporate and politic known as the Kennesaw Downtown Development Authority, which is hereby reconstituted upon the adoption and approval of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-2; Res. of 7-5-95(1)) 
Sec. 2-78. - Membership of board of directors. 
The mayor and city council hereby establish an initial board of directors consisting of seven members, each of whom meets the qualifications of O.C.G.A. § 36-42-7. The terms of the initial board of directors shall be staggered. Upon the expiration of the initial terms of these members, directors shall serve for six-year terms or as prescribed by the laws of the state, whichever is more restrictive. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-3; Res. of 7-5-95(1)) 
Sec. 2-79. - Organization. 
The board of directors named in this division shall be authorized to organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq., and as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-4; Res. of 7-5-95(1)) 
Sec. 2-80. - Boundary description of downtown development area. 
The geographical area of the downtown development area shall be as shown on a plat prepared by the city engineer, an official copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. The downtown development area has such size, shape, location, dimensions, metes, bounds, courses and distances as are shown on such plat, reference to which is made for all purposes of description. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-5; Res. of 7-5-95(1)) 
Sec. 2-81. - Effect. 
The action taken by the mayor and city council as specified in this article is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development, downtown development or payroll authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment, including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization and powers of function. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-6; Res. of 7-5-95(1)) 
Secs. 2-82—2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-86. - Declaration of need. 
The mayor and city council hereby declare that there is a need for a development authority to function in the city to carry forth the purposes set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 7-5-95(2)) 
Sec. 2-87. - Created. 
The mayor and city council do hereby create the Kennesaw Development Authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 7-5-95(2)) 
Sec. 2-88. - Terms. 
The mayor and city council hereby establish an initial board of directors of seven members which shall be appointed as prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-4. The terms of the initial board of directors shall be staggered. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of the development authorities act. 
(Res. of 7-5-95(2)) 
Secs. 2-89—2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF ETHICS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

Sec. 2-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advisory opinion means the board of ethics interpretation to a written request as to whether a particular course of conduct would constitute a violation of the applicable ethical standards outlined hereto. 
Board of ethics means the entity created by section 2-98. 
Business means a corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise whether for profit or not. 
City means the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the city containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member of the governing authority; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months after the complaining party knew or should have reasonably known of the alleged misconduct. 
Confidential information means any information that by law or practice is not available to the public. 
Conflict of interest means an individual has multiple interests and uses his or her official position to exploit, in some way, his or her position for his or her own direct, unique, pecuniary, and personal benefit. 
Consultant means any person not a member of the governing authority, who is not an employee of the city, who is retained to render personal services of a technical or professional nature, whether paid or unpaid, and who has other personal or private employment. The term "consultant" includes, but is not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors, accountants, brokers, financial advisers and title abstractors. 
Contract means any claim or demand against or any lease, account or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, verbal or in writing. 
Emergency situation means any circumstance or condition giving rise to an immediate necessity for the execution of a contract by and between the city and a member of the governing authority or between the city and a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest and where as defined in the city code section 34-2(a): 
(1)  It is shown that there is no person located within a reasonable geographic distance who could have provided the goods and services needed to meet the emergency other than the member or the business in which the member has an interest; and 
(2)  The necessity was not brought about by the fault or neglect of the person contracting with the city. 
Gift means any benefit or thing of value which is conveyed to or performed for the benefit of a public servant or a partner in interest, including any advance, award, contract, contribution, deposit, employment, favor, forbearance, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, payment, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things or acts of value will be conferred in the future, if such thing or act of value is conferred or performed without the lawful exchange of consideration which is at least equal in value to the thing or act conferred or performed. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of city council, municipal court judge or municipal court judge pro tem, city manager, and city clerk. The term also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other bodies which can or may vote and take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or council. The term "member" may be used throughout this division to refer to an individual member of the governing authority. 
Immediate family means a member's spouse, domestic partner, parent, sibling, child and grandparent. Also includes any of these persons of a step, in-law and foster or adoptive relationship to the member of the governing authority. 
Interest means any direct or indirect financial or personal benefit, which is not a remote interest, held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefit unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
Official act or action means any tangible act or inaction relating to a legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of a member of the governing authority. 
Paid means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary, a commission, a dividend or percentage, brokerage or contingent fee. 
Participate means to take part in official acts, actions or proceedings personally as a member of the governing authority through approval, disapproval, decision, recommendation, investigation, the rendering of advice or the failure to perform a duty or the failure to act; provided, however, abstention required by this document is not participation. 
Person means any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust or association, whether paid or unpaid, and includes any member of the governing authority. 
Property means any property, whether real or personal, or tangible or intangible, and includes currency and commercial paper. 
Remote interest means the interest of: 
(1)  A nonsalable director, officer, or employee of a nonprofit corporation exempt from federal income tax pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States; 
(2)  A holder of less than five percent of the legal or beneficial ownership of the total share of a business; or 
(3)  Action of a member in which the member receives a benefit common to residents of the municipality, generally including but not limited to the adoption of the general budget and adoption or substantial revision of the land use plan or zoning ordinance of the city. 
Transaction means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-92. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-93. - Prohibitions; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a conflict of interest if a member of the governing authority: 
(1)  By conduct, give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence or unduly enjoy favor in the performance of official acts or actions or that such member is affected unduly by the rank or position of or association with any person. 
(2)  Gifts, loans, favors. Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value for himself or another person if: 
a.  It could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; or 
b.  The member recently has been, is now, or within one year in the future, is involved in any official act or action that results in a pecuniary benefit for the donor or lender that is not available to the public at large. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value, for example, items received while at a convention, receipt of trinkets or gifts (such as a calendar, memento or pen) received in the normal course of business with a value of less than $100.00 (or $75.00 if received from a lobbyist as defined in O.C.G.A. § 21-5-70) and admission to and/or consumption of food at a breakfast, lunch, dinner, function or event. 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service. 
(3)  A transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6, as now or hereafter amended. 
(4)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction. 
(5)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her position for his/her, or another person's or business's private gain. 
(d)  Use his/her official position or office to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public. 
(e)  Engage in, accept employment with or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. For the purposes of this subsection, the employment of a consultant by any business involving matters unrelated to any contract or transaction by or with the city shall not be deemed incompatible with such consultant's official duties. 
(f)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the governing authority. 
(g)  Attempt to acquire, use or procure public resources not available to the general public for private gain or personal purposes. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 3; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-94. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
(a)  A member of the governing authority who has an interest shall disclose the precise nature and value of such interest by sworn written statement to the city clerk and to the chairperson of the board of ethics prior to the governing authority taking official action on a matter affecting such interest. Such sworn statements shall be a public record. 
(b)  A member of the governing authority who has an ongoing relationship with a business or individual arising out of the normal course of commerce for which such member receives compensation at a commercially reasonable rate shall disclose such relationship if the city has or can be reasonably anticipated to purchase goods or services from such business or individual. A disclosure of such relationship shall be made annually and when becoming aware of a possible conflict of interest. Such disclosures will be made in writing describing the nature of the relationship, the member and other parties in the relationship and the interest of the member in such relationship. Such disclosures shall be kept on file by the city clerk and a copy sent to the chairperson of the board of ethics. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 4; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-95. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify him/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city that results in a benefit to the member or a business or activity in which s/he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 5; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-96. - Prohibited contracts. 
No member of the governing authority or business in which that member of the governing authority has more than a remote interest shall enter into any contract involving services or property with the city. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan. 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
(4)  Contracts for services that are awarded pursuant to sealed competitive bids subsequent to an advertised competitive bid process in accordance with the purchasing ordinance of the city. 
(5)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation in accordance with city Code section 34-2, Civil Emergencies, provided that a written record explaining the emergency is prepared by the mayor and thereafter kept on file with the city clerk. A copy of same shall be submitted by the city clerk to the board of ethics. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 6; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-97. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governmental authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with, or take any official act or action favorably affecting, any person, or business represented by such person when such person has been a member of the governing authority within the twelve (12) month period preceding such action, except when the governing authority had a contract with such person or business prior to the member leaving office or unless the business received the contract for having the lowest and best bid pursuant to the purchasing procedures established by the city. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 7; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-98. - Board of ethics—Created. 
(a)  There is created the board of ethics of the city, to be composed of five residents of the city, to be appointed as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the immediately preceding two year period, any interest in any contract, transaction or official action of the city. No member of the board of ethics shall be a current member of the governing authority or employee of the city. 
(b)  The five members of the board of ethics shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. Appointees shall serve terms of two years from the appointment by mayor and council unless otherwise removed pursuant to this section or filling the remainder of a term for a member who has been removed. 
(c)  If a member of the board of ethics ceases to be a resident of the city during his term, that member's position on the board shall become vacant immediately. A vacancy in the board of ethics shall exist by reason of death, resignation or loss of residency as described in this subsection. A member of the board of ethics may also be removed from office during a term if the member becomes ineligible pursuant to one of the provisions listed in O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1, while applicable to civil office shall be also be applicable to the board of ethics, and that ineligibility is established by decision of a court of competent jurisdiction as required by said statute. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council. Further, members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of mayor and council for cause, including, but not limited to, failure to maintain any requirement for qualification to serve on the board of ethics. 
(d)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation and shall elect from their own membership a chairperson and otherwise provide for their own internal organization. 
(e)  The governing authority of the city shall provide adequate office and meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city: 
(1)  The city manager will provide the board of ethics with necessary staff support; and 
(2)  The city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to carry out its duties and responsibilities. The board of ethics shall be subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city; provided, however, in exercising its powers and duties pursuant to section 2-99, the board of ethics shall be independent and shall not be subject to control or supervision by any member of the governing body or employee of the city government. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 8; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-99. - Same—Duties and powers. 
The board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers subject to the establishment of a quorum which shall be three members of the board of ethics: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and the conduct of its affairs. 
(2)  To render advisory opinions with respect to the interpretation and application of this section to any city resident, duly licensed business, and/or member of the governing authority who seeks, in writing, advice as to whether a particular course of conduct would constitute a violation of the standards imposed in this section or other applicable ethical standards. Such opinions shall be binding on the board of ethics in any subsequent complaint concerning the person who sought the opinion and acted in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion. 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosures required in this division and to make available to the public the information disclosed as provided in this section. (The board shall be authorized to adopt forms for formal complaints, and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under the code of ordinances.) 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this division. 
(5)  To make such investigations in response to complaints as it deems necessary to determine whether any member of the governing authority has violated any provisions of this division. The board of ethics, as a result of a complaint filed with the board of ethics shall make such probable cause investigation as it deems proper to carry out its duties under this subsection. For the purpose of such investigation, the board of ethics may hold and conduct hearings, take evidence, examine witnesses and administer oaths and issue subpoenas when such subpoena power is authorized by law. All testimony taken by the board of ethics shall be under oath. The board of ethics shall apply to the superior court of the county for the enforcement of any subpoena issued by the board. 
(6)  At any hearing held under subsection (5) of this section, the member of the governing authority against whom the complaint was filed shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses against the member of the governing authority and to preserve evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(7)  To report its findings to the mayor and council. 
(8)  To select an attorney if the city attorney is not available or has a conflict of interest, at an hourly rate currently approved by mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 9; Ord. No. 1998-11, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-100. - Penalty. 
Any member of the governing authority who is found by the board of ethics to have knowingly violated any provision of the Code of Ethics shall be subject to such action as the mayor and council deem appropriate. Such action may include, but not be limited to, public reprimand or any other corrective and/or disciplinary action the mayor and council deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 10; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, adopted Dec. 15, 2014, amended the title of § 2-100, which was formerly titled "Penalty and appeals." Provisions relating to appeals now appear in § 2-101. 
Sec. 2-101. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics under section 2-100 may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county, within which the city is located, within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics becomes final which is the date that the board votes on the complaint. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a writ of certiorari, any enforcement of the board's decision and/or mayor and council's penalty shall be postponed pending judicial review provided for in this section. 
(d)  The record on review, unless otherwise stipulated by the parties, shall include the original or certified copies of all pleadings, testimony, evidence, exhibits and other papers presented to or considered by the board of ethics and the findings and decision of the board of ethics. As to alleged procedural irregularities, evidence may be taken independently by the court. 
(e)  If the court finds no error, it shall affirm the decision of the board of ethics. If it finds that such decision of the board was: 
(1)  Arbitrary or capricious; 
(2)  A denial of a statutory right; 
(3)  Contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege or immunity; 
(4)  In excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, purposes or limitation; 
(5)  Not in accord with the procedures or procedural limitations of this section or otherwise required by law; 
(6)  An abuse or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion, unsupported by substantial evidence when the record is considered as a whole; or 
(7)  Otherwise contrary to law; 
then the court shall hold such action by the board unlawful and set aside the decision of the board of ethics. 
(f)  The decision of the trial court shall be subject to appellate review in the same manner and with the same effect as in appeals from a final judgment or decree in any other civil action. 
(Ord. of 1-1-95, § 11; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-102. - Procedures for filing a complaint. 
(a)  In order to file a complaint, any city resident and/or duly licensed business owner in the city must do so in writing on the form prescribed by the board of ethics. Paper forms are available at the city clerk's office. The complaint should describe the facts that are alleged to constitute a violation, and be signed and sworn before the city clerk. If the complaint is against the city clerk, the complaint shall be delivered to the assistant clerk who shall be responsible for the actions normally conducted by the city clerk as set forth in this subsection. The city clerk will, no later than three working days after receipt, forward such complaint to the chairperson of the board of ethics or his/her designee. The city clerk will also immediately forward a copy of the complaint by registered mail to the member of the governing authority against whom the complaint was filed. The person filing the complaint shall verify at the time of filing that he/she or it is qualified, i.e. a city resident or duly licensed business owner in the city, to file a complaint. A complaint must be filed within six months of the date the alleged violation is said to have occurred, or in case of concealment or nondisclosure within six months of the date the alleged violation should have been discovered after due diligence. In the event the board of ethics makes an initial determination that a complaint is technically deficient, the board shall submit a list of deficiencies to the complainant and offer the complainant the opportunity to correct the deficiencies within 15 days from when the complainant receives notice of the deficiencies. In the event, six month limitation expires during the 15 day correction period, the complainant shall have the full 15 days to correct any deficiencies; however, in the event, the complaint is not resubmitted with all corrections on or before the fifteenth day, the complainant shall lose the right to file a complaint on that issue. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint, alleging misconduct, the member of the governing authority against whom the complaint was filed may reply to the complaint in writing within 30 days from receipt of said complaint, unless such time for reply is shortened or extended by the board of ethics. Such response should be submitted to the city clerk who in turn shall immediately forward it to the chairperson of the board of ethics or his/her designee. 
(c)  Within 60 days of receipt by the city clerk of a complaint, the board of ethics shall conduct an investigatory review to determine whether specific substantiated evidence from a credible source(s) exists to support a reasonable belief that there has been a violation of this division. If after reviewing the complaint the board of ethics by majority vote determines that no specific, substantiated evidence from a credible source(s) exists to support reasonable belief that there has been a violation of this division or determines that no violation occurred, it may dismiss the complaint. In the event a complaint is dismissed on the basis of a deficiency in the form of the complaint, rather than upon the merits of the complaint, the complaint may be re-filed within 15 days from when the complainant receives notice of the deficiencies. 
(d)  If the board of ethics determines that specific, substantiated evidence from a credible source(s) exists to support a reasonable belief that there has been a violation of this division, certified written notice of a hearing, containing the time, date and place of such hearing, shall be given to each party by the board of ethics, and a formal public hearing shall be conducted and both parties afforded an opportunity to be heard. Any formal public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of due process. The board of ethics is authorized to swear witnesses. Any final determination resulting from the hearing shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law. The board shall determine if clear and convincing evidence shows any violation of this Code. Within seven days of the hearing, findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the mayor and city council for action. 
(e)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to limit or encumber the right of the board of ethics to initiate an investigation on its own cognizance, as it deems necessary to fulfill its obligations under this division. 
(f)  Any city resident and/or duly licensed business owner in the city may file a written request for an advisory opinion by completing an advisory opinion request form and filing it along with any supporting documents with the city clerk. The city clerk will forward the request to the chairperson of the board of ethics or his/her designee no later than three working days after receipt. In the event the chairperson of the board of ethics makes an initial determination that a complaint is technically deficient, the chairperson shall submit a list of deficiencies to the complainant and offer the complainant the opportunity to correct the deficiencies within 15 days from when the complainant receives notice of the deficiencies. The board will make a good faith effort to render any advisory opinion within 60 days from receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 2007-25, 8-6-07; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 2-103. - Reimbursements of legal expenses. 
City funds may be used to reimburse members of the governing authority for reasonable legal expenses incurred in their successful defense of the complaint if the board of ethics determines that the conduct complained of arises out of or was in connection with the performance of the member of the governing authorities official duties and that the member of the governing authority was engaged in the performance of his/her duties at the time the alleged misconduct occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, Exh. A, 12-15-14) 
Secs. 2-104, 2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-106. - Members; officers; terms; quorums; meetings. 
(a)  The Kennesaw Planning Commission, referred to in this division as the planning commission, shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  A chairperson shall be elected by the planning commission at the first meeting of each year. A vice-chairperson shall be elected at the first meeting of each year and shall serve in the absence of the chairperson. 
(c)  Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor and council for a three-year term or to fulfill an unexpired term. All members shall be residents and registered voters of the city. 
(d)  To establish a quorum for the meeting, four members must be present, one of whom may be the chairperson. 
(e)  The meetings of the planning commission shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise stated prior to the meeting. 
(f)  The planning commission shall hear all matters pertaining to zoning and use of land. 
(g)  The planning commission shall act as an advisory board to the council in all matters pertaining to zoning, present or future, and use of land. 
(Code 1986, § 8-5-3; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 5-18-09) 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-08, adopted July 2, 2014, repealed Div. 6, §§ 2-107—2-114, which pertained to recreation and culture commission and derived from Ord. No. 2001-04, §§ 1—8, adopted Feb. 5, 2001; Ord. No. 2007-05, adopted Feb. 5, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, adopted Dec. 3, 2007. 

Secs. 2-107—2-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LICENSE REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 2-115. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a license review board. 
(b)  The license review board established by this section shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To hear due cause hearings as provided in chapter 6 of this Code. 
(2)  To consider and act upon any matters specifically delegated to the license review board by any other city ordinance or resolution or action of the city council. 
(c)  Applicants or licensee shall be given notice of the date, time and place when the license review board will consider the respective matter. 
(d)  The license review board, other than as expressly provided in chapter 6, shall have no authority or jurisdiction to hear, consider or render decisions of any kind with respect to the suspension, revocation, probation or other disciplinary action against a license or licensee. 
(e)  Any decision or recommendation of the license review board may be appealed to the city council pursuant to section 6-63. Any decision or recommendation of the license review board not appealed to the mayor and council must be approved by the city council or set down for a second due cause hearing before the city council. 
(f)  The decision of the city council on an appeal under this article shall be final unless appeal is made to the superior court of the county. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the city council by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the city council. 
(g)  The license review board shall have no jurisdiction or authority to hear any appeal from or to reverse, modify or set aside any decision of the city council. 
(h)  The license review board members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and shall be composed of three members determined as follows: 
(1)  Post 1: Mayor appoints with ratification by majority of city council. 
(2)  Post 2: Mayor appoints with ratification by majority of city council. 
(3)  Post 3: Mayor appoints with ratification by majority of city council. 
(i)  If there is a vacancy in any post on the license review board by virtue of a member resigning from any post or any vacancy by virtue of there being no one filling the office set forth for any post, then the mayor shall appoint a replacement for the vacant post. The replacement shall serve temporarily until the city council ratifies such appointment, and in such case, the replacement for the vacant post shall become permanent. If the council fails to ratify such replacement, then the mayor shall appoint a different replacement until a new member for that post is appointed and ratified as provided herein. 
(j)  Post members I and II shall serve a two-year term. Post member III shall serve for a one-year term. By majority vote, the city council may terminate any term prior to the expiration of such term. Terms of service by any board member shall automatically be renewed for an additional term unless terminated by majority action of the mayor and city council. There shall be no limit on the number of times such terms can be renewed. 
(k)  The license review board shall meet at such times as necessary, to be determined by such board, and shall render decisions in public on the date of the consideration by the board. The decision shall then be memorialized in writing and delivered to the affected parties after such decision is announced in public. 
(l)  The license review board shall select one of its members to serve as chair and one of its members to serve as secretary, to serve at the pleasure of the license review board. Minutes and records of all proceedings shall be kept and maintained in the office of the business license office. 
(m)  Each member of the license review board shall either be a resident of the city or have an ownership interest as principal shareholder, general partner or sole proprietor in at least one business that is located in the city. No employee or elected official of the city shall be appointed to the board. The mayor may appoint and the city council may ratify the appointment of any person who is an alcoholic beverage license holder, provided that only one such license holder, if any, serve on the board. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 6-16-08) 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-116. - Established. 
The following divisions of operation of the city are hereby established pursuant to section 3.01 of the City Charter. 
(1)  General and administrative. 
(2)  Police. 
(3)  Public works. 
(4)  Parks and recreation. 
(5)  Community development. 
(6)  Museum and preservation services. 
(7)  Information technology. 
(8)  911 communications. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-1; Ord. No. 1995-22, § 2, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2000-21, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-29, § 1, 8-4-08) 
Sec. 2-117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-21, adopted Nov. 6, 2001, repealed former § 2-117, which pertained to the museum and preservation services department, and derived from Ord. No. 1995-22, § 1, 9-5-95. 
Sec. 2-118. - Organization of city hall staff. 
The city staff is hereby organized according to the most recently approved city organizational chart. The city organizational chart will be reviewed at least annually, published and approved by resolution as part of the adopted budget. No further amendment by resolution to said organizational chart is necessary unless the total number of authorized positions is increased or decreased by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 1995-14, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 1, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-30, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), 8-4-08; Ord. No. 2016-15, 5-16-16) 
Secs. 2-119—2-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; authority to dispose of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-136. - Purpose; title. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for a system of financial administration, accounting, fiscal and budgetary control which conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 2-137. - Administrative responsibility. 
The responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this article shall be with the mayor, except where the responsibility is explicitly given to the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-2; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrual basis means the basis of accounting under which revenues are recorded when earned or when levies are made, and expenditures are recorded as soon as the result in liabilities, notwithstanding that the receipt of the revenue or payment of the expenditure may take place, in whole or in part, in another accounting period. 
Appropriation means an authorization granted by the legislative body to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
Appropriation balance means an unencumbered balance of appropriation or allotment, and unexpended balance of appropriation or allotment. 
Assets means property of all kinds of a government, including both current assets and fixed assets. 
Audit means the examination of records, documents, reports, systems of internal control, accounting and financial procedures, and other evidence for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To ascertain whether the statements prepared from the accounts present fairly the financial position and the results of financial operations of the constituent funds and balanced account groups of the governmental unit in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units and on a basis consistent with that of the preceding year. 
(2)  To determine the propriety, legality, and mathematical accuracy of a governmental unit's financial transactions. 
(3)  To ascertain whether all financial transactions have been properly recorded. 
(4)  To ascertain the stewardship of public officials who handle and are responsible for the financial resources of a governmental unit. 
Balance sheet means a statement ordinarily prepared from books kept by double entry, showing assets, liabilities, reserves and unrestricted fund balance of a fund of a governmental unit at a specified date properly classified to exhibit financial position of the fund or unit at that date. 
Budget means a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given time and the proposed means of financing them. The annual budget refers to a period of one year. 
Budgetary control means the control of management of a governmental unit in accordance with an approved budget and keeping expenditures within the limitations of available appropriations or revenues. 
Cash basis means the system of accounting under which revenues are accounted for only when received in cash, and expenditures are accounted for only when paid. 
Contingent account means an appropriation to provide for unforeseen expenditures. 
Debit and credit are terms commonly used to indicate the manner in which a transaction is to be recorded. Every entry on the left side of the ledger sheet is called a debit. Every entry on the right side of the ledger sheet is called a credit. 
Debt service means the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on the outstanding debt and the principal of maturing bonded debt not payable from a sinking fund and to provide a fund for the redemption of bonds payable from a sinking fund. 
Delinquent taxes means taxes remaining unpaid on and after the date on which a penalty for nonpayment is attached. Even though the penalty may be subsequently waived and a portion of the taxes may be abated or cancelled, the unpaid balances continue to be delinquent taxes until abated, cancelled, or converted into tax liens. 
Encumbrances means obligations in the form of purchase orders, contracts or salary commitments which are chargeable to an appropriation and for which a part of the appropriation is reserved. 
Fund means a sum of money or other resources, gross or net, set aside for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or to attain certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations. A fund is a distinct financial and legal entity. 
Fund balance means the excess of the current assets of a fund over its current liabilities and reserves. 
Internal audit means an audit made by persons on the staff of the governmental unit whose accounts are being audited primarily for the purpose of internal control. An internal audit is usually a continuous audit. 
Liabilities means debts owed and other obligations of the assets of the city of Kennesaw. 
Millage is a term used to express the property tax rate, derived from the term "mill," which is one-tenth of one cent. Thus, ten mills equal one cent or one percent. Millage is determined by dividing the total amount of money to be raised by the total assessed value of the municipality. 
Taxes receivable means the uncollected portion of taxes which a governmental unit has levied. 
Trust funds means amounts received or appropriated and held in trust in accordance with an agreement or legislative act which may be expended only in accordance with the terms of such trust or act. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-3; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-139. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year shall begin on October 1 and shall end on the 30th day of the following September. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-4; Ord. of 11-4-91(2)) 
Sec. 2-140. - Action by council on budget. 
Before October 31 of the current fiscal year, the council shall adopt an appropriations ordinance based on the city manager's budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable. Appropriations shall be in such detail as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5. The council shall not make any appropriations in excess of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property, or lives, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city; provided, that the council unanimously agrees that there is such an emergency. If conditions prevent the adoption of an appropriations ordinance before October 31 of the current fiscal year, the appropriations for the last fiscal year shall become the appropriations for the new fiscal year, subject to amendment as provided by ordinance specifically passed for such purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-5; Ord. of 11-21-94) 
Sec. 2-141. - Expenditures must be appropriated; when bids required. 
No expenditures in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet that expenditure have been made in the budget or approved by the majority of the council. Purchases in excess of $3,000.00 shall be made on the basis of bids unless such purchase is made through the state under the state contract system, in which event no further bids shall be required. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-6; Ord. of 1-7-91; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-142. - Proposed budget—Public inspection. 
At the time the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the governing authority by the city manager, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk during regular office hours. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-7) 
Sec. 2-143. - Same—Public hearing. 
No later than seven days prior to adoption of the proposed budget, a public hearing shall be held to give the public the opportunity to comment upon the proposed budget. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city no more than 20 days and no less than seven days in advance of the hearing. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-8) 
Sec. 2-144. - Adoption of budget. 
The adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget resolution which specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories; the appropriated expenditures for each department; each nondepartmental expense; and each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget in total shall be approved by resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-9) 
Sec. 2-145. - Increases in appropriations; transfers. 
Any increase in appropriations of a departmental budget or in a non-departmental expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments and non departmental expense, shall require the approval of the mayor and council in the form of an amendment to the budget resolution. At the request of a department head, the city manager with concurrence of the finance officer may transfer appropriations among various accounts within a departmental budget or within a non-departmental budget category with the exception of capital outlay line items. Appropriation changes in capital outlay line items shall require the approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1999-14, 10-18-99) 
Sec. 2-146. - Transfers from certain funds restricted. 
No appropriation transfer shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all the legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-11) 
Sec. 2-147. - Statement of anticipated revenues. 
The city manager shall present the statement of anticipated revenues on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based upon the anticipated tax digest, less a stated discount for delinquent taxes based on a consideration of the taxes which were delinquent at the close of the three prior fiscal years, plus a stated amount of delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, to be collected in the fiscal year based on consideration of the actual experience in the collection of delinquent taxes in the three prior fiscal years. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-12) 
Sec. 2-148. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall revert back to the unrestricted fund balance and shall be available for subsequent fiscal years when approved appropriation exceeds the budgeted revenues of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-13; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-149. - Funds established. 
The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide for the proper accounting of all financial activities of the city: 
(1)  The general fund, to account for the general governmental operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
(2)  Special revenue funds, to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources, other than special assessments, or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
(3)  Debt service funds, to account for the payment of interest and principal on long-term debt other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
(4)  Capital projects funds, to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies including bond funds used for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
(5)  Enterprise (utility) funds, to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
(6)  Trust and agency funds, to account for assets held by a governmental unit as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations, and other governmental units. 
(7)  Intergovernmental service funds, to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organizational unit within a governmental jurisdiction for other organizational units within the same governmental jurisdiction. 
(8)  Special assessment funds, to account for special assessments levied to finance public improvements or services deemed to benefit the properties against which the assessments are levied. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-14) 
Sec. 2-150. - Accounts established. 
(a)  A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. 
(b)  In addition to the accounts established in subsection (a) of this section, the following accounts shall be maintained: 
(1)  A fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which are of a tangible nature, have a life longer than one fiscal year, and have a value greater than $5,000.00. Fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. 
(2)  A general long-term debt account for the purpose of accounting for long-term debt which is supported by general revenues and for recording and fairly representing the liability for long-term debt and any time from the date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-15; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-151. - Accounting method. 
To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on long-term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-16) 
Sec. 2-152. - Financial statements and reports. 
Financial statements and reports showing the current condition of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the mayor and council at least every 30 days. Not later than 180 days after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared and published. A summary of the report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, will be made available by electronic copy on the city website and copies will be made available at the city clerk's and city finance director's office. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-17; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-153. - Annual independent audit. 
All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the city shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the mayor and council. The audit shall be conducted according to the standards set forth in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountant's publication, Audits of State and Local Governmental Units. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-18) 
Sec. 2-154. - Dual signature requirements. 
(a)  All documents of the city requiring execution, including but not limited to checks, drafts and money orders, shall bear the signature of two officers, one of whom shall be the mayor, or in his/her absence, the mayor pro tem, or an alternate designated by the mayor and city council. The second signature shall be that of the city clerk, the assistant city clerk, or the city manager. 
(b)  Those officers described in subsection (a) of this section, and only those officers, are authorized to execute all documents and perform all acts in the execution and signing of checks, drafts, money orders, etc. This requirement is waived in the case of payroll checks if the city has contracted with an outside vendor for the processing and production of payroll checks. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-19; Ord. of 2-3-97; Ord. No. 2001-17, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 2003-36, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-155. - Purchases and expenditures, procedure. 
(a)  Non-budgeted purchases. 
(1)  The city council fully understands and identifies that every event cannot be foreseen, but the city council also understands that the budget is the basis for the city's financial actions for each respective fiscal year. As such, non-budgeted purchases must be kept at a bare minimum, and must need to undergo the closest scrutiny to determine how necessary each non-budgeted purchase may be. 
(2)  When a department head determines the necessity to purchase a non-budgeted operating or capital item s/he must justify this need to the city manager. If the purchase is deemed necessary, the budget will be amended or adjusted as set forth in section 2-145 to accommodate the non-budgeted purchase. 
(3)  The city manager shall notify mayor and council of any non-budgeted capital purchases s/he has authorized in excess of $5,000.00 at a regular meeting and shall obtain formal ratification of this action through a budget amendment from mayor and council. 
(b)  Budgeted purchases. 
(1)  The city hereby establishes a centralized purchasing system where all city purchases will be coordinated by the city manager's office subject to the regulations outlined herein. 
(2)  The city manager shall be responsible for implementing and enforcing all purchasing rules and regulations and will maintain and distribute to all eligible vendors purchasing rules and regulations as may be written specifically for those vendors. 
(3)  The city manager shall establish internal procedures for review of all proposed expenditures to be known as the encumbrance process. The encumbrance process shall have the effect of reserving city funds to cover authorized purchases made within approved appropriations levels based on a modified accrual basis of accounting. 
(c)  The encumbrance process. 
(1)  It shall be the policy of the city that all purchasing be done in a competitive environment with qualified vendors being given a reasonable opportunity to do business with the city. 
(2)  In order to initiate a purchase, an employee must complete the city requisition form, sign it and forward it to their department head for approval. The completed requisition form must have the cost of each product or item noted on the form. If approved, the department head or designee shall sign the requisition form, identify and indicate the accounting code (budgeted line item) for this expense and forward it to the city manager's office for processing. If the actual cost of the purchase is lower than that indicated, the correction will be made to the original purchase order by the finance division. Purchases over $3,000.00 shall require the specific approval of the city manager. 
(3)  A purchase order shall be initiated; thus encumbering the specific line item appropriation to be charged with the transaction. In the event there are insufficient funds left within the cited accounting code (budgeted line item), the purchase order shall not be issued and the requisition form shall be returned to the respective department head. 
(4)  In the event the cited accounting code (budgeted line item) does not have sufficient funds in it to allow the proposed purchase, the department head may either: (1) decide not to purchase the item until the next fiscal year, or (2) request that the city manager adjust the departmental budget, or (3) make the appropriate budget amendment as allowed under section 2-145. Resubmitting the requisition form with a different accounting code is not permitted. In order to maintain an accurate incremental budget process, purchases should be made against the appropriate accounting code, thus accurately identifying where reductions and increases in specific line items are warranted for future budget years. 
(d)  Purchase orders. 
(1)  All purchases require department head or designee approval. 
(2)  Budgeted purchases of less than $150.00 shall not require a purchase order. However, such purchases shall be documented with proper evidence (ticket, invoice, receipt) and with specific approval of the purchase by the applicable department head. Said approval will also reflect assignment of the purchase to the appropriate departmental budget line item number. The invoice will be forwarded to the finance division for payment. Purchases made under this category are to be made on a competitive basis unless the city has an established purchasing contract with the applicable vendor. 
(3)  All budgeted purchases over $150.00 shall be accompanied by a purchase order. The purchase order must include a P.O. number, the name of the vendor, the name or a description of the item or service being purchased, and the actual or estimated cost of the item or service. Purchase orders for purchases less than $3,000.00 shall be made as field purchase orders within the department. (A field purchase order is one that is issued by an operating department and does not require executive review and approval.) Copies of field purchase orders must be forwarded to the finance division promptly after issuance for encumbrance purposes. Purchase orders for over $3,000.00 shall be obtained from the city manager's office after the purchase has been approved in the process described above. 
(4)  The finance department shall reject payment of any purchase over $150.00 that does not include an authorized purchase order that exceeds budgetary limitations, or is not authorized by the budget. Exceptions to this rule are routine purchases such as city's utility payments, professional services rendered, or other purchases which may be of a like nature not otherwise limited herein. 
(5)  Bonafide emergencies as set forth in wording under subsection (f)(1) shall be an exception to the encumbrance process. 
(e)  Criteria for purchases and bids. 
(1)  The following requirements for purchases and bidding shall be in effect. 
Purchases less than $3,000.00. Purchases less than $3,000.00 shall be authorized by the respective department heads who are required to document in writing their efforts to obtain at least three written quotes or bids for each purchase. Documentation of competitive pricing based on common specifications will be attached to the requisition and all associated paperwork, including the invoice. 
Purchases between $3,000.00 and $24,999.00. The department head, together with the city manager, shall authorize purchases between $3,000.00 and $24,999.00. All such purchases shall require informal (non-advertised, non-sealed) bids. Supporting bid documentation must be in written form and attached to purchase order. A minimum of three bids must be obtained from qualified vendors who regularly offer or carry the items or services to be purchased. 
Purchases over $25,000.00. Any purchase in excess of $25,000.00 shall be approved/awarded by the mayor and city council in a regular or special meeting, unless it is made under a Cobb County, state, federal G.S.A. negotiated contract purchasing system, or pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-69A-4, as may be amended from time to time. Such purchases shall require formal competitive sealed bids, which shall be advertised in the Georgia Procurement Registry pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-80-26, and as may be amended from time to time. However, any public works construction contract governed by O.C.G.A. 36-91-22 shall be advertised both in the Georgia Procurement Registry as prescribed by O.C.G.A. 36-80-26, and as may be amended from time to time, and be advertised in the county organ (presently, the Marietta Daily Journal) at least one time no less than one week prior to the date and the time of public bid opening, in accordance with state law. In addition, the city shall make other reasonable efforts to make qualified vendors aware of the purchasing opportunity, including direct notification of potential vendors in the Kennesaw area. Purchases in this category must be based on standard specifications that allow maximum competition among qualified vendors whose products or services meet established performance requirements. 
(2)  It is the policy of the city that any purchase greater than $25,000.00 that binds the city by contract shall be approved/awarded by the mayor and council in a regular or special called meeting. 
(3)  Additionally, following advertisement and time for bids, no item shall be determined a sole source purchase without the approval of the city manager. In this case, there must be full documentation of the lack of a competitive market submitted to the city manager and/or mayor and city council, as applicable. 
(4)  It is the policy of the city that the above purchasing limitations and authority guidelines be followed in all circumstances. Under no circumstances should purchases be split or divided to avoid established bid limits. 
(5)  Upon not receiving any sealed bids following two lawfully advertised bids, and following approval by the mayor and council, the city manager shall be authorized without additional advertisement to seek and obtain sealed competitive bids from at least three vendors who commonly deal in such supplies, materials, equipment or vehicles. No purchase in excess of $25,000.00 shall be authorized to be purchased in this method. Further, this policy shall not be applicable to public works projects, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1, et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
(6)  No contract shall be awarded to a bidder that is delinquent on any taxes, permit or license fees owed to the city; is in arrears on an existing contract with the city; or has failed to satisfy all liens against the bidder's property executed by the city. 
(f)  Emergency purchases. 
(1)  A bonafide emergency is a situation, which arises where it would seriously jeopardize the safety, health and welfare of the departmental mission or where it would otherwise adversely affect the work of the department to utilize normal purchases channels. The department head and/or city manager will determine the existence of an emergency situation or condition. Department heads will not use the emergency purchase procedure to abuse or otherwise purposely circumvent the established purchasing procedures. 
(2)  Procedure: Purchase of goods, supplies and materials is consummated and receipt obtained. A confirmation letter from the department head explaining the nature of the emergency is prepared, with receipt and/or other necessary paperwork attached and forwarded to the city manager the next working day. The city manager shall report the emergency purchases to the mayor and members of the city council no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(g)  Local vendor preference policy. 
(1)  Because bids awarded to local vendors contribute to the City of Kennesaw tax base and promote the local economy, the City of Kennesaw mayor and council have determined that, under certain circumstances, such local vendors shall be given preference when bidding against non-local vendors. A local vendor shall be defined as a vendor maintaining a physical presence within the city limits of the City of Kennesaw, including but not limited to the maintenance of one or more offices within the city limits and the continuous employment of not fewer than two persons at such office(s) for more than six months prior to the submission of a bid. The mere maintenance of a post office box within the City of Kennesaw shall not qualify a vendor to be local for purposes of this policy. 
(2)  For purchases or contracts under $100,000.00 where a local vendor's bid meets all specifications and is within five percent of the lowest responsive and responsible non-local bidder, the city is authorized to negotiate with the local vendor(s) to match the lowest bid submitted by a non-local vendor. The lowest bidding local vendor shall be given one business day from the opening of such bids in which to notify the city manager or designee that it agrees to match the low bid submitted by any non-local vendor. If such local vendor shall not agree to match the low bid, then the next lowest local vendor within five percent, if any, shall be given one business day therefrom to notify the city manager or designee that it agrees to match the low bid submitted by any non-local vendor, and so on until all local vendors have had an opportunity to match the low bid. 
(3)  To be eligible for consideration under this policy, bids submitted by local vendors must meet all other terms, quality, and conditions of the bid. Such preference shall not sacrifice quality. 
(4)  This preference shall not apply to road construction or public works projects otherwise governed by Georgia Law or to the purchase of any other goods and/or services for which preference is prohibited by Georgia Law. 
(5)  The local vendor preference policy shall be stated in all applicable solicitations for bids. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-20; Ord. of 8-1-88; Ord. of 1-7-91; Ord. No. 1998-04, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 5-7-01; Ord. No. 2001-19, 8-20-01; Ord. No. 2007-33, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 6-20-16; Ord. No. 2018-19, 8-6-18) 
Editor's note— The city manager clarified certain aspects of the city's purchasing policies in a memorandum dated January 18, 1995, entitled "Formal Review of City Spending Limits." An official copy of the subject memorandum is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-156—2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Building code, § 18-16 et seq.; mechanical code, § 18-45.1 et seq.; plumbing code, § 18-45.2 et seq.; gas code, § 18-45.3 et seq.; housing code, § 18-45.4 et seq.; one and two family dwelling code, § 18-45.6 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 46-61 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 80; unified development code, app. A; flood damage protection, appendix A, ch. 3. 

Sec. 2-181. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-2 and 36-13-5 provide for the appointment of such official inspectors and enforcement personnel as the governing authority deems necessary to enforce applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the governing authority, including building, construction, mobile homes, historic preservation commission, solid waste disposal, tree preservation, sediment control, water and wastewater, signs, house moving, flea market, and the zoning and planning ordinance of the city, referred to in this article as the Code. 
(b)  It is hereby declared by the governing authority of the city that the efficient enforcement of the Code and the zoning and planning ordinances of the city are best served through cross-utilization of city personnel for purposes of inspecting and enforcing certain codes and ordinances of the city. The city finds that the formation of a code enforcement division serves the economic interest of the city by maximum use of personnel. 
(Code 1986, § 8-7-1) 
Sec. 2-182. - Enforcement division. 
The city does hereby establish a code enforcement division to perform the following functions in connection with the inspection and enforcement of codes and ordinances as set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 8-7-2) 
Sec. 2-183. - Referral of matters. 
The city manager may name a city code enforcement officer in addition to the building inspectors to enforce the codes named in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 8-7-3; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-184. - Scope of duties. 
(a)  Inspection. 
(1)  The code enforcement division shall enter or inspect any building, land, structure, or premises in the city for the purpose of inspection of the building, structure, land, premises and all utility connections associated therewith for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of all codes and ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Efforts shall be made to conduct inspections during normal business hours, if practicable or unless, in the discretion of the code enforcement officer, an emergency is deemed to exist. 
(3)  All code enforcement division personnel shall present themselves, if necessary, to gain entrance or access to the property, at the front door or entrance in order to identify themselves prior to accessing the premises. The code enforcement division personnel shall present official identification as defined in section 2-185 upon reasonable request. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Upon ascertaining, being advised by another department or citizen, or believing that a violation of any code or ordinance exists, the code enforcement division shall cause a written citation to be directed to the owner of the property or such other appropriate representative, unless in the opinion of the code enforcement officer an emergency is deemed to exist. 
(2)  The citation shall state the following: 
a.  The owner or controller of the property. 
b.  The location (including district, land lot and parcel). 
c.  Nature of the violation and penalties, if applicable. 
d.  A provision for rectifying the violation without further proceedings. 
e.  A time frame for compliance. 
f.  A date for reinspection for compliance or mechanism for rescheduling an inspection, as applicable. 
(3)  Following the expiration of the time set forth in the notice, the code enforcement division shall cause a reinspection to be performed. 
(4)  If the violation has not been remedied, the code enforcement division shall handle, or if applicable refer these matters to the city police department for handling, in accordance with the provision for enforcement under the applicable code section or ordinance. 
(5)  If the code enforcement officer believes that an emergency is deemed to exist such that imminent harm or peril to life or property is likely, then the code enforcement officer shall be authorized to take immediate action, or if applicable immediately refer these matters to the city police department for immediate action, without notice to the owner as set forth under the applicable code section or ordinance. 
(6)  In any matter where a court order was previously rendered involving a similar subject matter, the code enforcement officer shall refer the matter to the city attorney. 
(Code 1986, § 8-7-4; Ord. No. 2001-36, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-185. - Official identification. 
The city, by this action, hereby adopts and authorizes the code enforcement division to be identified by a badge which shall clearly state on the front thereof the following: "code enforcement division," and this shall be carried on the person of the officer. Identification shall also include a clear designation of the individual as an investigator with the code enforcement division through city issued shirts and uniform. 
(Code 1986, § 8-7-5; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 2-186. - Applicability to Code and ordinances. 
This article shall be applicable to the following sections of the Code and the zoning and planning ordinances of the city, as amended, from time to time: 
(1)  Building code, 18-16 et seq. 
(2)  Mechanical code, 18-45.1 et seq. 
(3)  Plumbing code, 18-45.2 et seq. 
(4)  Gas code, 18-45.2 et seq. 
(5)  Housing code, 18-45 et seq. 
(6)  One- and two-family dwelling code, 18-45.6 et seq. 
(7)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control, 46-61 et seq. 
(8)  Subdivisions, chapter 80. 
(9)  Zoning, appendix A. 
(10)  Flood damage prevention code, appendix A, art. XIV. 
(11)  Nuisances, 46-31 et seq. 
(Code 1986, § 8-7-6; Ord. No. 2001-37, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 2007-36, Exh. A, 12-3-07) 
Secs. 2-187—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-201. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-1), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-202. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-2), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-203. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply 2 : 
City means the City of Kennesaw. 
Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information, drivers' license information, and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-3), 11-3-08) 
Note— 2 Other than "city" and "personal identifying information", definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2. 
Sec. 2-204. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include, but are not limited to, municipal sanitation collection fees, license fees, municipal court fines or any other account for which payment is made after the product is consumed or the service has otherwise been provided. 
(c)  The city would like to reduce the likelihood and possibly eliminate the instances of identity theft related to covered accounts. 
(d)  Including but not limited to, the following have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft can occur: The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, closing such accounts, transferring such accounts due to change of residence by consumer. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a moderate risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-4), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-205. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer in the form of: a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a valid government issued identification card and photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the city for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-5), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-206. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of information technology on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-6), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-207. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-7), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-208. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing addresses, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments. 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-8), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-209. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city's finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city's finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city's finance director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city attorney: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
i.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
ii.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city's finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city's finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city's finance director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city attorney: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-9), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-210. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-10), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-211. - Program administration. 
The city's finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city's finance director will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city's finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city's finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-11), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-212. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city's finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 1(VIII-12), 11-3-08) 
Secs. 2-213—2-242. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 2-243. - Short title. 
Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 2(VIII-13), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-244. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 2(VIII-14), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-245. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Kennesaw. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 3 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 2(VIII-15), 11-3-08) 
Note— 3 See 16 CFR § 681.1(b). 
Sec. 2-246. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 2(VIII-16), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-247. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 2(VIII-17), 11-3-08) 
Sec. 2-248. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-37, § 2(VIII-18), 11-3-08) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-18, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 19, 2008, updated and amended the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-5, 6-31—6-71, 6-86—6-109, 6-131, 6-132 and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. Formerly, Ord. No. 2000-02, adopted Feb. 21, 2000, amended in its entirety the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-132, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1986, §§ 3-2-21(9), 9-1-1—9-1-8, 9-1-21—9-1-53, and 9-1-61—9-1-81; and Ord. of 12-18-89; Ord. No. 95-9, § 9-8-3(m), 3-20-95; Ord. No. 95-10, §§ 9-1-9, 9-1-10, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 1997-06, 3-17-97. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2002-31, § 1, adopted Aug. 5, 2002, amended in its entirety the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-132, as amended by Ord. No. 2000-02. 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; offenses, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 82; unified development code, app. A. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual who does not have an ownership interest in the licensed premise, who meets the requirements of section 6-40 of this chapter, who is employed in a managing capacity and designated by the owner of the licensed premise to be licensee. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverage, hard cider, wine or fortified wine. 
Amusement park means a place owned and operated permanently and exclusively for the purpose of providing amusement, attraction, and entertainment to the general public through the means of rides, live entertainment and games either on a seasonal or year round basis, which park has at least 25 rides and 50 games or attractions and the area of the amusement park is comprised of at least 80 acres exclusive of parking. 
Applicant means the person making application for a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages and, if applicable, any individual designated by that person to be licensee. 
Bar means any premises at which a retailer licensed pursuant to this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages derives 75 percent or more total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. A licensee of a bar shall obtain and keep in force and affect a food service permit. 
Barrel means 53 gallons for purposes of distilled spirits. 
Barrel means 31 gallons for purposes of malt beverages. 
Bottle house means any place of business open to the public or any private club providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business that allows guest, patrons or members to bring in and to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation of not more than 10,000 barrels of malt beverages manufactured on the licensed premises in any calendar year solely for retail sale. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment that is licensed to sell distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, or wine and that derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more of the linear feet of that street length is in use for business purposes. 
Business license manager or supervisor means the individual employed by the City of Kennesaw who handles alcoholic beverage licenses, as such position presently exists, or by whatever name the position may be designated in the future. 
Case means a box or receptacle containing not more than 288 ounces of malt beverages on the average. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church. 
City means the City of Kennesaw. 
Closed function means an event not open to the general public that must have a written, limited guest list prepared at least 48 hours in advance of the date on which the closed function is to occur, and which occurs on property owned and maintained by the city. No pay-at-the-door guest or drop-ins are to be permitted. Alcoholic beverages may be served without charge and consumed at closed functions, but the offer and sale of alcoholic beverages at such functions is prohibited; except that a general admission fee permitting attendance at the closed function may be collected in advance. 
College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state, and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Convenience store means a retail establishment whose primary business is the sale of pre-packaged or unprepared food and grocery items and which may also sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and other goods commonly associated with the same. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly referred to as the State of Georgia First Offender Act, being O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, or as may be amended from time to time. 
Craft beer means an alcoholic beverage brewed by an independent brewer that is obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, mead, beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Denatured alcohol or denatured distilled spirits means alcohol, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, to which denaturants have been added in order to render the alcohol unfit for beverage purposes or internal human medicinal use. As used in connection with brewpub sales, infra, the term "denaturants" means materials authorized for use pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and as the same may now or hereafter be amended. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Distiller means a manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
Distance means the measurement in linear feet from the center of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal for the proposed premises of a licensee in a direct line to the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal of the applicable structure at issue under sections 6-42 and 6-43 of this chapter. A radius shall be measured from the center of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal of the proposed premises of any licensee. Should the proposed premises contain two or more primary entrances, the distance shall be the shortest measurement in linear feet from the center of any of the primary entrances as designated by the fire marshal to the primary entrance of the applicable structure at issue. 
Drink means any spirituous liquor not in its original package served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Farm winery means a domestic manufacturer of wine in quantities of less than 100,000 gallons of wine per calendar year, that is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, or as may be amended from time to time. Provided a license is issued as required by this chapter, a farm winery is authorized to sell wine by the package, by the drink and operate a wine tasting facility on the premises of the farm winery without additional license requirements, except as is required by state or federal law. For purposes of this section, the tasting room shall be limited to a single room. Licensed premises means the premises for which the farm winery license is issued or property located contiguous to the farm winery and owned by the winery. 
Food caterer means any person whose primary business is the preparation of food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wine means an alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. The term does not include hard cider. 
Fruit grower means any person who grows peaches, apples, pears, grapes or other perishable fruits in this state and who manufactures distilled spirits from the perishable fruits grown in this state. 
Good cause for discontinuing operations shall mean the licensee discontinued operations for a period of more than three months as a direct result of reasons beyond his or her control such as: an Act of God; civil disobedience of someone other than the licensee; delays caused by a governmental entity; fire; flood; material shortages; a natural disaster; a riot; strikes; and/or war. 
Good cause for failure to open shall mean the licensee was unable to open the business within the allotted time for reasons beyond his or her control such as delays caused by: an Act of God; a construction delay; civil disobedience of someone other than the licensee; delays caused by a governmental entity; fire; flood; material shortages; a natural disaster; a riot; strikes; and/or war. 
Grocery store means a retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
Growler means a container capable of being properly sanitized and which has a capacity that does not to exceed 64 fluid ounces. 
Growler shop means any establishment selling only malt beverages, craft beer, wine and/or hard cider and holding either a package license or a package/pouring license that allows for both package sales of malt beverages, craft beer and/or hard cider and limited consumption of malt beverages, craft beer, wine and/or hard cider on the premises, pursuant to section 6-111 of this Code. Growler shops shall not be required to have more than one entrance to the establishment in order to hold a pouring/package license and shall not be required to serve or sell food in addition to the service or sales of alcohol. 
Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage that contains at least one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume which is made by the fermentation of the natural juice of apples or pears. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 40 people, where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a bar, lounge, restaurant or nightclub on their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel. 
Indoor entertainment hall means a publicly or privately owned commercial establishment that satisfies all of the following requirements: (i) provides, professional, live musical entertainment or concerts, performed on-site indoors, at least three nights a week on average over the course of a calendar year; (ii) regularly serves prepared food, with a full service kitchen, consisting of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments; (iii) is prepared to serve food every hour it is open; (iv) derives at least 25 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional, or operational activities; (v) does not provide any sexually related adult entertainment at any time; (vi) has at least 40,000 square feet of enclosed heated space; (vii) has an occupant capacity of at least 3,500; (viii) is located on a major thoroughfare; (ix) does not provide the sale of alcohol on Sundays, unless such establishment qualifies for Sunday sales under state law and the provisions of this chapter of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinances; and, (x) does not allow the admission of any natural person who is under the age of 21 years of age during hours when alcohol is served, except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-90 of this chapter. Indoor entertainment halls shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages through concession sales. 
License means the authorization by the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages either by the package or consumption on the premises. 
License review board means the board created under section 2-115 of these ordinances of the City of Kennesaw. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room in which alcoholic beverages are sold, connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel as defined in this section with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 50 people. A lounge, as defined in this section, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant, shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, mead, beer, craft beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "beer" and "malt beverage" are interchangeable throughout this chapter. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Managing capacity means the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or the managing member of a limited liability company, or the general partner of a limited partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, or who is authorized to act on behalf of the licensee in any capacity at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operation, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed, whether or not such person is an employee of the licensee. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means any natural person less than 18 years of age. 
Nightclub means an establishment having a seating capacity of at least 100 people with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view, deriving its primary income from the sales of alcoholic beverages, and providing to its patrons a band and/or other professional live entertainment performed onsite, including, but not limited to, music, comedy, readings, dancing or acting. All nightclubs shall be equipped with air conditioning and shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from the requirement of maintaining a kitchen in connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and spirituous liquors shall be incidental thereto. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Package store means a business establishment whose primary business activity is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
Permit holder means that person authorized with a server permit and designated by the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at the licensed premise. 
Person means any individual, sole proprietor, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, general partnership or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether public, private or quasi-public. In the case of a general partnership, it includes all partners. In the case of a limited partnership, it includes the general partner. In the case of a corporation, it includes all principal shareholders. In the case of a limited liability company, it includes all members who are deemed to be principal shareholders under the definition of that term contained in this section. 
Pouring license means a license that authorizes on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Principal shareholder means a person who owns any shares of a corporation with less than 35 shareholders; or, if the corporation has more than 35 shareholders, a person who owns more than five percent of the shares of the corporation, except that a person who owns shares which are publicly traded shall not be deemed to be a principal shareholder or to have a beneficial interest in the corporation based solely on the fact of stock ownership. Principal shareholder shall also include a person who owns any membership interests in a limited liability company with less than 35 members; or, if the limited liability company has more than 35 members, a person who owns more than five percent of the outstanding membership interests in the limited liability company. 
Private club means a non-profit association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city, which has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued under this chapter; and which complies with all requirements set forth in this section: it has at least 75 members who regularly pay monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues; and, it is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profit purposes; and, no part of its net earnings inure to the benefit of any shareholders or members; and, it owns, hires or leases a building or space therein for the reasonable use to its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and, it maintains and uses a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guest; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid or receives, directly or indirectly, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meetings or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private party function means an event held by an amusement park where alcoholic beverages are provided. The licensee must submit to and have the private party function approved by the supervisor of the city's business license office provided such function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public. In the event the private party function is not approved by the business license supervisor, the licensee may appeal said decision to the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw. The mayor and city council shall have authority to approve the private party function provided the function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, a boardinghouse or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application for license, or any residence that shall be a nonconforming use in a commercial zone. 
Properly sanitized means the container was: sanitized per the instructions of Star San sanitizer or any product that is the equivalent of Star San sanitizer; or, placed in an oven at a temperature of 340 degrees or higher for at least 60 minutes; or, washed in an automatic dishwasher for a full wash and heat dry cycle with or without the addition of detergent agents; or, sanitized in conformance with the sanitation requirements for glassware used in restaurants as set forth in the rules or regulations of the Cobb County Health Department. 
Pub means any premises at which a retailer licensed pursuant to this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages derives between 50 percent and 75 percent of its total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. A licensee of a pub shall obtain and keep in force and affect a food service permit. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee or his agent to the purchases, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any spirituous liquor by the drink. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, such place seating a minimum of 50 or more people, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. A restaurant shall maintain a full-service kitchen which consists of, at a minimum, a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed and a refrigerator. A restaurant serves meals every hour that they are open and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits, beer and/or wine to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. In order to be classified as a restaurant under this chapter, the licensee must derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales, over any 12-month period of time, from the sale of prepared meals or food. In the case of an audit, the relevant time period shall be the 12 months immediately preceding the commencement of the audit. If the restaurant being audited has been in operation as a restaurant for less than 12 months, the audit period shall be the period of time the entity has operated as a restaurant, and the restaurant must derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales for that audit period from the sale of prepared meals or food. If the restaurant previously operated as another type of business, e.g., a bar as that term is defined in this section, total annual gross food and beverage sales for the time period it has been operated as a restaurant shall be the only data relevant to the audit and the data for the period it operate as another type of business shall not be examined during the audit. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. Such term shall also include, without limitation, the sale to any member of the public of any ticket or license, or the charging of any cover charge or fee, for admission to any event or premises where alcoholic beverages are available without further charge, as well as the sale of any ticket, stamp, token or similar item which may be redeemed or exchanged for alcoholic beverages. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, or as may be amended from time to time, including any public or private location that teaches the Georgia Pre-Kindergarten Program and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not include residences where home study programs are located. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relations, or excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism or zooerasty; or 
(2)  Cleary depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
Spirituous or alcoholic liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
Tasting room means a licensed premises (defined as the premises for which the farm winery license is issued or property located contiguous to the farm winery and owned by the winery) being a single room within a farm winery where farm products are manufactured or distilled spirits are available for sample or sales as may be limited as prescribed by this chapter, state or federal law, as may be applicable and as amended from time to time. 
Underage person means any person below the age at which alcoholic beverages may be legally purchased in the State of Georgia, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, or as may be amended from time to time. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of any alcoholic beverages as defined in this section. 
Wine means an alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. The term does not include hard cider. 
Wine specialty shop means a retail establishment which has both package sales of wine and limited consumption on the premises of wine or draft beers, under the conditions set forth in section 6-114 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 1, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 2012-10, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2016-10, 4-4-16; Ord. No. 2016-18, § 1, 8-15-16; Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 2016-33, 11-17-16; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values, and to protect against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages in one family or to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall have the authority to conduct an audit of the books and records of any licensee and/or require regular reporting of the books and records of the any licensee to assure licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In such event, the city shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit or reporting requirements. In conducting such audit, the city may require the licensee to provide the books and records in electronic form if such books or records are maintained, in the regular course of business by the licensee, in electronic form. 
(c)  Some of the business operations described in this chapter must, to continue operating as that type of business, maintain: 
(1)  In the case of an indoor entertainment hall, 25 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional, or operational activities. 
(2)  In the case of a grocery store, the sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
(3)  In the case of a restaurant, the licensee must derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales, over any 12-month period of time, from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(d)  In determining whether these entities have complied with these percentages, the City of Kennesaw shall be entitled to audit the books and records of the entities. The following shall be applicable to such audits: 
(1)  If the business has operated as that type of entity (e.g., a restaurant) for 12 months or more prior to the date on which the audit is commenced, the auditor shall consider the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the 12 months preceding the date on which the audit is commenced to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. 
(2)  If the business has operated as that type of entity for less than 12 months prior to the date on which the audit is commenced, the auditor shall consider the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the time that the business has operated as that type of entity to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. 
(3)  If the entity operated as one type of entity, e.g., a bar as defined in this chapter, and changed to another type of entity, e.g., a restaurant as defined in this chapter, the audit shall consider only the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the period it operated after the change of the type of entity to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. 
(4)  If the entity has failed to maintain the percentage required by the definition, the entity shall be placed on probation for a period of three months from and after the date the entity is notified of its failure to maintain the required percentage. The notification placing the entity on probation shall be in writing and provide the percentages determined as part of the audit. During that probationary time period, the entity can attempt to attain the percentage required by the definition for that entity. At the end of the probationary period, a second audit will be conducted. The second audit will audit only the annual gross food and beverage sales, or annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the probationary period and whether the entity attained the percentage required by the definition for that entity during the probationary period. Should the entity fail to attain the required percentage during the second audit, the entity will be informed, in writing, that it can no longer operate as that type of entity, e.g., a restaurant that fails to maintain the percentage required by the definition for that entity will be notified that it can no longer operate as a restaurant and may operate only as a bar. Should the licensee change its entity, for instance from a restaurant to a bar, it shall be the licensee's responsibility to assure that it complies with all the requirements of these ordinances of the City of Kennesaw, including, but not limited to, any licensing applicable to that entity. 
(5)  The entity may appeal the audit decision generated by a failure to meet the required percentage during the second audit. Any such decision to appeal must be made, in writing, and filed with the City of Kennesaw no later than ten calendar days from and after the entity's receipt of the decision appealed. If the results of the second audit are mailed by the auditor to the licensee, that decision of the auditor is deemed received by the licensee three days from and after the decision is mailed. The notice of appeal shall be filed with license review board and an additional copy filed with the city clerk. That notice of appeal must specify, in detail, why the entity believes the audit decisions are flawed. It shall be within the discretion of the license review board whether a hearing will be held on the appeal. If a hearing is scheduled by the license review board, the entity shall be provided written notice of such hearing no less than five calendar days prior to the date scheduled for the hearing. If the license review board upholds the auditor's decision, the entity shall have the right to appeal to the city council and mayor of the City of Kennesaw. Any such appeal to the city council and mayor of the City of Kennesaw must be in writing and filed with the city clerk and the mayor's office no later than ten calendar days from and after date on which the entity receives the decision of the license review board. If the decision of the license review board is mailed, that decision is deemed received by the licensee three days from and after the decision is mailed. The appeal to the mayor and the city council shall contain the following: a detailed explanation of why the entity believes the audit results and the decision of the license review board is flawed; statistics showing the entity has complied with the percentage contained in the definition for that entity found in this chapter; a copy of the results of the first and second audits; and, a copy of the decision of the license review board. Failure of the entity to submit all of the appeal documents shall be fatal to the appeal. It shall be within the discretion of the mayor and city council whether a hearing will be held on the appeal. If a hearing is scheduled by the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw, the entity shall be provided written notice of such hearing no less than five calendar days prior to the date scheduled for the hearing. 
(6)  The appeals shall consider only evidence of sales during the audit periods and shall not consider evidence of any sales during the appeal periods. 
(7)  The entity shall be allowed to operate during the time it is appealing the decision of the audit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 2, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 6-4. - Territorial application of chapter. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply only within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale, possession, or consumption. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person on or in any public park or public property except as otherwise approved pursuant to section 6-71 or section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11) 
Secs. 6-6—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-31. - License required for manufacture, sale. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured or sold at wholesale or retail, in the original package or by the drink, nor shall any bottle house be operated except under a license granted by the mayor and city council. A farm winery is required to obtain a license as provided in this chapter for the manufacture of wine, fortified wine, or hard cider. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12) 
State Law reference— Local permit or license for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-32. - Separate licenses required for package sales and sales for on-premises consumption. 
(a)  A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises shall have the right to serve malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider or allow the consumption of malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider on the premises during the same hours as are permitted under this chapter for the serving of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(b)  Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink that allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises and the sale of malt beverages by the drink shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package. Such licensees shall have the right to sell wine, fortified wine, champagne, or malt beverages to the public by the bottle or package for consumption on the premises without the issuance of a separate retail license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12) 
State Law reference— Governing authority to set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b)(1). 
Sec. 6-33. - Sunday permits. 
(a)  A separate permit is required for the Sunday sale of any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Licensed establishments that derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and licensed establishments that derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging may apply to the business license division manager for a permit for the propose of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sunday from 11:00 a.m. until Monday at 2:55 a.m. No Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made by such an establishment without first having obtained the permit provided for in this subsection. A charge of $550.00 shall be made for issuance of such permit. 
(c)  Licensed establishments that have a package license for the sale of distilled spirits may apply to the business license division manager for a permit for the purpose of selling such distilled spirits on Sundays. Licensed establishments that have a package license for the sale of malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider may apply to the business license division manager for a permit for the purpose of selling such malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider. Sunday sales of such alcoholic beverages shall be limited to between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., Sundays. No such Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made by an establishment holding a package license without first having obtained the appropriate permit provided for in this subsection. A charge of $300.00 shall be made for the issuance of each such permit to any licensee holding a package license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2011-30, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2018-28, 12-3-18) 
Sec. 6-34. - Application—Filing; form; contents; timing. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this chapter shall make written application to the city at the city hall for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Such applications shall state the name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is other than an individual, the application shall state the owner of the license, the name of the proposed licensee and a d/b/a name of the proposed licensed premise, if applicable. The application shall state the address where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and principal shareholders; and such other information as may be required by the mayor and city council, the business license division manager, or the police department, and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(b)  All applications for a license under this chapter shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the city, through any authorized officer, such as the business license manager or chief of police, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the city through its duly authorized representative, such as the business license manager, chief of police, or city attorney, and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the issuance or denial of such license. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic denial, with prejudice, of such application. 
(c)  All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest, as defined in section 6-46, in retail liquor stores. This shall include: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and what intervals it is paid; 
(4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and 
(5)  Any other information called for by the business license office or its duly authorized representative, such as the business license division manager, the police department, or city attorney. 
(d)  Each application furnished under this section must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(e)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any new license under this chapter and as a prerequisite to the issuance of a renewed license under this chapter, all applicants and existing licensees shall be required to execute and deliver to the city a verified statement indicating receipt of this Code relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  After staff has determined that an application is complete, the request shall be heard following advertising as set forth herein at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting of mayor and city council, or as soon thereafter as possible. A decision shall be rendered not later than 45 days after the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-35. - Same—Investigation; report. 
(a)  All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the police department, including but not limited to, an investigation into the criteria as outlined in sections 6-34 and 6-45 of this chapter. After such investigation, the police department shall report its recommendation to the business license manager. No further action shall be taken by the city or by the applicant with respect to any application until completion by the police department of its investigation. Once the applicant has submitted all of the required information and provided any additional information requested by the business license manager or the police department, the police department shall make its recommendation. 
(b)  All licensed premises shall be open for inspection by an inspector or member of the city police department, or any other person so designated by the mayor, council, city manager or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-36. - Same—Advertisement of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for license under this chapter shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement at least one time per week for two consecutive weeks in the daily paper published in the county in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and the date and time the mayor and city council will hear the application. The advertisement referred to in this section shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column advertisement. 
(b)  The running of the advertisement required in this section in a newspaper may be concurrent with the time after the application for license is filed, and if the one day's advertisement in two weeks is not made before the filing of the application, the application shall state that the advertisement is being made. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following: "___________ license applied for. A hearing before the mayor and city council of the city shall be held on the ___________ day of___________, 20___________, whichever is applicable. All interested persons take notice." The sign or signs shall not be less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible to persons using such public areas. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-37. - Same—Public hearing; approval. 
All applications, with the exception of renewals under section 6-59, for license under this chapter shall be acted upon by the mayor and city council after a public hearing after advertisement as required in this article. No license shall be issued until it has been approved by the mayor and city council. All reasons for denial or approval for license shall be recorded in the minutes of the hearing. Denial of application shall be provided to the applicant in writing providing the reasons for denial and mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-38. - Same—Acceptance and consideration after rejection. 
When an application for license under this chapter is denied by the city, the city shall not accept or consider an application for a license under this chapter from that applicant or licensee within 12 months of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-39. - Architectural standards. 
All applicants for license shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, stone or wood, but not concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all building, health and similar city and county codes. The applicant shall obtain and file with his application a certification of zoning certifying the property where the applicant shall operate his business to be zoned NS, PSC, HGB, GC, CRC, RRC, NRC, PVC or such other commercial districts as may be approved or adopted from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-40. - Citizenship, residence and age requirement. 
(a)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a corporation, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either the principal shareholder thereof, or an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either the general partner of the partnership, or an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(c)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor, provided that the sole proprietor works in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises. If the sole proprietor does not work in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises, then the license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor and an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(d)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be a U.S. citizen, or a legal alien for at least one year prior to making application. 
(e)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be 21 years of age or older at the time the application for a license is filed. 
(f)  The principal shareholder in the case of a corporate applicant, the general partner in the case of a partnership applicant, the sole proprietor in the case of a sole proprietor applicant or the agent of such applicant shall be a resident of the State of Georgia at the time the application for a license is filed or renewed. 
(g)  The licensee shall notify the city in writing and shall keep such notification current, of the name, address and telephone number for such licensee and the agent of such licensee at such address and telephone number for the purpose of receiving communication and notices required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-41. - Location of business—Districts where permitted. 
(a)  Wholesaler's license. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages except where the wholesale business is to be located in the area of the city which is zoned highway general business shopping center (HGB), or industrial (LI or HI). 
(b)  License for on-premises consumption. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued unless the location has been zoned highway general business (HGB), planned shopping center district (PSC), neighborhood shopping district (NS), community retail commercial (CRC), general commercial (GC), neighborhood retail commercial (NRC), planned village community (PVC), central business district (CBD), or regional retail commercial (RRC), but not industrial, under the zoning laws on the city or is in use as a business under specific special use permit; provided, this subsection shall not apply to private clubs. No license shall be issued for a location that operates as a nonconforming use. 
(c)  Package distilled spirits. No license to engage in the retail sale of distilled spirits in package form shall be issued to any person for the operation of such business except within the areas zoned highway general business (HGB), planned shopping center district (PSC), neighborhood shopping district (NS), general commercial (GC), community retail commercial (CRC), or regional retail commercial (RRC). No license shall be issued for a location that is a nonconforming use. 
(d)  All licenses granted herein shall be further subject to O.C.G.A. 3-3-21, or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-42. - Same—Distance from residence; distance from housing authority. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 300 feet or less from a primary entrance of a private residence. However, if the mayor and city council consider evidence that the property values of the residence or other residences will not be affected, that the quiet enjoyment of the premises by the residents thereof shall not be adversely affected and the grant of such license shall not have any other adverse effect on the private residence, then the mayor and city council may waive this provision. This provision shall not apply to private residences located on commercially zoned property. Wholesalers and distributors are exempt from this section. 
(b)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 300 feet or less from the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal of any housing authority, as housing authority is defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, or as may be amended from time to time. This subsection shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, or to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-43. - Same—Distance from schools, religious assembly, parks, hospitals and public buildings. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this chapter where the place of business of the applicant is located within a radius distance of 600 feet of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal of any school, college campus building, religious assembly, public park, hospital, public building, or alcohol or drug treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein; provided, however, that at a public hearing by the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council may waive the distance requirement of this section if satisfactory evidence shall be produced that no adverse effect to property values or the use of the facilities for the aforesaid purposes would occur if a license was granted. Wholesalers and distributors are exempt from this section. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above notwithstanding, in no event shall a license be issued for: 
(1)  The package sale of any distilled spirits within 300 feet of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal of any religious assembly building, school building, educational building, or college campus building. 
(2)  The package sale of any wine, fortified wine, hard cider, or malt beverage within 300 feet of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal of any school building, or college campus building. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine, fortified wine, hard cider, and malt beverages was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(3)  The package sale of any distilled spirits, wine, fortified wine, hard cider, or malt beverages within 300 feet of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. 
(4)  Any sale of any alcoholic beverage that violates any provision of state law. 
(5)  Wholesalers and distributors are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-22, adopted Sep. 19, 2016, amended § 6-43 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6-43 pertained to location of business with respect to distance from schools, churches, parks, hospitals and public buildings and derived from Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, adopted May 19, 2008; and Ord. No. 2012-11, adopted Sep. 4, 2012. 
Sec. 6-44. - Same—Additional considerations. 
The mayor and city council may take into consideration in its discretion the zoning of the surrounding area, the nature of the area, and the impact on traffic as factors in the consideration of a license application under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-45. - Conditions disqualifying application. 
(a)  No application for any license under this chapter shall be granted, retained, renewed or transferred where the application or the evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  Evidence that the applicant, licensee or any individual having an ownership interest in said license, has been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony. 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant has had revoked within the last twelve months any alcohol-related license or permit issued under the police powers of any county, state, municipality, or other governmental entity. 
(3)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee is family, as family is defined in this chapter, to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof. This subsection shall not restrict a farm winery from selling at retail or wholesale. 
(4)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee has failed to answer any question on the alcoholic beverage application accurately or failed to provide accurate information to the mayor and city council, license review board, police department, business license division staff or any city official or city employee. 
(b)  In addition to the standards stated elsewhere in this chapter, the following standards may also apply to the issuance, retention, renewal, transfer or denial of a license for alcoholic beverages either by the package or for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  Evidence that the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant has insufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(3)  Evidence that, despite compliance with the minimum distance requirement, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity causes underage persons to frequent the area. 
(4)  Evidence that the location and type of structure could create a difficulty in police supervision. 
(5)  Evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or that the proposed area already is adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(6)  Evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(7)  Evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking which would result in parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(8)  Evidence that the conduct of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of underage persons, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises by underage persons, or causes the police to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. More than three underage persons without supervision of a parent or one authorized by a parent shall be prima facie evidence of a congregation of underage persons. 
(9)  Evidence of unusual police observation or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance regulating such business, if the applicant is a previous holder of a license. 
(10)  Evidence that the application is a guise or dummy application for another person who cannot meet the qualifications of this chapter for the issuance of a license. 
(11)  Evidence that the applicant or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, principal shareholder, general partner or managing agent is delinquent in the payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the city, the county or the state. 
(12)  Evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to an intoxicated person or to an underage person. 
(13)  Evidence that the applicant, licensee or any individual having an ownership interest in said license, has been convicted of any misdemeanor within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(c)  The city clerk shall have authority to deny an application for a new license under this chapter upon a showing that any one or more of the conditions in subsection (a) exists. Upon such a denial, the applicant shall have a right to an appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein within ten days of the decision to deny on such basis. Upon the showing that any one or more of the conditions outlined in subsection (c) exists on an existing licensee, the licensee shall be entitled to notice and a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein prior to any action taken on said license by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-34, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-46. - Limitations on number of licenses within a family. 
(a)  No application for a retail license to sell distilled spirits in the package at retail shall be granted where any person or member of his family owns, holds or controls any interest whatsoever in more than one license to engage in the business of selling distilled spirits by the package at retail in the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Interest in a license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the owner of a license, a co-owner of a license, a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license, a shareholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of a license, an owner, lessor, sublessor or shareholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain owning or leasing any real estate which is occupied by a retail liquor store or shares in any of the income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a retail liquor store. 
(c)  All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to all interest, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, in retail liquor stores. This shall include the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which such retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the city. 
(d)  Any change in any relationship declared in this section must be filed with the city and failure to so file within a period of 30 days after such change is made shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein. 
(e)  No retail licensee or person having interest therein shall have any business or commercial transactions with a wholesaler or manufacturer of alcoholic beverage other than the purchase and payment for alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  No retail license shall be approved where the licensee pays to any person any rent, management fee, or other payment based on the profits or sales of such licensed store. Any legal, accounting, management or other consulting fees and all rentals shall be in an amount which is reasonable for the area and consistent with amounts paid by other similar businesses and other retail business establishments. All retail establishments shall maintain accurate books which correctly reflect all business transactions and shall make them available for inspection and audit by the city. Such records shall be maintained for a period of seven years. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or other person having interest therein to have any connection, either directly or indirectly, in any scheme or device to obtain an interest in a retail package store, being more than as allowed by this chapter, or to engage in any scheme or device to use another person as a quasi or dummy to obtain a retail license. 
(h)  Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause to revoke any license issued under this chapter in which such violators shall have an interest. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-47. - City official, spouse, children prohibited from interest in license. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or full-time appointed official or any employee of the city, or his spouse or minor children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest as defined in this article in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-48. - Wholesale licenses prohibited from holding interest in other licenses. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license under the terms of this chapter. This section shall not apply to farm wineries. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-49. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval; issuance. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained not later than two weeks from the date of approval of the application by the mayor and city council, and if not so obtained, the license granted by the mayor and city council shall be void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city the required fee, the license shall be issued, subject to subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-50. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
Where a building in which a retailer or bottle house operator intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-51. - Time limit for commencement of business; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter must within three months after the issuance of such license open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and revocation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. The time period in which to commence operations shall not be extended and the license revoked unless the time period to commence operations is extended by: 
(1)  The license review board pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia; or 
(2)  The city manager or his or her designee after the licensee produces written proof in the form of an affidavit on a form approved by the city manager or his or her designee showing good cause for failure to open. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall upon completion of such three months automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be revoked without the necessity of any further action by the city. The license shall not be revoked under this subsection if, prior to the date which is three months from and after the cessation of business, the licensee produces written proof in the form of an affidavit on a form approved by the city manager or his or her designee showing good cause for discontinuing operations. In addition to such proof, the licensee shall provide an action plan concerning the date on which operations will be commenced. If the city manager or his or her designee finds that the licensee has produced the necessary proof showing good cause for discontinuing operations, the licensee shall have until the date set forth in his action plan to commence operations. Should the licensee fail to commence operations on the date set forth in the action plan, the licensee shall automatically forfeit his or her license. Nothing in this subsection shall relieve the licensee of his or her obligations to renew his or her license as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  No license holder whose license is forfeited or revoked pursuant to this section may apply for a new alcohol license for a period of 12 months from and after the date of such forfeiture or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2012-10, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 6-52. - License fees; duration. 
(a)  The annual license fee for each classification of license under this chapter shall be set by the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw in the business license schedule. 
(b)  The schedule of fees for each license classification under this chapter shall be on file at the Kennesaw City Hall at the business license office. 
(c)  Any new license issued under this chapter shall be effective from the date of the license through December 31 of that year. Thereafter, the licensee shall be required to renew the license annually in January of each year. In the case of revocation or surrender of license before the expiration date of that license, the holder of the license shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(d)  Each person manufacturing or selling distilled spirits in the city shall pay any annual license as follows: 
Manufacturers ..... $3,000.00 
Wholesalers ..... 100.00 
Retailers, package only ..... 2,000.00 
Pouring license ..... 3,000.00 
Bottle house ..... 2,000.00 
Off premise ..... 500.00 
(e)  On or after July 1 of a calendar year, all initial distilled spirits license and permit fees for that year shall be one-half of the basic fees set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Each person selling malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, and/or hard cider in the city shall pay an annual license fee as follows: 
Retail package, each location: 
Manufacturers ..... $3,000.00 
Malt beverages ..... $300.00 
Wine, or fortified wine, or hard cider ..... $300.00 
Malt beverages, or wine, or fortified wine, or hard cider wholesale delivery ..... $100.00 
Malt beverages or wine, or fortified wine, or hard cider pouring, each location ..... $550.00 
Brewpub License, with/without sales of wine or malt beverage by the package ..... $3,000.00. 
Off premises ..... $500.00 
Package/pouring license, each location ..... $850.00 
(g)  Each person selling any alcoholic beverage, including, but not limited to, distilled spirits, malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider on Sunday, shall pay a license fee of $550.00 for pouring and $300.00 for package. 
(h)  Any person holding a license granted under any subsection of this section 6-52 is eligible for applying for a license to sell and/or re-fill growlers. The fee for a growler license shall be the sum of $200.00 per calendar or any portion of a calendar year, in addition to the fee for a license as provided in subsection (f) above. The application shall be submitted on forms approved by the city manager or his or her designee. To be valid, the growler license must be approved by the mayor and city council. 
(i)  The total for off-premises license fees shall not exceed the statutory maximum prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2(e), as amended. For retail package licenses, a half year is authorized as in subsection (e) of this section. 
(j)  All license fees required under this chapter shall be paid in cash of by certified check or by cashier's check. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 3, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-30, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2016-10, 4-4-16; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 2, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 6-53. - Penalty for late fee payment. 
Any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the city of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a one-time separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax or other charge received more than 30 days after the due date. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-54. - Payment of fees, number of license, renewal; annual sales statement, inspection of records. 
(a)  On an annual basis, the licensee shall submit renewed information and application on forms prescribed by the city no later than December 31 of each year in order to renew the license. The annual license fee under this chapter for those seeking renewal of a license accrues and is due and payable on December 31 of each year. The failure of the licensee to timely submit renewed information and application and/or the failure of the licensee to timely pay the annual license fee shall result in the expiration of the license. 
(b)  Upon expiration of the license, the licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic beverages until the licensee obtains a valid license under this chapter. If the licensee fails to cease the sale of alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 6-53, in addition to other remedies under state or federal law and/or actions taken by the license review board and/or the mayor and city council. 
(c)  A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(d)  Each licensee shall provide the city with a certified statement prepared by his bookkeeper or accountant of the gross sales of the business for the preceding calendar year. Copies of the state sales tax returns for the same period shall be attached to the statement. Such statement must be properly notarized and certified to be true and correct by the licensee or his agent under penalty of law, and shall accompany the basic license fee payment on or before December 31 of each year. 
(e)  Any holder of or applicant for an alcoholic beverage license must make available for audit any and all records concerning such business upon request of the business license division manager or his representative. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage license holder or applicant for same shall be open for inspection at any time for agents of the business license office and the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-55. - Supplemental requirements for the sale of spirituous liquors for on-premises consumption. 
No license for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink or for the operation of a bottle house shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a bar, restaurant, hotel, or private club, lounge or nightclub as defined in this chapter. No bottle house shall operate unless it shall obtain a pouring license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-56. - Event permits. 
(a)  In order to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at an event authorized pursuant to section 6-71 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, the applicant, who is a licensed alcoholic caterer, intending to sell such alcoholic beverages must: 
(1)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid license from a county or municipality within the state which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  Provide the city with a copy of valid annual off-premise license from the city which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(3)  Apply to the city for an event permit, providing the name of the applicant, the date, the applicant's address, the date or dates of the event, the time of the event, the applicant's alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. 
(4)  Pay an event permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule as approved by the mayor and city council. 
(5)  Pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. This subsection only applies to those licensed alcoholic beverage caterers who are domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the city. 
(6)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle while transporting the alcoholic beverages to the event and post it in a conspicuous location at the event for the duration of the event. 
(b)  In order to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at an event authorized pursuant to section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, the applicant intending to sell such alcoholic beverages must: 
(1)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid liquor license from a county or municipality within the state which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid annual off-premise alcohol license from the City of Kennesaw; or, if the applicant does not have an off-premise alcohol license from the City of Kennesaw, obtain one to submit with the application for an event permit. 
(3)  Apply to the city for an event permit, providing the name of the applicant, the date, the applicant's address, the date or dates of the event, the time of the event, the applicant's liquor license number. 
(4)  Pay an event permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule as approved by the mayor and city council. 
(5)  Pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. This subsection only applies to those applicants who are domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the city. 
(6)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle while transporting the alcoholic beverages to the event and post it in a conspicuous location at the event for the duration of the event. 
(c)  The event permit is valid for the duration of the authorized event and shall expire at the end of the event. The event permit is also only valid for the sale of the same type of alcoholic beverages that the applicant is allowed to sell under his or her liquor license or off-premise license. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any such applicant to employ any person who is less than 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. Any and all persons, regardless of the person's title or position, employed by the applicant who dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages at the event must have a valid server license issued by a governmental entity within the state. That server license must be carried by the licensee and available for review on request whenever the licensee is working at the event. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with an event approved under section 6-71 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, without first having obtained an event permit as provided in subsection (a) of this section 6-56. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with an event approved under section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinance, Kennesaw, Georgia, without having obtained an event permit as provided in subsection (b) of this section 6-56. 
(g)  The event permit as contemplated by this section 6-56 shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the mayor and city council, or the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-57. - Requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages at an amusement park. 
(a)  When an amusement park is not open to the general public, the amusement park may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages to its private party function participants. Alcoholic beverages shall not be removed from the amusement park premises, which premises shall not include the parking or amphitheater areas of the amusement park. 
(b)  When the amusement park is open to the general public, the amusement park may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at a private party function in restricted areas. Such restricted areas shall be: 
(1)  Not open to the general public; 
(2)  Not an amphitheater or parking for the amusement park; 
(3)  Contain a fence or barrier which limits access to the restricted area; and 
(4)  The location of the restricted areas has been submitted to and approved by the business license manager. 
In the event a designated area is denied by the business license manager, the owner/licensee may appeal said decision within ten days of said decision pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein. The license review board and/or the mayor and city council shall have the authority to approve a designated area provided it meets the standards of this subsection. Alcoholic beverages shall be limited to the restricted areas only and shall not be removed from the restricted areas. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-58. - Name of license and license number to be displayed by package stores. 
The license itself shall be prominently displayed so as to be visible to the public inside the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-59. - Renewal—Required annually. 
All licensees under this chapter shall, in order to continue such business, renew their licenses annually. Renewing licenses are not required to meet the posting and advertising provisions of section 6-34 and 6-36 of this chapter or to appear before the license review board or the mayor and council when the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  Same applicant and information as contained in the formerly approved application. 
(2)  Updated background check for criminal record or alcohol violations in the past year conducted by police department. 
(3)  No prior, existing, or pending violations of the alcoholic beverage ordinance. 
(4)  Compliance with all state alcoholic beverage regulatory statutes and regulations. 
(5)  Timely payment of renewal fees and timely submission of renewed information. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-60. - Same—Application for existing licensed premises. 
Any application for renewal of a license on an existing licensed location shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this chapter, if not originally in violation; provided, that no license may be issued in violation of state distance requirements. An application for license renewal filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this chapter for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-61. - Transfer of license, restrictions. 
Licenses, under this chapter shall not be transferable as to location or ownership, except upon approval of the mayor and city council and issuance of and payment for the license, subject to the following: 
(1)  In case of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, such license may, in the discretion of the city, be temporarily transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, for a period of up to 60 days, provided that such transferee otherwise meets the requirements for holding an alcohol license under this section. 
(2)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners, who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(3)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more principal shareholders in a corporation holding a license to withdraw from the corporation, who were principal shareholders at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the corporation. 
(4)  Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new location shall be considered under and meet the requirements of a new license under this chapter. Provided, however, where a transfer of an existing location is approved and there is no change in the ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(5)  It shall be deemed a change of ownership when an owner or licensee adds an additional partner or partners or an additional principal shareholder or principal shareholders. 
(6)  All applications for transfer of location shall be posted as required by section 6-36. 
(7)  A change in ownership as set forth in this section requires an application for a new license and the payment of a new license fee according to the procedures in this chapter. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to promptly report any changes of any kind in the ownership or distribution of ownership to the business license office. 
(9)  If a licensee desires to sell the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser of the business must be informed by the licensee that the purchaser of the business must make application for and obtain a license prior to operating the business. Any transfer of the business for which the license is issued without the new owners being licensed shall cause the automatic revocation of the license. 
(10)  In the event that an alcoholic beverage license is issued to a corporation and an agent, and the owner of the license desires re-issuance of the license under an alternative agent, such re-issuance shall not be deemed to be a change of ownership; provided however, that the owner of the license provide the name of a principal shareholder or alternative agent for purposes of background investigation, including fingerprinting of such person. No license under this chapter shall reissue to such designated alternative person unless and until the city grants approval of such background investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-62. - Licenses constitute grant or privilege. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "this license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled by the mayor and city council, and is subject to amendments to this ordinance or state law upon hearing prior to revocation with or without cause." 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-63. - Procedure for suspension and revocation. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause, as defined in this section, after a hearing and upon written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which such hearing shall be held. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor or city manager may deem the circumstances to justify. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws, regulations, ordinances regulating such business; the violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business; the violation of any state or federal law; any change in the area where such business is located, which change is deemed by the city council to authorize the city council to refuse the issuance of a license, including those circumstances as outlined in section 6-45; the arrest or conviction of a drug-related, alcohol or sex-related crime, or a crime involving moral turpitude; or any violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The police department shall provide written notification to the mayor and city manager of any violation of this chapter or any facts that may constitute due cause for the suspension or revocation of a license. Such notification shall include facts constituting due cause and shall also include a history, if any, of previous violations of this chapter or previous findings of due cause for the probation, suspension or revocation of said license and the penalty, if any, imposed by the city for such violations or previous findings. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the notification as provided in subsection (c), the city manager shall place the matter for a first due cause hearing by the license review board, provided that the licensee has not been on probation or suspension within the last 24 months from the date of the writing as provided in subsection (c). 
(e)  If the licensee has been on probation or suspension within the last 24 months from the date of the writing as provided in subsection (c), then the city manager shall place the matter for a first due cause hearing by the mayor and city council, wherein the mayor and city council shall consider revocation of the license. 
(f)  Written notice of the time, place and purpose of the first due cause hearing and a written statement of the charges or charges shall be provided to the licensee. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods shall be authorized as the mayor or city manager may deem the circumstances to justify. 
(g)  After the due cause hearing as provided in subsection (d), the license review board may place on probation with conditions, recommend suspension for a period of time not to exceed 12 months or recommend revocation of the alcohol license. The city manager shall send written notice to the licensee of the license review board's decision and prepare a written report to the city council regarding the decision. 
(h)  In the event that the license review board recommends that the alcoholic beverage license be on probation with conditions and/or be suspended for six months or less, the owner of the alcoholic beverage license, the licensee or both may file an appeal with the city manager of such recommendation within five business days of the date of the license review board's decision to the city council. If the license review board recommends probation or suspension as provided above and the owner of the alcoholic beverage license or the licensee or both should fail to appeal such recommendation, at 12:01 a.m. on the first day following the end of the appeal period following the date of the license review board's decision, the owner of the alcohol beverage license and the licensee shall be deemed to have acquiesced to such decision and to have waived the licensee's right to appeal such decision, subject to the provisions of subsections (i), (j), and (l) of this section. In the event that the license review board recommends suspension for more than six months or revocation, then a second due cause hearing shall be conducted before the mayor and city council no later than the next regular meeting or special called meeting. 
(i)  For those hearings conducted by the license review board wherein the license review board recommended probation with conditions or suspension for six months or less, upon review of the city manager's report, the city council shall, no later than the next regular meeting or special called meeting, either approve such recommendations or cause the matter to be placed before the mayor and council for a second due cause hearing. 
(j)  In the event that the license review board recommends any probation, suspension, or revocation of a license under this section, the police department shall immediately place signage in or on the premises indicating that such recommendation has been made and the basis for such recommendation, pending review and approval by the mayor and council. Such signage shall remain in place until mayor and council shall take action on such recommendation. 
(k)  In all hearings held pursuant to this section, the proceedings shall be as informal as compatible with justice and the following procedures shall prevail: 
(1)  The charges and specifications against the licensee and the responses, if any, filed by the licensee shall be read into the record, unless expressly waived by the city representative and the licensee. 
(2)  The city representative shall present evidence and then the licensee shall present evidence, with the opportunity for each party to present rebuttal evidence, examination and cross examination of witnesses, and interrogation by the city manager or city council. No evidence shall be presented which is not relevant to the charges. Evidence of previous probation(s) and suspension(s) is relevant. 
(3)  The license review board and the mayor and city council, through the city manager, shall be authorized to issue subpoenas when such subpoena power is authorized by law. All testimony taken by the board shall be under oath. The board shall apply to the Kennesaw Municipal Court for the enforcement of any subpoena issued by the board. 
(l)  After any due cause hearing under this section by the mayor and city council, if the mayor and city council determine that due cause exists, the mayor and city council may place on probation, suspend with or without conditions or revoke the license. The city manager shall send written notice to the licensee of the city council's decision. 
(m)  In the event a license to sell alcoholic beverages is suspended as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance to the facility wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: "THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN SUSPENDED FROM _______ TO _______ AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON, AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE". 
(n)  In the event that the license to sell alcoholic beverages is revoked as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: "THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN REVOKED AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON, AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE." The sign shall stay in place for the period of suspension or in the case of a revocation for a period of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 6-64. - State revocation revokes city license. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in such products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-65. - Removal of signs where license revoked, suspended or denied. 
When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked, suspended or denied, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased, including any and all advertisement signs, shall be removed from such place of business, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the police department of notice of such revocation, suspension or denial, the police department shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2003-37, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-66. - False information in application. 
Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for any license issued under this chapter shall be unlawful, and shall be the cause for the denial thereof, and if any such license has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute due cause for the revocation of such license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-67. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-68. - Joint sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink and by the package prohibited. 
A pouring license shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the bottle or package except as provided by section 6-41. This section shall not apply to manufacturers of malt beverages, manufacturers of distilled spirits, growler shops, wine specialty shops, or farm wineries selling wine, fortified wine, or hard cider by the package. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2016-10, 4-4-16; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 3, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 6-69. - Mandatory workshop for licensee; mandatory training for permit holders. 
(a)  Licensee policy workshop. All applicants for an alcoholic beverage license shall attend an alcohol sales and service policy workshop for owners and managers, which workshop shall be approved by the business license manager. The applicant shall attend such workshop prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license. Such workshop shall be at the applicant's expense. If, at the time the application is considered by the mayor and city council, the applicant has not provided evidence that the applicant has successfully completed the alcohol sales and service training workshop, the application shall be denied. This provision shall not be waived. 
(b)  Training of permit holders. 
(1)  Licensees are required to provide information to all permit holders on provisions of the law of this state regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated and underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(2)  Licensees shall provide regular information and training to all permit holders on the methods, procedures and measures to be taken in order to request, obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Detailed records of such training, including the date, time, persons attending and substance of such training shall be maintained for a minimum of 48 months of the training. Evidence of such training records shall be made available upon request for inspection by the city. 
(c)  The failure of the licensee to comply with this subsection regarding the attendance of a policy workshop and the training of permit holders shall be grounds for due cause to suspend and/or revoke the license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-70. - Permit holders of licensees—Applications, issuance, and denials. 
(a)  For whom required. The following persons shall be required to apply for and obtain a valid server permit from the City of Kennesaw for each establishment that sells alcoholic beverages at which such person works: 
(1)  All employees and independent contractors who sell and/or serve alcoholic beverages at a premise licensed under this chapter. 
(2)  Any person acting in a managerial and/or security capacity, except for law enforcement personnel, at the licensed premise, regardless of whether such person sells and/or serves alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Exemption. The licensee to whom an alcoholic beverage license has been issued under this chapter is not required to obtain a server permit. 
(c)  Application and issuance. Except as otherwise provided, no person requiring a server permit may be employed by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been issued a server permit from the Kennesaw Police Department indicating the person is eligible for employment. All applications required by this section shall be investigated by the police department and shall include, among other things, (1) fingerprinting; (2) an appropriate photo taken by the Kennesaw Police Department that accurately represents the appearance of the applicant; (3) proof of acceptable identification; (4) a copy of the applicant's Social Security card to verify that it is unrestricted; and, (5) an investigation of the criminal record, if any, of the applicant. Acceptable identification for purposes of this subsection shall mean any of the following: (i) a copy of a valid Georgia photo identification issued to the applicant; (ii) a valid Georgia driver's license issued to the applicant; (iii) a valid driver's license or identification card issued by another state to the applicant along with a copy of student identification card from a college or school located in the State of Georgia; or, (iv) a valid passport together with a resident alien card or a permanent resident card issued by the United States government to the applicant. The applicant must pay a reasonable fee as determined by the city for processing and issuance of the server permit; said fee must be paid in cash, by check, or by other method of payment considered acceptable by the city; and, if paid by check the city may place a hold on the issuance of the server permit until the check clears the bank. Failure to provide any of the documentation or information referenced above, or the omission or falsification of any material information in an application for server permit shall be a violation of this chapter and grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of any such server permit. 
(d)  Time limit. All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall report to the Kennesaw Police Department for purposes of being fingerprinted and make application and be approved for a server permit before beginning work at any establishment holding a license for alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  Letter of eligibility; term; fee. Any server permit issued under this section shall expire 12 months from and after the date of issue unless earlier suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw. The Kennesaw Police Department may prescribe regulations for certifying the eligibility for continued employment without the necessity of the employee being again fingerprinted. The Kennesaw Police Department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for a server permit. 
(f)  List of employees to be filed. It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to keep on file on the premises the actual current server permit or a copy of the current server permit for all persons required to have such permit who work at that establishment. 
(g)  Possession of permits by employees. Each and every server permit holder shall, at all times during his or her working hours, have his or her server permit available for inspection at the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  Permit holder on premises. At all times that the business is open, the licensee shall have at least one server permit holder on the premises. 
(i)  Other grounds for denial of server permit. In addition to the other requirements in this section, the Kennesaw Police Department shall not issue server permit to any applicant: 
(1)  Who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence and who has been granted employment authorization to work within the United States by the United States Department of Homeland Security or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Department of Homeland Security to work within the United States. 
(2)  Who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the application for server permit of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, or any charge relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Who has been convicted or pled guilty to within five years immediately prior to the application for server permit of: 
a.  Any felony under the laws of any state or of the United States of America; 
b.  Two or more convictions for any alcohol or drug related offense; or, 
c.  For whom there exists any outstanding warrant charging such person with any crime described in this section, provided that this section shall not apply to private clubs as defined in this chapter. 
(4)  Who is on probation or on parole for any drug or alcohol related offense. 
(j)  Appeal of denial of server permit. Any applicant who is not issued a server permit for any reason shall have the right to appeal such decision within ten calendar days from and after the applicant's the receipt of that denial. The appeal must be made to the City of Kennesaw's license review board. That appeal shall set forth, in writing, all reasons that the applicant believes he or she should receive a server permit. Failure of the applicant to set forth such reasons shall be fatal to the appeal and the appeal shall be denied and the denial of the server permit upheld. That board shall have the authority to require the city to issue a server permit if the board feels the circumstances justify such an issuance despite the requirements of this section. If the board upholds the denial of the permit, the applicant may appeal that decision to the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw within ten calendar days from and after the applicant's receipt of written notice of the board's decision. The appeal to the mayor and the city council shall also set forth all reasons that the applicant believes he or she should receive a server permit. Failure of the applicant to set forth such reasons shall be fatal to the appeal and the appeal shall be denied and the denial of the server permit upheld. The mayor and city council shall have the authority to require the city to issue a server permit if they feel the circumstances justify such an issuance. If an applicant is denied a server permit and that denial is upheld on any appeal, the applicant will not be allowed to apply again for a server permit for a period of six months from and after the date of such denial or, if the applicant appealed, from and after final decision on that appeal. 
(k)  Grounds for suspension, revocation, probation. No server permit that has been issued or which may hereafter be issued under this section shall be suspended, revoked or placed on probation except for due cause as defined in this subsection, and after a hearing and upon written notice to the permit holder of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which such hearing shall be held. Five calendar days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the city manager may deem the circumstances to justify so long as the permit holder is provided reasonable notice of the hearing. "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of the server permit shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages or the violation of any state or federal law or local ordinances set out in this section; or for the omission or falsification of any material in any application; or for any reason which would authorize the refusal of the issuance of a permit; or any violation of this chapter. All hearings shall be before the license review board at a specially called meeting and shall be conducted in the manner provided in section 6-63 of this chapter. After the hearing, if the license review board determines due cause exists, the license review board may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the server permit. The permit holder whose server permit was suspended, revoked or probated by the license review board may appeal to the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw pursuant to section 6-63 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 4, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2010-23, 12-20-10) 
Sec. 6-71. - Closed function. 
The requirements for obtaining a closed permit function are as follows: 
(1)  The organization sponsoring any closed function which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages must first apply for and obtain a special permit from the city manager or his/her designee in order to serve alcoholic beverages at the closed function. This permit must be posted in a conspicuous location at the closed function at all times during the event. The special permit shall specify the hours in which the closed function is permitted to function. 
(2)  The organization sponsoring any closed function which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages must hire an off-duty City of Kennesaw police officer to monitor the function. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the discretion to allow the sponsoring organization to hire an off-duty police officer from another jurisdiction to monitor the function if the circumstances warrant. 
(3)  The special permit as contemplated herein shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-72. - Approved events. 
The possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on any public property are permitted at: 
(1)  At an event at which the possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on, in, or over public property is approved by the mayor and city council; or, 
(2)  At an event at which the possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on, in, or over public property is approved by the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
(3)  At any establishment licensed as an eating or drinking establishment that holds a current encroachment permit pursuant to section 22-481. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 6-73. - Regulations for sales by manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
(a)  A limited exception to the provisions of this chapter providing for the distribution and sale of distilled spirits shall exist to the extent that the license to manufacture distilled spirits in this city shall include the right to sell up to 500 barrels of distilled spirits per year produced at the distiller's licensed premises to individuals who are on such premises for: 
(1)  Consumption on the premises; and 
(2)  Consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 2,250 milliliters of distilled spirits per consumer per day. 
(b)  A distiller may sell distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this Code section on all days and at all times that sales of distilled spirits by retailers and retail consumption dealers are lawful within the city, including, but not limited to, Sundays. 
(c)  A distiller shall not sell any distilled spirits for consumption off the premises pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at a price less than the price at which a person licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package is permitted to sell distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (b) of Code section 3-4-26. 
(d)  Any distiller engaging in sales of distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall remit all state and local sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
(e)  The Commissioner of the Department of Revenue shall promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations as he or she may deem reasonable and necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Upon a violation by a distiller of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue shall have the power to place conditions or limitations on such distiller's license and to modify or amend such conditions or limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 4, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 6-74. - Regulations for manufacturers of malt beverages. 
(a)  A limited exception to the provisions of this chapter providing for the distribution and sale of malt beverages shall exist to the extent that the license to manufacture malt beverages in this state shall include the right to sell up to 3,000 barrels of malt beverages per year produced at the brewer's licensed premises to individuals who are on such premises for: 
(1)  Consumption on the premises; and 
(2)  Consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 288 ounces of malt beverages per consumer per day. 
(b)  A brewer may sell malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this Code section on all days and at all times that sales of malt beverages by retailers are lawful within the county or municipality in which the licensed premises of the brewer is located, including, but not limited to, Sundays. 
(c)  Any brewer engaging in sales of malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this Code section shall remit all state and local sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
(d)  The Commissioner of the Department of Revenue shall promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations as he or she may deem reasonable and necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Upon a violation by a brewer of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue shall have the power to place conditions or limitations on such brewer's license and to modify or amend such conditions or limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 5, 8-21-17) 
Secs. 6-75—6-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 6-87. - Employment and entry upon the premises. 
(a)  As used in this Code section, the term "bouncer" means an individual primarily performing duties related to verifying age for admittance, security, maintaining order, or safety, or a combination thereof. 
(b)  No person shall allow or require an individual under the age of 21 to serve as a bouncer on a premises or in an establishment where alcoholic beverages are dispensed, served, or sold pursuant to a license issued under this title. 
(c)  No individual under the age of 21 shall enter or be allowed to enter a bar unless he or she is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who is 21 years of age or older. This subsection shall not apply to an individual while he or she is attending a live musical concert or live presentation of the performing arts for which he or she has paid an admission charge. 
(d)  No licensee shall allow or require a minor to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any individual under the age of 21 to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages in a bar. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, § 3, 8-15-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-18, § 3, adopted Aug. 15, 2016, amended § 6-87 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6-87 pertained to employment of minors and derived from Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, adopted May 19, 2008. 
Sec. 6-88. - Serving customers. 
Alcoholic beverages by the drink permitted to be sold under this chapter shall only be served by employees of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 5, 6-21-10) 
State Law reference— Employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises; O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
Sec. 6-89. - Sale to underage persons, incompetents, intoxicated persons. 
No licensee under this chapter and no employee of such a licensee under this chapter shall furnish, sell or knowingly allow the possession of any alcoholic beverages, whether by the package or by the drink to: 
(1)  Any person under the age at which such beverages may be legally purchased in the state; or 
(2)  Any person in an intoxicated condition; or 
(3)  Any person known to such licensee or his or her employee to be an habitual drunkard; or 
(4)  Any person known to such licensee or his or her employees to be of intemperate habits or of unsound mind. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2012-10, 8-6-12) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-90. - Notice; allowing underage person on licensed premises. 
(a)  Licensees that own, operate or manage a nightclub, indoor entertainment hall, lounge or package store and/or their employees shall not permit underage persons on the licensed premises unless such person is (1) accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; or, (2) unless such person is an on-duty employee of the licensee and is at least 18 years of age. However, an indoor entertainment hall may allow persons who are at least 18 years of age to be on the premises without a parent or legal guardian on specially designated days, whether they are designated "special events," "concert nights," or other similar term, not to exceed two days per calendar week, and only one of which may be a day other than Friday and Saturday, under the following conditions: 
(1)  Every patron must be required to present valid identification and proof that the patron is at least 21 years age at the point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall each time such patron attempts to purchase alcoholic beverages while on the premises. In lieu of checking identification and proof of age at the point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall, the licensee or the licensee's employees may check such identification and proof of age at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall, provided that any person who is 21 years of age or older who enters the premises be provided with a handstamp, nonremovable wrist band, or similar method of confirmation that the patron is legally entitled to purchase alcoholic beverages while on the premises. In such event, no licensee or employee of licensee may sell, serve, or provide any alcoholic beverage on the premises to any patron who does not present such handstamp, nonremovable wristband, or similar method of confirmation that the patron is 21 years of age or older each and every time the patron attempts to purchase an alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  On days the indoor entertainment hall allows underage patrons on the premises in accordance with this section, no patron may be sold, served, or provided more than one alcoholic beverage during any single transaction. 
(3)  A conspicuous notice must be posted at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall and at each point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall stating that it is illegal under state and local law for persons under the age of 21 years of age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages, that it is illegal for any person under the age of 21 years of age to misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever, that it is illegal for anyone to purchase alcohol for or on behalf of any other person under the age of 21 years of age, and that any person found in violation of any such law will be subject to arrest and criminal prosecution. "Conspicuous notice" as used in this chapter shall mean a sign on white background with red or black print with the printed message being 28 point type or larger. 
(4)  On days the indoor entertainment hall allows underage patrons on the premises in accordance with this section, licensee must employ or otherwise provide at least two uniformed, off-duty Kennesaw police officers to patrol the exterior of the indoor entertainment hall, including the parking lot. Such officers shall not enter the indoor entertainment hall unless requested by licensee or licensee's employees or unless the officers otherwise have reason to believe that illegal activity has taken or is taking place within the indoor entertainment hall or that the health or safety of the patrons is immediately at risk. 
(5)  The indoor entertainment hall must require that each person entering the premises provide valid identification and proof at the entrance to the premises that the person entering the premises is at least 18 years of age. No person under the age of 18 years of age may be admitted to the indoor entertainment hall without a parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  Each licensee shall post a conspicuous notice at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall and at each point of sale within the indoor entertainment which shall contain the provisions of the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 6, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2012-10, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 6, 8-21-17) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. 
Sec. 6-91. - Purchase, consumption or possession by or for underage persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any underage person to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where underage persons knowingly are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy any alcoholic beverage and furnish it to an underage person for consumption. 
(d)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of section 6-91 of this chapter shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  When the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverages to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age pursuant to the standard as set forth in O.C.G.A. 3-3-23(h), or as may be amended from time to time. The term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing the description of the person, the person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state issued identification card for persons without a driver's license. "Proper identification" shall not include birth certificate, traffic citation and complaint form, or student (college/university) identification card. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons. O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-92. - Same—Misrepresentation of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any underage person to falsely misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-93. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages by the package. Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., Sunday; however, to engage in such sales the licensee must hold a license allowing it to sell such distilled spirits on Sundays. Licensees for the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:55 a.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m. Saturday. Licensees for the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., Sunday; however, to engage in such sales the licensee must hold a license allowing it to sell such malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider on Sundays. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages by the drink. Sale of any alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption: licensees shall not engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Sunday. All alcoholic beverages will be consumed or removed no later than 45 minutes after legal sales have been terminated, provided that this subsection shall not apply to private clubs hereunder, and establishments holding a valid permit may be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(1), or as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Wholesalers. The business hours of any wholesaler licensed under this chapter shall be sunup to sundown, exclusive on Sunday. 
(d)  Sundays. A licensee for the sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package at retail shall be allowed to sell such alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays only if that licensee holds a permit from the city authorizing that licensee to engage in Sunday sales of the type of alcoholic beverages being sold. 
(e)  Election days. The sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be permitted on election days as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, as amended. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent any restaurant that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine and/or bottle of fortified wine per patron for consumption off premises, provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine on the restaurant's premises. The securing, resealing and transporting of said bottle of wine and/or bottle of fortified wine shall be in accordance with procedures outlined in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(g)  Distiller . A distiller may sell distilled spirits on all days and at all times that sales of distilled spirits by retailers and retail consumption dealers are lawful within the city, including, but not limited to Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2008-24, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 2008-25, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2008-28, § 1, 8-4-08; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 7, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-30, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 7, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 2018-28, 12-3-18) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-94. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesalers shall be licensed under the provisions of this chapter and shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any distilled spirits to any establishment in the city. Deliveries and sales shall only be made to retailers properly licensed under this chapter for the operation of establishments in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this section and shall at all times when deliveries are being made be subject to inspection by any duly authorized authorities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-95. - Retailers to purchase from properly licensed wholesalers; exception. 
Retail dealers in distilled spirits licensed under the applicable provisions of this chapter shall not buy nor accept deliveries of distilled spirits from wholesalers or other persons offering distilled spirits for sale except from wholesalers duly licensed under this chapter. Such retail dealers shall only accept deliveries of distilled spirits directly to the premises for which their license and permit was issued, and by no means other than a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as required by this chapter; except that, on written request to the business license division manager of the city and upon the granting of permission by the city in writing, deliveries may in special instances be made otherwise upon terms and conditions as prescribed by the mayor and city council as to each delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-96. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises or unlicensed caterers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to allow the sale or delivery of any alcoholic beverage by the drink to any area other than the premises covered by the license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for unlicensed individuals or caterers to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-97. - Discrimination or interference by wholesaler. 
No wholesaler may discriminate between retail dealers as to quantity, selections, and brands sold to the retail dealer, nor use any business technique so as to control the retail dealer's business and pricing policy, or in any way interfere with the free enterprise operation of the retail dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-98. - Storage—Regulation generally. 
All licensed retailers shall store all distilled spirits possessions on the premises for which the license was issued, and at no other place. All distilled spirits stock shall be available for inspection by authorized city officials. Any brand or type of distilled spirits found in any retailer's stock that is handled by a wholesaler who is not licensed to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-99. - Breaking of packages; consumption on premises; possession of alcoholic beverages on unlicensed premises; spirituous or alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  No retail dealer shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking or opening of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. This section shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  A restaurant, eatery, cafe, diner or other eating establishment not licensed under this chapter for on-premise consumption shall not knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking or opening of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the unlicensed premises or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the unlicensed premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee who is authorized to sell malt beverages, or hard cider, or wine, to sell, store or possess spirituous or alcoholic liquors without an appropriate license therefor. 
(d)  Upon the suspension, revocation, denial of renewal or denial of transfer of any alcoholic beverage license under this chapter, the licensee shall remove from the licensed premises all alcoholic beverages within 48 hours of the effective date of such suspension, revocation or denial. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 6-100. - Clear view of entrance and interior of licensed premises; lighting; private clubs. 
(a)  No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under the license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, private club or is located in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. Clearly visible shall mean that not less than 60 percent of the front area shall be glass. Front area shall mean the width of the premises from the ceiling to the floor. 
(b)  No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(c)  Private clubs which have been granted licenses under this chapter to sell distilled spirits at retail by the package shall not have an outside or street entrance for such retail outlet to sell to the general public, nor shall any such establishment make any sales to any member of the general public who is not a member of the private club. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-101. - Sanitary and fire protection regulations; disturbances; inspections. 
(a)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on any licensed premises. 
(c)  The fire inspector shall inspect premises licensed under this chapter to determine compliance with subsections (a) and (d) of this section and report its findings to the mayor and city council. 
(d)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city, county, and state. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-102. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees or their employees to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. This section shall not preclude the sale and/or refilling of any growler so long as such sale or refilling complies with section 6-111 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-103. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
Each retail licensee for sale in the package shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale; provided, however, a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-104. - Exterior advertisements. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electric, advertising any brand or price of distilled spirits shall be permitted on the exterior, or in the window, of the licensed premises, except one sign located in the interior which shall be not more than 12 inches by 36 inches, and may be lighted or unlighted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-105. - Coin-operated devices, similar machines on licensed premises. 
No retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package shall permit on his premises any slot machines, other food or cigarette vending machines, or any mechanical music boxes or pinball machines of any kind or character or any machines operated for amusement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-106. - Possession or consumption on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: possess or transport alcoholic beverages for the purpose of consumption on public property; consume alcoholic beverages on public property; or, sell alcoholic beverages on any public property, with the following exceptions: at an establishment licensed as an eating or drinking establishment that holds a current encroachment permit pursuant to section 22-481, at a closed function permitted pursuant to section 6-71 or at an event approved pursuant to section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 6-107. - Public intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on public property within the city limits while intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 6-108. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-109. - Pricing of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to every type of alcoholic beverage licensed to be sold in the City of Kennesaw, including wine, fortified wine, hard cider, malt beverages and spirituous liquors. 
(b)  Each licensee under this chapter shall maintain a daily schedule of the prices to be charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the prices from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be maintained in a manner so as to be available to the paying public and law enforcement officers or agents of the governmental authority. Such schedule shall be effective for not less than a 24-hour period and shall show thereon the date for which the schedule is effective. 
(c)  No licensee or holder of any license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or in any part thereof, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. This subsection shall not apply to tasting rooms of farm wineries where wine is offered in a quantity to only taste the product. This subsection shall also not apply to those persons or entities who are engaged in the business of refilling growlers who are allowed to provide samples to taste the product as set forth in section 6-111 of this chapter. 
(2)  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time, or allow any patron to possess more than two alcoholic beverages at one time. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during any 24-hour period during which the price schedule required by this section is in effect, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more or an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time at a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, by the pitcher or carafe, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same 24-hour period for which the price schedule required by this section is in effect. 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game, event, competition, contest, or promotion that involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(8)  Sell two or more alcoholic beverages for a price per beverage that is less than that charged for the one such alcoholic beverage. 
(9)  Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased. 
(10)  Knowingly allow an alcoholic beverage purchased on the premises to be removed from the premises without having been consumed. "Premises," for the purchase of this section, shall be construed to mean the entire area under the supervision, management or control of the licensee, excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles; and, in the case of licensees whose licensed location is located on a portion of the premises of a club, organization, establishment or entity offering outdoor recreation (for instance, golf or tennis), the word "premises" shall extend to cover all areas operated as a part of the club or entity excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles. 
(11)  Sponsor, conduct or allow contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(d)  There shall be no advertisement or promotion in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, of any of the practices prohibited under this section. 
(e)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as a part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine or fortified wine by bottle or carafe when sold with meals to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests, or to prohibit the sale of more than two drinks at one time which are to be consumed by the purchaser out-of-doors on the premises of the licensee, as described in this section, in connection with the purchaser's participation as a player of games of golf or tennis; otherwise, no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee; however, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to allow a licensee to circumvent the intent of this section by offering meals which include an alcoholic beverage as a device or scheme to promote drink sales at a price per beverage less than the daily listed price. 
(Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 8, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-110. - Additional activities prohibited; rationale and findings; exception. 
(a)  Rationale and findings. 
Whereas, Article III, Section VI, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, delegates authority to Counties and municipalities "for the purpose of regulating, restricting, or prohibiting the exhibition of nudity, partial nudity, or depictions of nudity in connection with the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages;" and, 
Whereas, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit has upheld a municipal ordinance prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments; and, 
Whereas, the Supreme Court of Georgia has upheld a municipal ordinance prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments; and, 
Whereas, among the undesirable community conditions identified with live nude entertainment and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for the allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior, and acceleration of community blight; Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); 5634 East Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4279670 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curium); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and, 
Whereas, the Supreme Court of Georgia, in Chambers d/b/a Neon Cowboy v. Peach County, Georgia, 266 Ga. 318, 467 S.E.2d 519 (1996), held that local governments may adopt ordinances designed to combat the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses, and further held that a governing authority seeking to regulate adult entertainment establishments must have evidence of a relationship between the proposed regulation and the undesirable secondary effects it seeks to control. The Georgia Supreme Court further held in the same opinion that in passing its regulations, a local government may rely on the experience of other counties and municipalities to demonstrate such a relationship; and, 
Whereas, the United States Supreme Court, in City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), held that a local government may rely on the experience of other Cities in enacting legislation to regulate adult entertainment businesses; and, 
Whereas, Federal and State appellate courts, have previously held that before enacting an ordinance to combat undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment, a legislative body is required to consider specific evidence of the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments that it reasonably believes relevant to the interests it seeks to address by passing the ordinance; and, 
Whereas, based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties including, but not limited to, Fulton County, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; New York City, New York; Indianapolis, Indiana; Dallas, Texas; Sandy Springs, Georgia; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; City of St. Mary's, Georgia; Hamilton County, Tennessee; Amarillo, Texas; Rome, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Austin, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; Manatee County, Florida; City of Garden Grove, California; Forth Worth, Texas; Houston, Texas; St. Cloud, Minnesota; Whittier, California; and the City of Los Angeles, California, which are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Kennesaw, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw note the documented negative economic, physical, and social impact adult entertainment businesses have on the community; and, 
Whereas, based upon the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, which experiences the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw find are relevant to the problems faced by the City of Kennesaw, and which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within this country, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw find that public nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments offering adult entertainment, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia et al. v. Fulton County, Georgia, 596 F.3d 1265, 2010 WL 520542 (11th Cir. 2010); and, 
Whereas, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw find and declare that nudity and sexual conduct and depiction thereof, coupled with alcohol in public places, encourages undesirable behavior and is not in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare; and, 
Whereas, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw have chosen to avoid the disturbances associated with mixing alcohol and nude dancing by means of a reasonable restriction upon establishments which sell spirituous or vinous liquors or malt or brewed beverages; and, 
Whereas, the ordinance furthers important governmental interests of reducing crime and protecting property values which are unrelated to the suppression of speech; and, 
Whereas, it is the intent of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw to enact an ordinance, narrowly tailored, sufficient to combat the undesirable secondary effects of the serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment facilities; and, 
Whereas, it is not the intent of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw, in enacting this article to deny to any person the right to speech or expression protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor it is the intent to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented performance or materials protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, but to adopt a content neutral ordinance to combat the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment where alcoholic beverages are served or consumed; and, 
Whereas, this Section is enacted to further the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Kennesaw; 
Now, Therefore, this Section is hereby enacted to further such health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Kennesaw. 
(b)  Activities prohibited; minimum clothing requirements; exception. 
(1)  No person shall suffer or permit any person to engage in live conduct exposing to public view the person's genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola on the licensed premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of any licensee to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of the licensee during such employees working hours. 
(3)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises of any licensee, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(4)  No licensee shall allow any person to engage in specified sexual activities on the licensed premises. 
(5)  No licensee shall use any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, and or genitals. 
(6)  No licensee shall allow the holding, promotion, or sponsoring of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in this section. 
(7)  Exception. Nothing contained in subsection (b) of this section shall apply to the premises of any theatre, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances, where the performances that are presented are expressing matters of serious literary, artistic, scientific, or political value. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, § 9, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 6-111. - Sale and refilling of growlers. 
(a)  The sale and refilling of growlers in compliance with this chapter is authorized for growler shops licensed pursuant to section 6-52(h) of this Code. 
(b)  The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or any provision or section of this Code. 
(c)  Growlers may only be filled from kegs or containers procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(d)  Growlers may only be filled with a malt beverage, craft beer, or hard cider. 
(e)  Only growlers that are properly sanitized may be filled and made available for retail sale. It shall be the responsibility of the entity filling the growler to sanitize such growler prior to filling it. 
(f)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Each growler shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of the sale and/or refilling, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extend over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the business filling the growler. The containers or bottles shall be identified as a malt beverage or craft beer, contain the name of the malt beverage or craft beer, and bear the name, address and telephone number of the business selling the malt beverage or craft beer. 
(g)  Each growler filled with a malt beverage or craft beer must contain the following warning label: 
"GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General, women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption of alcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car or operate machinery, and may cause health problems." 
It shall be the responsibility of the entity filing the growler to assure each growler has, on its exterior, a warning label containing the language set forth in this subsection. 
(h)  Consumption of the contents of any growler on the premises where it was filled is strictly prohibited. However, the licensee may provide samples of any malt beverages or craft beer on tap and wine. Each such sample shall not exceed two fluid ounces. The licensee shall not serve more than three samples to any individual within a 24-hour period. In addition, the licensee shall be permitted to sell flights of malt beverages, craft beer, wine and/or hard cider for consumption on the premises. A flight may consist of no more than four four-ounce glasses. The licensee may sell no more than two flights per person within any 24-hour period. Flights and samples must be consumed only in a designated area on or within the licensed premises. The licensee shall not be required to hold a separate license for sales of alcohol by the drink in order to serve or sell samples of flights of malt beverages, craft beer, wine and/or hard cider. However, the licensee must apply for and obtain a package/pouring license for a fee to be established from time to time by the city in section 6-52 of this Code in order to sell flights for consumption on the premises. 
(i)  Sales of growlers shall be limited to the legal hours during which the licensee may sell such alcoholic beverages and must be removed from the premises before the applicable closing time. 
(j)  Any person filling a growler with a malt beverage or craft beer, or handling a growler after filled the growler is filled with either a malt beverage or craft beer must have a server license issued by the city in conformance with the provisions of chapter 6, alcoholic beverages, of this Code. 
(k)  The refilling of growlers shall not be a violation of section 6-102 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2016-10, 4-4-16; Ord. No. 2016-33, 11-17-16) 
Sec. 6-112. - Liability of licensee for acts or omissions of employees. 
Because employees of licensee are able to sell alcoholic beverages only as a result of the city issuing a license to the licensee, the licensee shall be liable for all acts or omissions of those employees that amount to a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 6-113. - Reporting of disciplinary actions. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §3-3-2.1 and as amended, the finance director of the city shall be required to provide notification to the Georgia Department of Revenue within 45 days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the municipality taking disciplinary action against any person issued a license to operate any premises at which 75 percent or more total gross annual revenue is derived from the sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Within 45 days of any disciplinary action, the licensee shall notify the Georgia Department of Revenue of the details of such disciplinary action, including the date such action was taken, the nature of such action, and any other information required by the Georgia Department of Revenue, using a format to be determined by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(c)  The notification required under paragraph (a) and (b) of this code section shall be in the format for the reporting of disciplinary actions set by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(d)  For purposes of this code section "disciplinary action" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. §3-3-2.1(a)(1) and as amended, which includes any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, any employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of a licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 8-15-16) 
Sec. 6-114. - Wine specialty shops. 
Wine Specialty Shop will operate under the following conditions: 
(1)  No less than 75 percent of the gross revenue of the business shall be derived from the package sale of table wine, fortified wines, port, sherry and/or wine accessories or other merchandise allowed to be sold in the business zoning district. Consumption on the premises sales must be 25 percent or less of the business' gross revenue; free samples distributed under this section shall not be included in the calculation of consumption on the premises sales. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a wine specialty shop to sell or have on the premises spirituous liquors or packaged malt beverages. 
(3)  A wine specialty shop shall be allowed to sell growlers containing craft draft beer, as long as they follow provisions set forth in section 6-111 of this chapter. 
(4)  Shall be allowed to serve craft draft beers by the glass for consumption on the premises only during the same hours as are permitted in subsection 6-93 under this chapter for the sale of "malt beverages and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package." Packaged sales of craft draft beers other than craft draft beer growlers is prohibited. Malt beverages fees shall apply for consumption on the premises of craft draft beers. 
(5)  Only the licensee or an employee shall dispense wine/craft/draft beers from a tap or bottle. Free samples of wine or craft draft beers shall not exceed two ounces nor shall any one individual be offered more than three samples within any 24-hour period. 
(6)  Sampling or tasting of wine or craft draft beers is only permitted within the designated portion of the premises. 
(7)  A wine specialty shop shall not be required to have more than one entrance to the licensed establishment by virtue of it holding a combination package/pouring license. 
(8)  A retail establishment operating as a wine specialty shop shall provide the business license clerk's office, at the time of alcohol license renewal, a statement prepared by licensee's bookkeeper or accountant of the gross sales of the business for the preceding calendar year. The statement shall include the total gross sales for the establishment and document the percentage of sales in dollars attributed to consumption on the premises as compared to package sales and other general merchandise sales. Copies of the state sales tax returns for the same period shall be attached to the statement. The statement must be properly notarized and certified to be true and correct by the licensee or his/her agent under penalty of law, and shall accompany the renewal license fee payment on or before December 31, of each year. The city reserves the right to require, for any reasons deemed necessary by the city, a certified audit for sales of wine. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 6-115. - Brewpubs. 
(a)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without first obtaining any applicable federal and state licenses, and each brewpub licensee shall comply with all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and license requirements; 
(b)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
(1)  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of malt beverages in a calendar year solely for retail sale; 
(2)  Operate an eating establishment that shall be the sole retail outlet for such malt beverages; 
(3)  Operate an eating establishment that may offer for sale for consumption on the premises any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers that are authorized for retail sale under this title, including wine, distilled spirits, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler; and, provided, further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers; 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, sell up to a maximum of 5,000 barrels annually of such malt beverages to licensed wholesale dealers. Under no circumstances shall such malt beverages be sold by a brewpub licensee to any person holding a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the purpose of resale; 
(5)  Possession of a brewpub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the same premises; 
(c)  A brewpub license holder shall not be prohibited from selling wine or malt beverages by the package for consumption off the premises; 
(d)  A brewpub licensee shall: 
(1)  Pay all federal, state, and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed by this city and the state as manufacturers, retailers, and, where applicable, wholesalers under this title; 
(2)  Measure malt beverages manufactured on the premises and otherwise comply with applicable rules and regulations respecting excise and enforcement tax determination of such malt beverages as required by this City, the state, and the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 2016-33, 11-17-16; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 8, 8-21-17) 
Secs. 6-116—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOCIAL HOSTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of Art. IV by Ord. No. 2012-14, said article was repealed by Ord. No. 2012-13, § 10, adopted June 21, 2012. The former Art. IV pertained to erotic entertainment/dance establishments and derived from Ord. No. 2008-18, § 2, adopted May 19, 2008. Ord. No. 2012-14, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as § 6-111 et seq. Inasmuch as there were already provisions designated as §§ 6-111 and 6-112, Ord. No. 2012-14 has been included herein as § 6-131 et seq. at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-131. - Findings and intent. 
The mayor and the city council finds and declares as follows: 
(a)  In 2007, the U.S. Surgeon General issued a report entitled "The Surgeon General's Call to Action To Prevent and Reduce Underage Drinking," which can be found at http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/underagedrinking/calltoaction.pdf. ("Surgeon General's Call to Action"). 
(b)  "Early alcohol consumption by some young people will result in an alcohol use disorder—that is, they will meet diagnostic criteria for either alcohol abuse or dependence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 4. 
(c)  "[A] higher percentage of youth in 8th, 10th, and 12th grades used alcohol in the month prior to being surveyed than used tobacco or marijuana, the illicit drug most commonly used by adolescents." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 5. 
(d)  Various surveys have found that: approximately ten percent of children who are nine to ten years old have started drinking alcoholic beverages; nearly 33 percent of youth start drinking alcoholic beverages before the age of 13; more than ten percent of youth who are 12 to 13 years old and over 33 percent of youth who are 14 to 15 years old reported drinking a whole alcoholic beverage in the year before they were surveyed, and the peak years of alcohol initiation are when youth are in 7th and 8th grades. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 6. 
(e)  While adolescents typically drink alcoholic beverages less often than adults, when they do drink alcoholic beverages, adolescents tend to drink more alcoholic beverages at each event than adults. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at pages 6—7. 
(f)  Persons who are less than the age of 21 often possess or consume alcoholic beverages at social parties or gatherings held at or on private residences and other private property under control of a person who either has provided the alcoholic beverages or who knows or reasonably should know of such conduct, but fails to take steps to prevent it. 
(g)  "Annually, about 5,000 people under age 21 die from alcohol-related injuries involving underage drinking." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 10. 
(h)  Underage drinking "[p]lays a significant role in risky sexual behavior, including unwanted, unintended, and unprotected sexual activity, and sex with multiple partners. Such behavior increases the risk of unplanned pregnancy and for contracting sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including infection with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 10. 
(i)  Underage drinking "[i]ncreases the risk of physical and sexual assault." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 10. 
(j)  Underage drinking "[c]an cause a range of physical consequences, from hangovers to death from alcohol poisoning." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(k)  Underage drinking, "[c]an cause alterations in the structure and function of the developing brain, which continues to mature into the mid- to late twenties and may have consequences reaching far beyond adolescence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(l)  Underage drinking, "[c]reates secondhand effects that can put others at risk. Loud and unruly behavior, property destruction, unintentional injuries, violence, and even death because of underage alcohol use afflict innocent parties. For instance, about 45 percent of people who die in car crashes involving a drinking driver under the age of 21 are people other than the driver." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(m)  Law enforcement agency responses to disturbances involving underage consumption of alcoholic beverages at parties or gatherings at or on private residences or other private property frequently require the use of extensive public resources. Further, when law enforcement personnel respond to such disturbances it limits their ability to respond to other service calls in the community, thereby placing the community at increased risk. Law enforcement is not currently reimbursed for their expenses when called to a party or gathering at or on a private residence or other private property. 
(n)  The prohibitions found in this article are reasonable and expected to deter the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of 21 by holding responsible persons who encourage, are aware of, or should be aware of, the illegal conduct, yet fail to take steps to prevent it. In addition, the revenue received by the city, after cost reimbursement to responding law enforcement agency, will be directed toward law enforcement strategies and prevention programs in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 6-132. - Title. 
This article shall be referred to as the "Kennesaw Social Hosting Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 6-133. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, or as set forth in section 6-1 of this Code, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Dwelling unit means, without limitations, any of the following: 
(1)  Any single and multi-family residence including, but not limited to, any apartment, cabin, condominium, duplex, house, or log cabin, and the land on which it is located, whether owned, leased, rented, or occupied for no compensation by the occupant or occupants; 
(2)  Any mobile home and the land upon which the mobile home is located, whether or not rent is paid for the mobile home, for the land upon which the mobile home is located, or for both; 
(3)  Any recreational vehicle, whether located on privately-owned or publicly-owned property, and whether rent or not is paid for the recreational vehicle, and the land upon the recreational vehicle is located. 
Gathering means an assembled group of people for the purpose of a social occasion or activity. 
Legal guardian is a person who is lawfully vested with the power and charged with the duty of taking care of an underage person. 
Other private property. 
(1)  The term "other private property" includes the following locations: 
a.  A hotel or motel room; 
b.  An assembly hall or meeting room; 
c.  A common room of a dwelling unit used for a party (e.g., a recreation room of an apartment building or a common room of a condominium complex); 
d.  A site in a privately-owned campground; 
e.  A privately-owned vacant lot; or 
f.  Privately-owned land or real estate of any type. 
(2)  Such locations constitute "other private property" under all of the following conditions: 
a.  The location is occupied by one or more persons on a temporary or permanent basis; 
b.  The location is occupied as a dwelling, permanent residence, or temporary residence, for a party or for any other social function; 
c.  The location is owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
Parent means any person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, a foster parent, a step-parent, or who a person who stands in loco parentis . 
Party means a gathering or event at which two or more persons assemble or gather for a social occasion or activity. 
Person who has a right of possession means, with respect to a private residence or other private property, as follows: 
(1)  Owner of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(2)  The record owner of the title to the property as of the time of the party regardless of where that person currently resides; 
(3)  Tenant or lessee of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(4)  Landlord of another person who has a right of possession in the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(5)  The person or persons who are in charge of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; or 
(6)  Social host. 
Private residence means the following: 
(1)  A dwelling unit, whether occupied on a temporary basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation; 
(2)  Any other item on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, which includes, but is not limited to any of the following: an animal pen, an animal shed, a barn, a boat dock, a boat house, a cabana, an equipment shed, a free-standing office, a garage, a gazebo, a granary, a hot tub, a hunting cabin, a corn crib, a sauna, a stable, a studio, a swimming pool, a private office, a shed, a silo, a tent, a tool shed, a tree-house, a tractor, or a vehicle of any type or nature; 
(3)  Other items or areas accompanying or on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, whether improved or unimproved, such as a yard (whether fenced or unfenced), patio, outdoor grilling or eating area, open fields, jetty, pier, dock, or lake shore; 
(4)  Water bodies contiguous to or on the same land parcel as a dwelling unit, such as a basin, bayou, brook, creek, dam, lagoon, lake, marsh, pond, river, stream, or swamp. 
Reasonable steps means steps that include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Verifying the legal minimum drinking age of persons at the party or gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued identification cards all of those persons in attendance; and 
(4)  Supervising and monitoring the activities of underage persons at the party or gathering. 
Social host means: 
(1)  The person or persons who organize, supervise, officiate, conduct or control a party or gathering at or on or at a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by that person or those persons; 
(2)  The person or persons receiving money or any other type of consideration for granting access to a party or gathering at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by that person. 
Underage person means any person under the age of 21. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 6-134. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person who has a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property to knowingly host, permit, or allow a party or gathering to take place or continue at or on such private residence or other private property if any underage person at the party or gathering possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the person knows or reasonably should know, after taking all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by the underage person, that the underage person is possessing or consuming any alcoholic beverage at the party or gathering. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a parent or legal guardian to allow any underage person under the care of that parent or legal guardian to allow to attend a party or other social gathering if that parent or legal guardian knows or reasonably should know that the underage person will possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at that party or social event. 
(c)  It is the duty of any person having a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property, who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a party or gathering at or on the dwelling unit, the private residence, or other private property, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any underage person at the party or gathering. A breach of this duty shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Any violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended, shall also be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 6-135. - Protected activities. 
(a)  Nothing in this article should be interpreted to prohibit legally protected practices held at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property that includes the possession and/or consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21: 
(1)  As part of religious practices on private property; or 
(2)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state and the consumption occurs on private property pursuant to and in accordance with that prescription; or 
(3)  When the parent or legal guardian of the underage person physically gives the alcohol to that underage person when in their own residence and while in their presence and as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the exemptions for protected activities found in section 6-135(a) of this article, if an underage person leaves said private property intoxicated where he or he was provided the alcohol and is found in public, then said furnishers of alcoholic beverages to that underage person shall be held responsible in the same manner as furnishers of alcoholic beverages to underage persons at nonprotected activities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 6-136. - Separate violation for each incident. 
Each incident in violation of section 6-134 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 6-137. - Enforcement authority. 
The city police department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the mayor and city council are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The city police department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the mayor and the city council may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 6-138. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  Consistent with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10(a), the first violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall also be a violation of this article. Any person who violates O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine for which the Georgia Statutes provide for a violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(2)  Any parent who violates section 6-134(b) of this article may be assessed the maximum penalty for which the city Ordinances and Georgia Statutes provide for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates section 6-134(a), (b) and/or (c) of this article has committed a public nuisance constituting an immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare, warranting summary abatement and is guilty of a civil violation. 
(2)  On the violation of section 6-134(a), (b) and/or (c), the violator shall be assessed a civil penalty for each such violation of not more than the maximum allowed by the city ordinances and the Georgia State Statutes. 
(3)  Violations of section 6-134 of this article shall be noticed by citation, issued by the city police department. The citation shall also give notice of the right to request a hearing to challenge the validity of the citation, the time for requesting that hearing, and that the person has a right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 12-17-12) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-08, adopted Feb. 5, 2007, renumbered and/or deleted former chs. 10 and 14, and enacted new chs. 10 and 14 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 14 pertained to animals and is now set out as ch. 10, with new provisions for same. For a complete history of former ch. 14 see the Code Comparative Table. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment (of an animal) means the act of any person who: 
(1)  Abandons an animal by leaving an animal unattended for a period of time in excess of 24 hours without food, water, adequate ventilation or shelter on public or private property, including but not limited to the property of the owner/custodian; 
(2)  Puts out, leaves, abandons, or in any other way discards any animal on public or private property, including but not limited to the property of the owner/custodian, and including but not limited to leaving an animal contained in a box, bag, fence, house or other structure or tethered; or 
(3)  Places an animal in the custody of a state licensed entity, such as but not limited to a veterinary clinic, grooming facility, boarding facility, or pet sitter for treatment, boarding, or other care, and fails to reclaim the animal by the agreed upon time. The entity shall abide by the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 44-14-490 in disposing of the animal. 
Abused animal means any animal that has been harmed by an act, an omission or neglect, including but not limited to any animal that has been: 
(1)  Deprived of adequate food, water, shelter, ventilation, care, space, or veterinary care. 
(2)  Physically harmed, tortured, mutilated, beaten, or illegally killed. 
(3)  Trained/used for fighting other animals. 
(4)  Used as bait to train/lure other animals to fight/kill. 
Adequate means sufficient; commensurate; equally efficient; equal to what is required; suitable to the case or occasion; satisfactory. 
Animal shall not include fish or any pests that might normally be exterminated or removed from a business, a residence or other structure. 
Animal bite means any physical contact of the teeth, nails, or claws of an animal with human flesh, including but not limited to a scrape, puncture, pierce, scratch or tear, so long as bleeding results. 
Animal control facility/shelter means those facilities designated by the board of commissioners for the housing and care of animals pursuant to this chapter. 
Animal control officer means an individual authorized by local law or by the governing authority of the county or the covered municipality to carry out the duties imposed by this chapter. 
Animal control unit means, collectively, the animal control manager and employees who are under the direction of the Cobb County Police Department, its successor department(s), or other entity selected by the board of commissioners to carry out the duties of animal control for Cobb County pursuant to this chapter and federal/state laws. 
Animal mill means an individual or entity that keeps and/or breeds animals in conditions where animals are frequently caged for extended periods of time, do not receive adequate care, and/or are not kept in an environment conducive to the health and well being of the animals. 
Animal shelter means an entity that possesses a shelter license from the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
Attacking or biting animal means: 
(1)  Any animal which poses a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of an attack that caused property damage and/or physical injury. 
(2)  An animal shall not be an "attacking or biting animal" within the meaning of this chapter if: 
a.  It inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. 
b.  The injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal; had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Bedding (adequate) means sufficient quantity of dry, non-contaminated, safe bedding, which is appropriate to the animal's age, size, species, and breed requirements. 
Board of health means the Cobb County Board of Health, or its authorized representatives, which shall include officers or employees of CCAC. 
Breeder means a person or entity that owns an animal and allows it to reproduce, whether planned or unplanned. 
Care (adequate/humane) means attention to the needs of an animal, including but not limited to, the provision of adequate water, food, shelter, bedding, sanitary conditions, ventilation, heating/cooling (temperature control), space, exercise and veterinary medical attention necessary to maintain the health of the animal with regard to the specific age, size, species, and breed of animal. 
Cobb County Animal Control means the Cobb County Animal Control Unit and Shelter sometimes referred to in this chapter as "CCAC". 
Confinement means restriction of an animal to a home, basement, garage, building, pen, or other escape-proof enclosure. Confinement by a rope, chain, tether, fenced yard or other area accessible by other animals or persons, other than the caretaker, is not considered confinement. 
Costs means confiscation costs on potentially dangerous dogs, dangerous dogs or vicious animals are set by the board of commissioners and shall be paid by the owner to Cobb County Animal Control. 
Dangerous dog means: 
(1)  Any dog that, according to the records of the county, has without provocation either: 
a.  Inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
b.  Aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered the safety of humans after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
(2)  A dog shall not be a dangerous dog within the meaning of this chapter if: 
a.  The dog inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer executing official duties; 
b.  The injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Dead animal means a deceased animal including the carcass or parts of a carcass. 
Dispose of means: 
(1)  The sale of any live animal at public or private sale, the giving or adopting of a live animal to an individual/entity, or the transference of ownership of a live animal to CCAC or any licensed humane society, licensed rescue group or licensed veterinarian. 
(2)  Appropriate burial or cremation of a dead animal as directed in this chapter. 
Dog control officer means the manager of Cobb County Animal Control or his/her designee who is responsible for enforcing the state dangerous dog laws. This term "dog control officer" is utilized by state law with regard to the state dangerous dog law. 
Domestic animal means any animal other than wildlife, wild animals, or exotic animals as defined by this chapter that is domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition. 
Effluent means an outflow or discharge of waste. 
Euthanasia means the legal act of putting animals to death using humane methods approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
Exercise (adequate) means bodily exertion suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal to maintain normal good health, muscle tone, non-aggressive temperament, and normal behavior. 
Exotic animal means any animal that is not indigenous to the State of Georgia. 
Fence means a structure of wire, wood, stone or other materials, including invisible fencing, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against the passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. 
(1)  A fence does not include an "invisible fence" if the fence is: 
a.  Turned off or the animal is not wearing a properly operating signaling device; 
b.  Ineffective for any animal that has learned it can cross the fence line; 
c.  Intended to be a means of keeping people or animals out of an enclosed area; or 
d.  Buried in or adjacent to the county right-of-way. 
(2)  An invisible fence is not an acceptable means of control for an animal that is classified as vicious, dangerous, potentially dangerous, or is in estrus/heat. 
Fighting animal/game animal means any animal that has aggressive parentage, or an animal bred and/or trained to: 
(1)  Exhibit aggressive qualities; 
(2)  Have no instinct to withdraw from a fight or to display signs of submission; 
(3)  Fight to the point of complete exhaustion or death with minimal provocation; 
(4)  Suppress the animal's instinct for self-preservation; 
(5)  Inflict maximum damage to the animal's opponents; 
(6)  Offer little or no indication that an attack is imminent; or 
(7)  Be ready/willing for combat and unyielding in combat. 
Food (adequate) means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally adequate food, fed according to age, size, species and breed requirements, or as directed by a veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition or risk to the animal's health. Garbage or spoiled/rancid food is not considered adequate food. 
Foster home means a temporary home that cares for animals until they can be placed in a permanent home or returned to CCAC or its designee for adoption/disposal. Foster homes must be affiliated with and controlled by licensed rescue groups and/or licensed animal shelters. 
Garbage means all refuse matter/effluent. Garbage includes, but is not limited to animal or vegetable refuse, by-product of a restaurant, kitchen, or meat/poultry processing establishment, spoiled/rancid food and refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise (that is normally discarded). 
Grid means a manufactured type of wood, plastic, or wire flooring specifically designed to be used in an area where an animal is housed. 
Hoarder means a person or entity that: 
(1)  Collects animals and fails to provide them with humane/adequate care; 
(2)  Collects dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this chapter; or 
(3)  Collects, houses, or harbors animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
Human exposure to rabies means any bite, scratch, or other situation in which saliva or central nervous system (CNS) tissue of a potentially rabid animal enters an open wound, fresh wound, or comes in contact with a mucous membrane by entering the eye, mouth, or nose. Touching or handling a potentially rabid animal with the possible exception of a bat or touching or handling another animal or inanimate object that has had contact with a rabid animal does not constitute an exposure unless wet saliva or CNS tissue entered a fresh, open wound or had contact with a mucous membrane. Likewise, contact with the urine, feces, or blood of a potentially rabid animal does not constitute an exposure since the pathogenesis of rabies is such that the virus follows nerve pathways and has only limited circulation in the blood. 
Humane society means a licensed organization that rescues, assists and provides care for animals, educates the public in humane care of animals, initiates/facilitates programs to improve the quality of life for animals. 
Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by CCAC. 
Licensed means having a valid Georgia state license issued under the authority of the State of Georgia. 
Lure means an animal used to bait/teach/encourage another animal to chase, fight or kill other animals. 
Manager means the manager of the Cobb County Animal Control Unit or his/her designee. 
Neglect means absence of adequate care that is unintentional. 
Neglect (willful) means the intentional withholding of adequate food, water and humane care required by an animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, death, or other harmful/debilitating conditions. 
Nuisance animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles, eliminates or defecates on private property other than its owner's property or on public property; 
(2)  Causes unsanitary or offensive conditions or otherwise endangers public health, welfare or safety; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by barking, howling or other noisemaking for a period of more than 15 minutes; 
(4)  Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people; 
(5)  Is in estrus and not confined in a manner which can keep it away from intact males of the same species; or 
(6)  Causes serious annoyance to a neighboring residence and interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of that property. 
Owner means any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of any animal subject to this chapter. This definition is intended to embrace any person who is a custodian. 
Police department means the Cobb County Police Department or its successor department(s). 
Potentially dangerous dog means: 
(1)  Any dog that has without provocation bitten a human being on public or private property. 
(2)  A dog is not considered a potentially dangerous dog according to this chapter if: 
a.  The dog inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer in carrying out official duties; or 
b.  The injury inflicted was sustained by a person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Primary enclosure means any structure or device used to restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, such as a fence, building, room, pen, run, cage, stall, paddock, or pasture, that provides adequate space and shelter. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious animal securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of another animal or any person other than the owner or caretaker. 
The enclosure must: 
(1)  Be designed to prevent the animal from escaping, and: 
a.  If the enclosure is a fence, the fence must be high enough to keep the animal from climbing over and must be secured at the bottom to keep the animal from digging under. 
b.  If the enclosure is a pen or structure other than a fence, the pen or structure must have secure sides, top and bottom constructed or secured in such a manner to prevent the animal's escape, and be of a height and strength to maintain the animal within it. 
(2)  Provide adequate shelter. 
(3)  Provide adequate space for the animal. 
Provoked attack means an attack resulting when a domestic animal is placed in a situation such that an expected reaction would be to bite or attack. 
Relinquished means written transfer of ownership of an animal by the owner to CCAC. 
Rescue animal means a dog, cat, or other animal temporarily maintained by a licensed rescue group until the animal can be placed in a permanent home. 
Rescue group (licensed) means any individual or entity that houses and cares for rescue animals until permanent homes can be located and that maintains all required federal, state and local licenses/registrations. 
Restraint of animal means complete and immediate control of an animal by a physical device while under the direct supervision of a competent person. 
Running at large means any domestic animal not under the control and restraint of the owner or the owner's designee. 
Sale of animals means the transfer of ownership of an animal through verbal or written agreement to a new owner in exchange for money, goods, services, or fees. 
Sanitary conditions means animal living space free from health hazards, irritants, or conditions that may endanger or pose a significant risk to an animal's health. In the case of farm animals, nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing sanitation requirements or standards more stringent than normally accepted animal husbandry and humane practices as defined by this chapter and Georgia state law as regulated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
Severe injury means any physical injury resulting in any of the following: 
(1)  Broken bones; 
(2)  Puncture wounds; 
(3)  Lacerations, with or without, sutures; 
(4)  A medical procedure; or 
(5)  Death. 
Shelter (adequate) means protective cover for a domestic animal appropriate for the species and providing adequate space to maintain the animal in good health, which also prevents pain, suffering or a significant risk to the animal's health. 
(1)  Adequate shelter includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Sufficient coverage and insulation to protect an animal from extreme hot and cold temperatures; 
b.  Sufficient protection from the elements to keep the animal dry; 
c.  Sufficient shade and ventilation to prevent an animal from overheating and/or dehydrating; and 
d.  Adequate bedding or resting area suitable for the breed, species, age, size, and medical condition of the animal. 
(2)  Adequate shelter is structurally sound housing which provides an animal with: 
a.  Adequate space; 
b.  Four solid walls or an "igloo" type of structure; 
c.  A roof; 
d.  A dry floor that is either: 
1.  Solid, or 
2.  Grids, provided the animal can easily stand, walk, lay and sit on the grids without its feet or body parts being caught, damaged, or injured. The grids and area under the grids must be designed so that they can be cleaned and sanitized. 
e.  An entrance; and 
f.  Adequate space for the number of animals on the property. 
(3)  Materials not suitable for shelters include but are not limited to: 
a.  Inadequately insulated containers; 
b.  Crates with exposed sharp edges; 
c.  Metal or plastic drums; 
d.  Abandoned or parked vehicles; 
e.  Porches or decks; 
f.  Lean-tos; 
g.  Any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection from the elements; and 
h.  Any other structure that is not safe or suitable for housing the species. 
Space (adequate) means: 
(1)  Sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal; 
(2)  Sufficient space during periods of confinement, suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal to permit the animal to turn about freely, stand, sit, or lie, move, etc. in a comfortable and normal position; or 
(3)  For sick or injured animals, confinement as directed by a veterinarian. 
State dangerous dog control law means O.C.G.A. tit. 4, ch. 8, art. 2 (O.C.G.A § 4-8-20 et seq.) as amended. 
Strict confinement/isolation for animals bitten by rabid animal means confinement for the period of time recommended by the State of Georgia and kept inside a home, basement, garage, or suitable building, and isolated from other animals and people other than the caretaker while the animal is being observed for symptoms of rabies. An animal within a fenced yard, on a chain, or otherwise in an area accessible in any way to other animals or persons other than the caretaker is not in a strictly confined area. 
Temperature control (adequate) means maintaining temperatures recommended for animals by the department of agriculture guidelines for shelters and farm animals. 
Tether means any chain, rope, leash, tie out or wire designed to restrain an animal which is attached to an animal's collar or halter and is also attached to a stationary object. Acceptable temporary tethers include appropriate size chain, leash, rope or other tethering device that is of adequate length to satisfy the space and exercise requirements for the animal. In any event, any tether must be a minimum of ten feet in length. Tethering devices, as referred to in this chapter, are the type commonly used for the size animal involved and are attached to the animal by means of a properly fitted collar or harness. 
Training group (licensed) means an appropriately licensed organization or individual that trains animals to assist physically handicapped persons, to assist search and rescue operations, and/or to work with government agencies or law enforcement agencies. 
Unprovoked attack or without provocation means an attack that is not provoked as defined by this chapter. 
Unsanitary conditions means animal living space including shelter and exercise area, contaminated by health hazards, irritants, items or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Excessive animal waste; 
(2)  Garbage, trash or effluent; 
(3)  Standing water or mud; 
(4)  Rancid/contaminated food or water; 
(5)  Fumes, foul or noxious odors, contaminated air, hazardous chemicals or poisons; 
(6)  Decaying materials; 
(7)  Uncontrolled parasite or rodent infestation; and 
(8)  Areas that contain nails, screws, broken glass, broken boards, pits, poisons, sharp implements or other items that could cause injury, illness or death to an animal. 
Ventilation (adequate) means fresh air sufficient to provide for the health of an animal. 
Veterinarian means a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed to diagnose and treat diseases and injuries in animals. 
Veterinary care (adequate) means medical care of an animal from or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian and necessary to maintain the health of an animal based on the age, species, breed, etc., of the animal, or to prevent an animal from suffering from: 
(1)  Ongoing infections; 
(2)  Infestation of parasites; 
(3)  Disease; or 
(4)  Any other medical condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such care would: 
a.  Endanger the health or welfare of the animal; or 
b.  Promote the spread of communicable diseases. 
Veterinary clinic (licensed) means a business facility where veterinary medicine is practiced. 
Vicious animal means: 
(1)  Any animal which: 
a.  Constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of an attack of such severity or intensity as to cause severe property or physical damage; or 
b.  Makes an unprovoked attack on animals or on human beings; or 
c.  Intentionally attacks physical property in an effort to cause harm to a human or other animal. 
(2)  An animal shall not be a vicious animal within the meaning of this chapter if: 
a.  It inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer carrying out official duties; or 
b.  The injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Water (adequate) means clean, fresh water sufficient to prevent dehydration, properly sustain health, and prevent significant risk to the animal's health. For the purposes of this chapter, snow, ice or rancid/contaminated water are not considered adequate water. 
Wild animal/wildlife means any animal which is indigenous to this state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, and including any hybrid animal that is part wild animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State law and other references— See Georgia Department of Agriculture, Animal Industry Division, Chapter 40-13-13, Animal Protection, the current state law, and the Georgia Rabies Control Manual. 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-3. - Interpretation of chapter. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any liability on the part of county, or any employee, board or official which enforces or fails to enforce any of the provisions provided in this chapter or any provisions in the state dangerous dog law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-4. - Incorporation of state law; construction; other regulations. 
(a)  Incorporation. The state law known as the dangerous dog control law is incorporated in this chapter by reference and made part of this chapter. 
(b)  Construction. This chapter shall be construed to effectuate its purposes and policies and to supplement such existing state laws as may relate to animals. 
(c)  Other regulations. Other provisions of law or regulations relating to this chapter shall apply when any provisions of this chapter shall conflict with the laws of the state or the United States of America. The laws of the state or the United States of America shall apply when this chapter is silent. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-5. - Jurisdiction and interlocal agreement. 
The jurisdiction for enforcement of this chapter shall be in the unincorporated area of the county; however, the county may contract or enter into agreements with other municipalities to enforce this chapter for joint animal control services or for the provision of animal control services and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment for such services. Such agreements or contracts shall be subject to any state law, which may govern. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-6. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer by taking or attempting to take any animal from any vehicle used to transport such animal, or by taking or attempting to take any animal from the animal control impounding areas, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his duties. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-7. - Disposal of dead animal. 
(a)  Legislative authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the Georgia Constitution and 1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 19), page 914 (see pt. J, § 1-4) and 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 2486 (see pt. I, §§ 2-38, 2-39). 
(b)  Abandonment of dead animals; requirements as to disposal generally. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is caring for an animal which has died or has been killed to abandon the animal, its parts, or blood. Under no conditions may dead animals be abandoned at any location, including but not limited to, in wells or open pits of any kind on private or public land. 
(2)  No person shall dispose of an animal, its parts or blood, by burial on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. 
(3)  Arrangements for proper burial must be made with a county official in order to dispose of a dead animal in a county landfill. 
(c)  Removal and disposition of dead animals within rights-of-way and on public property. Any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be the duty of CCAC and the county department of transportation to remove and dispose of the carcasses of all dead animals found within the rights-of-way of all county roads maintained either totally or in part from county funds. 
(d)  Methods of disposal of dead animals. Methods which can be used for disposal of dead animals are burial and incineration in a county approved incinerator. Disposal of animal carcasses by either of the approved methods must be completed within 12 hours after the death or discovery of the carcass unless the carcass is properly refrigerated or frozen. 
(1)  If incineration is chosen, the entire carcass must be reduced to ashes in the incineration process only in a county approved incinerator. 
(2)  Carcasses which are buried must be buried at least three feet below the ground level, but no more than eight feet, and have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass. 
(3)  Mutilation of dead domestic animals is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-8. - Treatment of diseased or injured animals. 
When, in the opinion of the CCAC manager, an animal in the custody of CCAC is: 
(1)  Diseased or injured and in need of immediate treatment so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of communicable disease, the CCAC manager or designee shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of administering necessary treatment. 
(2)  Suffering needlessly due to a life threatening disease or injury, and a licensed veterinarian recommends euthanasia as the most humane course of action, and the CCAC manager or designee agrees that the best interest of the animal would be served by euthanizing the animal, then the animal shall be humanely euthanized regardless of whether or not the normally required impoundment period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-9. - Animals creating nuisances. 
The owner of any animal shall be in violation of this chapter if the animal exhibits any behavior or engages in any activity defined as a "nuisance animal" under section 10-1. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-10. - Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs; registration; insurance; inspection. 
(a)  Certificate required. It shall be unlawful for any person to have or possess a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued by the county. No more than one certificate of registration shall be granted per person or owner for a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. No more than one certificate shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Conditions for issuance of certificate. Subject to the requirements of this section for dangerous dogs and subject to revocation for non-compliance and possible confiscation, the CCAC manager shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the CCAC manager sufficient evidence of the following: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting on the premises of a dangerous dog sign obtained from the county warning that there is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on the property. 
(c)  Dangerous dogs. In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) and (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the CCAC manager evidence of either: 
(1)  Insurance. A policy of insurance in the amount specified by the State of Georgia Dangerous Dog Law, issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of a dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog, provided: 
a.  It shall be the continuing and sole duty of the owner to provide the CCAC manager an updated and effective policy; 
b.  The owner shall notify the CCAC manager of any changes, renewals, and/or cancellations by written notice at least 30 days prior to any change, renewal, and/or cancellation; and 
c.  The county shall have the right to rely on the representations of the owner that to maintain the required insurance when the owner qualifies for the issuance of the certificate of registration; or 
(2)  Surety bond. A surety bond in the amount specified by the State of Georgia and issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)  Fees. The certificate of registration must be renewed annually on the date the dog was declared a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. An annual fee to register dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs as set by the board of commissioners shall be paid by the owner to CCAC. 
(e)  Right to inspect. CCAC shall have the right to inspect, randomly and without notice, a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, which is required to be confined pursuant to this section, in its environment. Permission of the owner or person in custody of the animal confined shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(f)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is loose, unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall provide the dog control officer the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog, and notify the new owner of the designation. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within ten days if the owner is moving within the dog control officer's jurisdiction or moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is moving out of the county shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. Likewise, any person moving into Cobb County who owns a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall register the dangerous dog in Cobb County within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(h)  Any person who releases a vicious animal either willfully through failure to exercise due care or control or who takes such animal out of such proper enclosure in such a manner which is likely to cause injury to another person or damage to the property of another person shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 10-11. - Control of animal. 
(a)  General control. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to be out of his immediate control and restraint, or to be left unattended off the premises of the owner, or to be upon the property of another person without the permission of the owner or person in possession of such other property. For the purposes of this chapter, condominium and apartment common property shall not be considered to be the premises of the animal owner. Voice control does not constitute control of an animal. 
(2)  Restraint of dogs and/or animals shall be maintained as follows: 
a.  When upon the premises of the owner, all animals shall be kept indoors or in a primary enclosure as defined by this chapter in such a manner as to contain the animal within the bounds of the owner's premises, or on a leash in the hands of a person that possesses the ability to restrain the animal. Tethering as a means of primary enclosure is not permitted. 
b.  When off the premises of the owner, all animals shall at a minimum be maintained on an appropriate chain, leash or tie not exceeding six feet in length, and in the hands of a person who possesses the ability to restrain the animal. 
(3)  The requirements of subsections (2)a. and (2)b. of this section shall not apply in the areas zoned for agricultural purposes where the owner of the dog is using the dog for hunting or working purposes and has the dog in his possession or control. If the dog is being used for hunting purposes the owner shall have on his person a valid hunting license. Dogs, while hunting, or show dogs while being shown, are not required to wear a collar or dog tag; but the owner shall have the dog tag in his possession where it may be shown upon demand of a representative of CCAC. 
(4)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal within any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(5)  Every female dog and cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with an intact male of the same species except for planned breeding. 
(6)  Every animal shall be restrained and controlled so as to prevent it from causing property damage, harassing pedestrians or bicyclists, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, or attacking persons or other animals. 
(b)  Control of attacking or biting animal, vicious animals, potentially dangerous dogs and dangerous dogs. 
(1)  The above provisions concerning general control and contained in subsection (a) of this section are applicable to attacking or biting animals, vicious animals and dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(2)  When upon the premises of the owner, attacking or biting animals, vicious animals, potentially dangerous dogs and dangerous dogs shall be kept indoors or in a proper enclosure as defined by this chapter. Permanent or temporary tethering as a means of enclosure is not permissible. 
(3)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall not permit the dog to be outside of a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person. The dog must be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not more than six feet in length and under the physical control of a person who possesses the ability to restrain the dog. 
(4)  The owner of a potentially dangerous dog, vicious animal or attacking or biting animal shall not permit the dog or animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog or animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash not more than six feet in length and is under the physical restraint of a person who possesses the ability to restrain the dog or animal. 
(c)  In any prosecution under this Code section, any animal found running at large may be held by CCAC as evidence of a violation of this Code section. Such holding is at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, and the animal may be released at the conclusion of the prosecution. 
(d)  In lieu of paying a fine or serving jail time under this section, a violator may, at the discretion of the judge, relinquish the animal to CCAC for placement or disposal as determined by CCAC. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 10-12. - Attacking or biting animals. 
The owner of any animal that exhibits the characteristics or behavior as set forth in the definition of "attacking or biting animal" [in section 10-1] shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-12.1. - Vicious animals; possession of vicious animals. 
(a)  The owner of any animal shall be in violation of this chapter if the animal engages in any activity or exhibits any behavior as defined a "vicious animal" by this chapter under section 10-1. 
(b)  Upon being adjudicated guilty of or entering a guilty plea or nolo contendere plea to a charge made under this provision, the owner of the vicious animal, if allowed to maintain the animal will have to adhere to the following requirements for possessing a vicious animal: 
(1)  The owner must possess a proper enclosure to confine the vicious animal; and 
(2)  The owner must post the premises with a vicious animal warning sign. 
(c)  Right to inspect. CCAC shall have the right to inspect, randomly and without notice, a vicious animal which is required to be confined pursuant to this section in its environment. Permission of the owner or person in custody of the animal confined shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  Any person who releases a vicious animal either willfully through failure to exercise due care or control or who takes such animal out of such proper enclosure in such a manner which is likely to cause injury to another person or damage to the property of another person shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-12.2. - Penalty for violation of section 10-12.1. 
For the first conviction under foregoing section 10-12.1, vicious animals; possession of vicious animals, the following penalties may be assessed: 
(1)  The convicted person may serve 60 days confinement, and/or 
(2)  The convicted person may be fined $1,000.00, and/or 
(3)  The convicted person may be required to relinquish control of the animal in question to Cobb County Animal Control and the animal will be dealt with in the discretion of animal control. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State Law reference— Liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal. O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 
Sec. 10-13. - Attacking and biting animals; report of; confiscation. 
(a)  Notice to the county. 
(1)  Any person having information an animal has bitten or attacked a person shall immediately report such information to CCAC. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section, the owner of a vicious animal shall notify CCAC immediately, but in any case within 24 hours, if the animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold or donated. If the animal has been sold or donated, the designation travels with the animal, and the original owner shall provide CCAC with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the animal, and the former owner shall inform the new owner of the designation. 
(b)  Confiscation of biting animals. Upon receiving notice that an animal has bitten or attacked a person, an authorized person from CCAC shall investigate the incident. Any animal determined to have bitten a person shall be immediately strictly confined and isolated for observation at CCAC or, at the owner's option, the owner may immediately take the biting animal to a licensed veterinarian. In the event the licensed veterinarian is closed or unable to take the animal at that time, the animal will be immediately transported to the animal shelter and held until the animal can be transported to a veterinary clinic. Regardless of the quarantine or confinement location, the owner shall be responsible for all expenses incurred. The biting animal shall be segregated and isolated for at least ten days from the date of the bite. 
(1)  Nothing shall prohibit CCAC from allowing an animal to remain in strict confinement on the premises of the owner subject to daily inspections by CCAC so long as the health, safety, and welfare of any person or animal is not threatened. Those animals may include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  A female animal that is nursing offspring and that is current on her rabies vaccination. 
b.  A vaccinated animal if the animal has a medical condition, verified by a written statement from a licensed veterinarian, and confinement at CCAC or a veterinary clinic would be detrimental to the health and welfare of the animal. 
c.  An animal that is current on its vaccination and has bitten its owner, caretaker, or member of its family. 
(2)  No animal that is in strict confinement for biting shall be vaccinated for rabies until the end of the quarantine period. 
(3)  No animal that is in strict confinement shall be sterilized or undergo any other surgical procedure during the quarantine period unless the surgery is necessary for a life threatening medical condition or injury. 
(c)  Confiscation of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. In addition to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, after adjudication, shall be confiscated as follows: 
(1)  Dangerous dogs. A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by CCAC or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by CCAC if: 
a.  The owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by section 10-10; 
b.  The dog is not validly registered as required by section 10-10 of this section, including the posting of warning signs; 
c.  The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
d.  The dog is outside of a proper enclosure in violation of section 10-11. 
(2)  Potentially dangerous dogs. A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
a.  Not validly registered as required by section 10-10, including the posting of warning signs; 
b.  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
c.  Outside of a proper enclosure in violation of section 10-11. 
(d)  Return of confiscated dangerous dogs, potentially dangerous dogs or vicious animals. Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsections (b), (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon payment of reasonable confiscation costs provided in this chapter. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The payment of reasonable confiscation costs and the return of a dog shall not bar or affect an action against the owner for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-14. - Prohibited animals. 
It shall be unlawful to purchase, sell, own, possess, harbor or breed skunks, foxes, prairie dogs, raccoons, coyotes, wolves, hybrid wolves, any hybrid animal that is part wild animal, exotic cats or any other wildlife unless licensed by the respective federal or state department of agriculture to possess such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-15. - Ferrets. 
European ferrets, mustela putorius furo, may be sold, purchased, exhibited, or held as pets, provided that the ferret owner can provide valid documentation that the ferret was sexually spayed or neutered prior to seven months of age and is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian with a properly administered vaccine approved for use on ferrets by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 10-16—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-36. - Animal control unit; unit commander; dog control officer; animal control officers; humane officers. 
(a)  Animal control unit. There is hereby created the county animal control unit, which shall have primary responsibility for animal control and welfare in the county. 
(b)  Appointment of unit. The unit manager of the animal control unit shall be appointed by the appropriate appointing authority. The unit manager may also be designated by the board of health as the official rabies control officer for the county. 
(c)  Powers and duties of unit manager. The unit manager shall be primarily responsible, with support from the director of the department of public safety, for the enforcement of this chapter; and his duties shall include but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Responsible for the operation of the animal shelter and the performance of such duties and the keeping of such records as the board of commissioners may require. 
(2)  Cooperation with the county board of health in the enforcement of rabies control regulations and of animal control directives. 
(3)  Cooperation with animal welfare organizations. 
(4)  Taking up and impounding animals which are in violation of this chapter, using any and all means available that are humane in nature. 
(5)  Housing animals at the animal shelter, or at any facility designated by CCAC to function or serve as an auxiliary shelter. 
(6)  Keeping a record of the number, description and disposition of all animals impounded or otherwise taken into custody, showing in detail in the case of each animal the following: 
a.  A general description by sex, breed and approximate age, together with any identification tag, vaccination tag or other marking, if any; 
b.  The date of receipt; 
c.  The date and manner of disposal; 
d.  The name and address of the person reclaiming or adopting; 
e.  The fees and charges; 
f.  The proceeds of sales received; 
g.  The condition of the animal when received; 
h.  Any treatment administered to the animal, including any drugs, medication or appliances; 
i.  The condition of the animal when reclaimed, redeemed, adopted or purchased; and 
j.  Such additional records as the board of commissioners may require. 
(d)  Identification. The animal control officers shall wear uniforms and badges containing individual names while engaged in the execution of their duties. The unit manager and assistant manager shall possess badges for use in the execution of their duties, but shall not necessarily wear uniforms. 
(e)  Dog control officer. The unit manager is hereby designated the responsibility of dog control officer, and shall carry out all duties provided for by the state dangerous dog control law for the county or any other local government pursuant to contract or agreement; and his duties shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, to make such investigation and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs and dangerous dog owners within the dog control officer's jurisdiction. 
(2)  Notifying the dog's owner pursuant to the state dangerous dog control law when the dog has been classified. 
(f)  Enforcement by unit manager, animal control officer, humane officers. In addition to other duties, the unit manager, animal control officers and humane officers shall have authority to investigate all animal complaints and enforce the animal control ordinance and state dangerous dog law as applied in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-37. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees with respect to all services performed in connection with enforcement of this chapter shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time. A copy of such fee schedule shall be posted at the headquarters of the CCAC and may be changed at any time and from time to time as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The fees established and collected under this chapter and pursuant to the state dangerous dog control law are not penalties but are imposed for the sole purpose of defraying expenses borne by the county for animal control and welfare under this chapter and are subject to change at any time. 
(c)  The CCAC may waive any part of the normally required fees at his discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 10-38—10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL CONTROL BOARD 

Sec. 10-51. - Membership. 
(a)  The Cobb County Animal Control Board shall consist of the following: One member of the Humane Society of Cobb County Board of Directors or its designee (post 1); three interested citizens who have interest in domestic animals (posts 2, 3, 4); two veterinarians, at least one of whom shall be a member of the Cobb County Veterinary Medical Society (posts 5, 6); and one citizen chosen by the chairman of the board of commissioners (post 7). Members of the animal control board shall adopt procedures and policiesto govern potential conflicts of interest arising from the responsibilities and duties of their positions. 
(b)  The manager of the animal control unit shall be an ex officio member of the animal control board. 
(c)  All members of the animal control board shall be residents of the county. 
(d)  Members of the board of commissioners from districts 1, 2, 3 and 4 shall separately appoint posts 5, 3, 1, and 6 respectively (i.e., district commissioner 1 appoints post 5; district commissioner 2 appoints post 3; district commissioner 3 appoints post 1; district commissioner 4 appoints post 6.) The terms of those four members will run concurrent with the appointing commissioner's term, and these members will serve at the appointing commissioner's pleasure. 
In addition, the commissioners from districts 1 and 3 shall together appoint the post 4 member, and the commissioners from districts 2 and 4 shall together appoint the post 2 member. These two members shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing commissioners, and these members' terms shall begin with the announcement of their appointment at an open meeting and will conclude upon first of their appointing commissioner's leaving office for any reason. Notwithstanding the above, all members shall continue to serve until their replacements are appointed. 
(e)  One member of the animal control board (post 7) shall be appointed by the chairman of the board of commissioners. The post 7 member shall serve concurrently with the chairman's term of office and at the chairman's pleasure and until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(f)  The changes provided in this section concerning membership will take effect post-by-post upon the expiration of the terms of the members of the animal control board presently serving on the date of the adoption of this revision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-52. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  In addition to such other powers and duties as may be set forth in this chapter, the animal control board shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Hold hearings and recommend to the board of commissioners regulations and amendments to this chapter concerning the control and welfare of animals in the county. 
(2)  Recommend to the board of commissioners guidelines for the operation and maintenance of the animal shelter. 
(3)  Hold a public meeting at least twice yearly. 
(4)  Study animal related issues and recommend to the board of commissioners those programs, methods, found to be both economically feasible and humane. 
(5)  Study and recommend to the board of commissioners requirements for the treatment and maintenance of animals at the animal shelter. 
(6)  Supply to the board of commissioners semiannual reports as to any recommendations provided for in this section or at such other intervals or times as may be designated by the board of commissioners. 
(7)  Carry out those duties as provided in the state dangerous dog control law, as amended, and hold hearings and determine matters provided therein and as amended. In addition, the animal control board may enact procedures for hearings on the state dangerous dog law. 
(b)  The animal control board may request and receive in a timely manner statistics, information and documentation necessary for reports and studies for the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The animal control board may enact its own by-laws and general hearing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 10-53—10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND ADOPTION 

Sec. 10-66. - Impoundment of animals found running at large; notice to owner. 
(a)  Subject to the state dangerous dog control law and the provisions of this chapter relating to rabies control and the rules and regulations of the board of health and this chapter, any animal found running at large or otherwise engaged in any activity or existing in a condition prohibited by this chapter or by the state dangerous dog control law shall be taken and impounded at the animal shelter. 
(b)  Any person may take into custody any animal running at large in violation of this chapter and place with CCAC. 
(c)  Any person who takes into custody an animal running at large in violation of this chapter shall deliver such animal to the animal shelter without fee or charge. However, a person may house the animal for five business days while attempting to locate and/or contact the owner. Once in the custody of the animal shelter, the shelter shall hold and dispose of such animal in the same manner as though such animal had been running at large and impounded by officers of CCAC. 
(d)  Upon receipt for impoundment of any domesticated animal found to have any means of identification, the CCAC shall immediately make diligent efforts to ascertain the identity of the animal's owner. If identified, CCAC shall, within 24 hours of receipt, telephone the owner to give notice of the impoundment. If CCAC is unable to contact the owner by telephone, it shall send notice of impoundment to the owner by certified mail. 
(e)  Diseased, injured, or pregnant animals, and animals in need of immediate veterinary care so as to lessen the suffering, prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, and/or to save the animal's life, shall be treated by or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian. If an animal is suffering from any life threatening disease or injury where life cannot be maintained and a slow death would be inhumane, and the licensed veterinarian and the CCAC manager agree that the best interest of the animal would be served by euthanizing the animal, then the animal shall be humanely euthanized regardless of whether or not the normally required impoundment period has expired. 
(f)  Any licensed veterinarian who is caring for an animal during the period of impoundment shall immediately notify the CCAC manager if the animal dies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-66.1. - Taking; selling; impounding of owned animals. 
(a)  Any person who takes, steals, or deliberately lures a cat, dog or other domestic animal off the property of the owner without permission of the owner, or who deliberately releases such animal from the property of the owner, without the permission of the owner, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(1)  A law enforcement officer or the CCAC manager or his designee who takes an animal as directed in this chapter while performing his duties as defined by this chapter shall not be in violation of this section. 
(2)  An animal that has been injured, that is in danger, or whose health or safety has been compromised may be removed by CCAC without being in violation of this chapter. 
(3)  Any CCAC officer who finds an animal in need of immediate medical care or treatment due to a life threatening illness or injury or finds an animal in danger, may remove the animal from public or private property if the removal is for the purpose of seeking immediate medical care for the animal, or is in the immediate best interest of the animal. If the animal is removed from a private residence, notice shall be left at the owner's residence advising the owner of the impoundment and reason for impoundment. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who, knowing the identity of an animal's owner, without permission of said owner does any of the following: 
(1)  Relinquishes the animal to CCAC without notifying CCAC of the animal owner's name and address; 
(2)  Relinquishes the animal to CCAC and falsely represents himself as the owner of the animal; 
(3)  Sells the animal; or 
(4)  Gives the animal away. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-66.2. - Entrapment of animals; methods, duration, access to food and water, etc. 
(a)  Trapping of animals is permitted only if all of the following are complied with: 
(1)  The trap shall be a humane trap that is safe and non-debilitating; 
(2)  The trap must be placed in such a manner to prevent injury to children; 
(3)  Traps set to operate must be checked at least every eight hours; 
(4)  Traps must not be set for more than eight hours prior to the earliest possible transport to the animal shelter; and 
(5)  Traps can only be placed on public or private property with permission of the owner or lessor of the property. 
(b)  Trapped animals: 
(1)  Shall be given food and water as needed to prevent malnutrition and dehydration; 
(2)  May not be treated in a cruel or abusive manner; 
(3)  That are domestic animals and are seriously ill or severely injured shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian or the animal shelter for evaluation, care and disposition; 
(4)  That are domestic animals that appear to be uninjured and reasonably healthy shall be taken to animal shelter or returned to the owner if known; and 
(5)  That are wild animals or wildlife shall be taken to the animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-67. - Period of impoundment or confinement. 
(a)  All periods specified in this section shall be deemed to commence at 12:01 a.m. of the day following the day of impoundment or confinement. 
(b)  Other than those dogs confiscated under subsections 10-13(b), 10-13(c), 10-97, or 10-121 through 10-121.18, all impounded animals shall be kept at the animal shelter for a period of not less than five working days unless redeemed within such period. 
(c)  Wildlife or wild animals as defined by this chapter which have been captured by or come to be in the custody of CCAC shall not be deemed impounded and need not be retained for any minimum length of time. Wildlife and wild animals received by CCAC will be disposed of in accordance with federal and state guidelines. 
(d)  Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to CCAC shall be deemed permanently relinquished to CCAC and may be immediately adopted, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as though it had been impounded. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-68. - Redemption; abandonment. 
(a)  The owner of any impounded animal may regain possession of the animal upon payment of all applicable fees specified in section 10-37 and compliance with the terms of this chapter. Such redemption shall not affect any criminal liability of the owner, which may exist with respect to any violation of this chapter and shall not preclude proceedings against the owner for the purpose of pursuing sanctions under this chapter. The following exceptions apply: 
(1)  Any animal impounded as a result of cruelty, abuse, neglect, or any other reason defined by this chapter as inhumane treatment may be retained by CCAC until such time as the case is disposed of in a court competent to hear such matters. 
(2)  Any impounded animal adopted from CCAC that was not spayed or neutered per the adoption agreement may immediately be reclaimed by CCAC, and the owner may not be permitted to reclaim said animal. 
(b)  Any impounded animal not redeemed within the period specified in subsection 10-13(d) or section 10-67, whichever is applicable, shall be considered abandoned to CCAC, in which event all rights of ownership shall vest in CCAC; and the owner shall have no further claim to such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-69. - Adoption. 
(a)  CCAC shall endeavor to locate adopters for adoptable animals. No adoption shall become final until the termination of the impoundment period or confinement period provided for in section 10-67. No person under 18 years of age may adopt an animal and all adopters must provide proper identification prior to the adoption. 
(b)  As a condition precedent to adoption, all fees pursuant to subsection 10-37(a) shall be paid by the adopter. 
(c)  The unit manager shall have the right to refuse adoption to any person or entity who, for any reason, in the discretion of the unit manager or his designee, may be deemed unsuitable as an adopter. 
(d)  No transfer of any animal held at the animal shelter shall be valid without the written approval of CCAC. 
(e)  All animals adopted from the animal shelter shall be neutered or spayed. Upon completion of neutering or spaying, within the period specified by CCAC, the veterinarian performing such operation shall submit to CCAC signed certification of such operation. The adopter shall be responsible for providing proof that the animal has been sterilized within seven days of the surgery or will insure that the licensed veterinarian responsible for the spay/neuter surgery submits signed verification to CCAC that the sterilization process has been accomplished. 
(f)  No person residing in the same household, nor any corporation, institute or other entity, may adopt more than three animals within any 12-month period; however, nothing shall prohibit CCAC discretion to donate more than three animals in a 12-month period, if the donation is in the best interest or welfare of the animal or it is in the best interest of public safety. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, CCAC shall have the right to keep any animal which could otherwise be adopted or sold. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-70. - Sale of animals. 
CCAC shall have the exclusive right to dispose of all animals that have been relinquished to CCAC, impounded or confiscated and not redeemed within the period specified by CCAC, including but not limited to domestic animals, farm animals, livestock, exotic animals, birds and reptiles, in any manner deemed appropriate and in the best interest of the animal and in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-71. - Destruction of animals. 
(a)  Subject to those dogs falling within subsections (b) and (c) of this section, any impounded animal within one of the following categories may be destroyed at the discretion of CCAC, in as humane a manner as possible: 
(1)  Any animal not redeemed within the periods specified in section 10-68 and subsection 10-13(d) or which by reason of age, disease, temperament or injury, is not considered adoptable or otherwise placeable, or when limitations on available kennel space at CCAC exist. 
(2)  Any animal, which is suffering excessively, without regard to whether the period of confinement designated in section 10-67 has expired. 
(3)  Any animal, which presents a danger or exhibits a propensity for aggressive behavior towards any person or other animal, without regard to whether the period of confinement designated in section 10-67 has expired. 
(b)  The owner of a dog confiscated for violation of section 10-10 shall have 20 days from the date the dog was confiscated to comply with the provisions of this chapter and pay reasonable confiscation costs to redeem the animal. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this chapter within the 20-day period, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner, as determined by CCAC. 
(c)  Any dog confiscated when the owner is in violation of the state dangerous dog control law (O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.) or section 10-10 of this chapter shall be destroyed as determined by CCAC only after there has been a conviction or order by the appropriate court under either of such sections. 
(d)  Any animal confiscated when the owner is in violation of section 10-12.1 of this chapter may be destroyed as determined by CCAC only after there has been a conviction or an order by an appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State Law reference— Euthanasia of dogs and cats by animal shelters, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. 
Sec. 10-72. - Neutering and spaying. 
(a)  No impounded animal shall be neutered or spayed (sterilized) without the owner's consent until the period of redemption has expired, except any animal that in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian must be sterilized in order to save its life may be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian prior to the expiration of the redemption period. 
(b)  CCAC shall accomplish the sterilization of any animal whose period of impoundment has expired or that has been voluntarily surrendered to the county by: 
(1)  Requiring adopters to sign a binding agreement to have the adopted animal sterilized within a period specified by CCAC as follows: 
a.  Within 30 days from the date of adoption for animals over the age of six months. 
b.  Within the first six months of age for sexually immature animals. 
(2)  By CCAC sterilizing the animal prior to adoption. 
(3)  If the animal cannot be sterilized as required due to disease, medical condition, or for other reasons as specified by a veterinarian, then signed verification from a licensed veterinarian shall be delivered to CCAC by the adopter and the animal shall be sterilized upon recovery or as soon as recommended by the veterinarian. 
(c)  The adopter of any animal required to be sterilized pursuant this chapter shall be responsible for providing CCAC proof that the animal has been sterilized within seven days of the surgery. The adopter will not be relieved of this responsibility until the veterinarian performing the sterilization certifies to CCAC that the sterilization has been accomplished, or unless the veterinarian certifies to CCAC in writing that the animal has died. 
(d)  Any adopted animal not sterilized within the time specified may be reclaimed by CCAC. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 10-73—10-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-96. - Rabies inoculation, tag requirement for dogs, cats and ferrets. 
(a)  Insofar as the control of rabies is concerned, this chapter shall be construed and enforced consistently with any rules and regulations promulgated by the board of health. CCAC and the public safety director and his designees are authorized and directed to enforce any such rabies control rules and regulations which may be promulgated by the board of health. 
(b)  All dogs, cats and ferrets shall be vaccinated by four months of age and revaccinated as recommended by the current Compendium of Animal Rabies or a licensed veterinarian according to the type of vaccine and the duration of its effectiveness. 
(c)  Animals that may not be vaccinated for health reasons at the direction of a licensed veterinarian and those under the suggested age shall wear a collar with identification tags when off the property of the owner. 
(d)  Ferrets are not required to wear a collar and tag, however the owner, caretaker or veterinarian shall provide proof of vaccination upon demand of CCAC. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor or allow to be kept or harbored any dog or cat over four months of age without a collar, which shall have attached thereto a valid vaccination tag. 
(1)  Dogs, while legally hunting or working on agricultural property with permission of the owner, are not required to wear a collar with identification tags when off the property of the owner. 
(2)  Show animals are not required to wear a collar or rabies tag while being shown as required by this chapter provided that the owner/handler shall have the rabies tag in his possession where it may be shown upon demand of a representative of CCAC. 
(3)  Animals that are housed at licensed kennels, shelters, or veterinary clinics are exempt from wearing collars and rabies tags provided the animal has been properly vaccinated and the veterinarian/caretaker has the rabies tag or proof of vaccination in his possession where it may be shown upon demand of a representative of CCAC. 
(4)  Cats and dogs over four months of age that are on the owner's property are not required to wear their rabies tag provided the animal has been properly vaccinated and the veterinarian/caretaker has the rabies tag or proof of vaccination in his possession where it may be shown upon demand of a representative of CCAC. 
(f)  Any dog or cat entering the county for the purpose of a temporary stay not exceeding 14 days shall be exempt from the rabies tag provision of this section, but shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State Law reference— Inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
Sec. 10-97. - Animals bitten by rabid animals/suspected rabid animals. 
(a)  Dogs, cats and ferrets current on their rabies vaccinations that are bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal shall be revaccinated immediately, confined and observed for the recommended time set by the State of Georgia. Confinement is the responsibility of the owner and subject to unannounced inspections by CCAC to ensure compliance. 
(b)  Unvaccinated dogs, cats and ferrets that are bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal should be humanely euthanized immediately. If the owner is unwilling to euthanize the animal, the exposed animal must be placed in strict confinement/isolation for the period of time set by the State of Georgia and vaccinated one month prior to being released from isolation. Confining the animal in strict isolation is the responsibility of the animal owner and subject to unannounced inspections by CCAC. 
(c)  Cattle and livestock that are current on their rabies vaccinations bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal shall be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for the period of time set by the State of Georgia. Confining the animal in strict isolation is the responsibility of the animal owner and subject to unannounced inspections by CCAC. 
(d)  Unvaccinated cattle or livestock bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal should be destroyed (slaughtered) immediately. Under special circumstances and with the approval of CCAC and the county health department, the owner may opt to keep the exposed animal under very strict confinement/isolation and close observation for the period of time set by the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Any animal bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal that is not destroyed and manifests any of the symptoms of rabies should be immediately examined by a licensed veterinarian. If the licensed veterinarian determines the animal is displaying symptoms of rabies and the symptoms cannot be attributed to any other illness or injury, the animal shall be humanely euthanized and CCAC shall be notified. 
(f)  All animals will be managed in accordance with the guidelines established in the most current edition of the Georgia Rabies Control Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
State Law reference— Animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4. 
Secs. 10-98—10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CRUELTY AND RELATED OFFENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-121. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person who abuses an animal, or aids another person in abusing an animal, or causes or permits an animal to abuse another animal, by acting or failing to act, shall be in violation of this chapter. Cruelty to an animal includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Willfull neglect as defined by this chapter; 
(2)  Failure to provide reasonable remedy or relief for any injured or diseased animal; 
(3)  Overloading, overdriving; 
(4)  Beating, torturing, tormenting or mutilating; 
(5)  Abandonment; 
(6)  Killing any animal or causing the same to be done; 
(7)  Failure to maintain adequate care; 
(8)  Failure to provide adequate food; 
(9)  Failure to provide adequate water; 
(10)  Failure to provide adequate shelter; 
(11)  Failure to provide adequate bedding; 
(12)  Failure to provide adequate primary enclosure; 
(13)  Failure to provide adequate exercise; 
(14)  Failure to provide adequate space; 
(15)  Failure to maintain sanitary conditions; 
(16)  Failure to provide adequate ventilation; 
(17)  Failure to provide adequate temperature control; 
(18)  Hording or collecting animals as defined by this chapter; 
(19)  Owning, managing, obtaining, confining or caring for any number of animals in an animal mill as defined by this chapter; or 
(20)  Otherwise treating any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and CCAC personnel who euthanize animals under the direction of the CCAC manager per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, Georgia Department of Agriculture and this chapter are not in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him, provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-121.1. - Aggravated cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of aggravated cruelty who knowingly and maliciously causes or aids another person or animal in causing or attempting to cause the death, physical harm or serious disfigurement of an animal by, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Rendering a part of such animal's body useless; 
(2)  Drowning, severely starving, severely dehydrating, strangling, suffocating, burying alive, or burning; 
(3)  Attempting to kill, abuse, maim, disfigure, dismember, mutilate or torture any animal; or 
(4)  Administering poison to any animal or exposing any animal to any poisonous or toxic/deadly substance. 
(b)  Exception: Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and CCAC personnel who euthanize animals under the direction of the CCAC manager per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, Georgia Department of Agriculture and this chapter are not in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Exception: A person shall not be guilty of aggravated cruelty when the person is protecting his life, or the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him, provided that the person or animal being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-121.2. - Abandonment of a domestic animal. 
(a)  Any person who engages in any behavior or activity defined as "abandonment (abandonment of an animal)" under section 10-1, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Exception: An animal that is deserted when premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster or emergency hospitalization shall not be regarded as abandoned under this article where the owner or custodian lacked sufficient time or resources to make reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal. 
(c)  Exception: An animal relinquished through a written agreement with CCAC, the Humane Society of Cobb County, other licensed rescue group, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the entity. 
(d)  Exception: An animal left unattended when its sole owner dies shall not be deemed abandoned, and shall be impounded by CCAC until CCAC can locate a family member to take custody of the animal. If a family member cannot be located, then the animal will be held in compliance with section 10-67 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-121.3. - Fighting of animals. 
(a)  No animal shall be used for fighting. 
(b)  No animal shall be used to train other animals to fight. 
(c)  No animal shall be used as bait to encourage aggressive or fighting behavior in other animals. 
(d)  No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, train, lend, borrow, or handle any dog, cat, bird/fowl, or other domestic, feral or wild animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in any animal fight/fight training, exhibition of animal fighting or being used as bait for fighting/aggressive animals. 
(e)  No person shall train, assist, umpire/referee or in any way participate in the training of any animal to be used for animal fighting or used as bait or for animal fighting, or torment, badger or bait any animal for the purpose of fighting or blood sport training or any other such activity, the primary purpose of which is the training/conditioning of animals for aggressive or vicious behavior or animal fights or exhibitions of fighting animals. 
(f)  No person shall charge admission to, participate in, or be present as a spectator, handler, timekeeper, referee, guard, etc. at any animal fight/battle. 
(g)  No person shall profit from any activity connected with any animal fight or exhibition of animals fighting or training, or competitions or matches of fighting animals. 
(h)  Any animal found to be used in violation of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of this section will be immediately confiscated by CCAC. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-121.4. - Animal fighting/training arenas/areas. 
No person shall, for the purpose of any exhibition/ occurrence of animal fighting, training for animal fighting, or training of animals to display aggressive behaviors: 
(1)  Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit or other animal fighting arena or area, whether permanent or portable, on premises owned or occupied by him; 
(2)  Allow a pit or other animal fighting arena or area whether permanent or portable, to be built, made, maintained, or kept on his premises; or 
(3)  Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit or other animal fighting arena or area, whether permanent or portable, on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-121.5. - Training equipment. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Possess, use, sell, give, trade, or loan apparatus, paraphernalia, pit supplies, implements, programs, drugs or equipment used to train or condition animals to be aggressive, aggressive animals, game animals, or animals used to train other animals to be aggressive. 
(2)  Use any animal as bait or as a lure in training dogs for racing or other competitions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-121.6. - Animals in motor vehicles. 
Any person shall be in violation of this chapter who: 
(1)  Transports an animal in a pickup or other open vehicle unless the animal is either: 
a.  Fully enclosed within the vehicle. 
b.  Protected by a belt, halter, tether, cage, container or other device that will prevent the animal from falling, jumping or being thrown from the motor vehicle and that will protect the animal from harm. 
(2)  Leaves an animal in a parked vehicle when temperatures inside the vehicle may adversely affect the animal's health and welfare. When the conditions inside a parked vehicle constitute an imminent threat to the animal's health or safety, any animal left in a parked vehicle may be removed from that vehicle by CCAC, any law enforcement agency, or fire agency. 
(3)  Leaves an animal unrestrained or unattended in any parked open vehicle. 
(4)  Leaves an animal in any vehicle where it must stand, sit or lie on extremely hot or cold surfaces including but not limited to truck beds. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-121.7. - Impoundment of animals inhumanely or cruelly treated in violation of sections 10-121 through 10-121.6. 
Any animal that has not received humane care, that has been subjected to cruelty in violation of sections 10-121 through 10-121.2 or section 10-121.6, or that is used or intended for use in any violation of sections 10-121.3 through 10-121.5 shall be immediately impounded by CCAC. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 10-122—10-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 10-135. - Selling/giving away of animals; use of animals as prizes. 
Selling or giving away animals in front of or on private property or public property, other than the animal owner's property, without the owner's permission, is prohibited. A licensed rescue group, licensed animal shelter, licensed veterinarian, licensed pet dealer, or licensed humane society which has all required governmental licenses, registrations and has obtained permission from the owner of the business or property, may sell or give away animals on private or public property, including but not limited to: retail stores, businesses, flea markets, yard sales and CCAC property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-136. - Motorist hitting domestic animal to make report. 
Any person who strikes or causes injury to any domestic animal while operating a motor vehicle shall notify the owner of the nature of the injury and the location of the incident. If the owner is unknown, the person striking or injuring the animal shall notify CCAC, the county police department, or any law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-137. - Exhibition of animals. 
(a)  Animal exhibitions will be permitted provided that the exhibitor: 
(1)  Has all valid licenses and permits that are required by the state, county or city available for inspection on demand; 
(2)  Abides by all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and guidelines that apply to such exhibits; 
(3)  Does not exhibit any animal that is ill or injured; 
(4)  Has a licensed veterinarian either present or on call to attend to any injured/ill animal; 
(5)  Confines/controls all animals to protect the public and the animals from harm; and 
(6)  Ensures that all animals are treated in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Legal exhibitions include but are not limited to petting zoos, circuses, dog shows, individuals or groups displaying/marketing animals for adoption or sale, etc., unless otherwise prohibited in this chapter. Animals that are high-risk carriers of rabies such as foxes, raccoons, and skunks shall not be exhibited in petting zoos or any exhibition where they can come in contact with people. 
(c)  Exhibitions of animals for illegal purposes as stated in local ordinances, this chapter, state and federal laws are strictly prohibited. 
(d)  No person shall in any manner or for any reason encourage, instigate, promote, assist, exhibit, organize, sponsor, host or participate in an exhibition/demonstration of the following types of animals including but not limited to those animals that are: 
(1)  Used or potentially used for fighting or training for fighting; 
(2)  Game animals; 
(3)  Bred with the intent to fight; or 
(4)  Aggressive animals. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-138. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Animal owners must keep their yard, property, porches, balconies, decks, etc. reasonably free of animal feces. Animal waste will be removed in a timely manner by placing said material in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in the animal owner's trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(b)  Persons who permit their animals to defecate on public or private property other than their own property are required to immediately pick up the feces, bag the feces, and properly dispose of the feces. Animal waste shall be removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in the animal owner's or public trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(c)  Any person found in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be in violation of this chapter, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Persons using guide dogs or assistance dogs are exempt from removing feces; 
(2)  Hunting dogs being used in a legal hunt with permission of the property owner; or 
(3)  Law enforcement officers working police trained dogs. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-139. - Proximity of livestock lot, excluding pigs and hogs, to residences and public buildings. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain a barn or lot in which is kept any livestock, other than pigs and hogs, within 100 feet of any private residence or public building other than the residence of the owner of such animal. 
(Code 1986, § 11-3-2; Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-140. - Proximity of hog lots or pigpens to residences and public buildings. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain a pigpen or hog lot having more than one animal within 600 feet of any private residence or public building except the residence of the owner; and it shall be unlawful to maintain a pigpen or hog lot having one animal within 200 feet of any private residence or public building except the residence of the owner. 
(Code 1986, § 11-3-3; Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 10-142. - Noisy or offensive animal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any dog or other animal in the city in such a manner that such dog or other animal becomes unreasonably noisy or offensive to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or disturbs the general peace of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 2-5-07) 
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-08, adopted Feb. 5, 2007, renumbered and/or deleted former chs. 10 and 14, and enacted new chs. 10 and 14 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 10 has been renumbered and is now set out as ch. 14. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 58; offenses, ch. 62; unified development code, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Amusement devices; code adopted; penalty for violation. 
(a)  The Standard Amusement Device Code, 1985 edition, one copy of which is on file with the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection, is hereby adopted as the Amusement Device Code of the City of Kennesaw, and all provisions of said code are effective in the city; except such provisions as are in conflict with this Code, or as are modified, amended or deleted by this Code. 
(b)  Anyone violating the provisions of the Amusement Device Code shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1996-4, § 1, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 2007-06, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 14-2—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ARCADES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State licensing of coin operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c). 

Sec. 14-81. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No arcade or amusement center of any type, including but not limited to a pool hall, shall be issued a business license in the city if located within 600 feet of a residence, church, public property, school, or library; provided however, this shall not apply to city, church, or civic club sponsored recreational activities. 
(b)  In reaching a decision regarding the location of an establishment referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the mayor and council may take into consideration in its discretion the same factors that are considered in determining the location of alcoholic beverage businesses. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-1; Ord. No. 2007-06, 2-5-07) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, amended Ch. 18 in its entirety. Former Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former Ch. 18 see the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; cable communications, ch. 26; environment, ch. 46; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; historic preservation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 80. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall constitute and be known as "The City of Kennesaw Building and Building Regulations Code of Ordinances." 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-1), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize various mandatory standard codes as adopted by the state and to adopt various optional codes (hereinafter referred to collectively as "the technical codes" and individually by the specific code {e.g. the plumbing code}) and to provide for the administration and enforcement of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-2), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-3. - Code declared remedial. 
(a)  General. The technical codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health, and general welfare - through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the technical codes except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by the city, under the requirements of the technical codes, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan, or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-3), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-4. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the technical codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Commercial building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every commercial building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. Commercial structures include multifamily, condominium, or other commercial type construction not meeting the definition of residential construction, as listed in subsection (3) below. 
(3)  Residential building. The provisions of the International Residential Code for one and two-family dwellings, as amended by the state, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every residential building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. Residential structures include detached one- or two-family dwellings and one-family townhouses not more than three stories in height, and any accessory structures on residential building sites. 
(4)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(5)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances, and the installation and operation of commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
(6)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fitting and or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. 
(7)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewage system. 
(8)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Prevention Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to the repair, equipment, use, occupancy and maintenance of every existing building or structure or any existing appurtenance connected or attached thereto. 
(9)  Energy conservation. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to the construction, alteration, and use of occupancy of every commercial and residential (habitable) structure. 
(10)  Accessibility. The provisions of the Georgia Accessibility Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, and use and occupancy of every commercial structure as deemed practical by the building official. (O.C.G.A. Title 30 Chapter 120-3-20) 
(11)  Housing. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof, all accessory structures or portions thereof located on residential property, used or unused, designed or intended to be used for human habitation or the storage of materials associated with human habitation. 
(12)  Swimming pools. The provisions of the Standard Swimming Pool Code shall apply to the design, construction or installation, repair or alterations of swimming pools, public or private, and equipment related thereto. 
(13)  Existing buildings. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as amended by the state, shall apply to all existing buildings. 
(14)  Unsafe buildings. The provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code shall apply to all unsafe buildings or structures as therein defined, and shall apply equally to new and existing conditions. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the technical codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, or any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the technical codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. To be enforceable, the appendices included in the technical codes must be referenced in the code text or specifically including in the adopting ordinance. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes without separate adoption. If specific portions of the standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-4), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-5—18-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECOGNITION AND ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES 

Sec. 18-15. - Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes. 
(a)  As of October 1, 1991, amended July 1, 2004, the following construction codes, as amended by the State, became mandatory as the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes and each, except as amended hereby or by subsequent ordinance, shall provide the minimum standards for the city: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(3)  International Mechanical Code; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  International Fire Prevention Code; 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code; 
(8)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings; 
(9)  Georgia Accessibility Code (O.C.G.A. Title 30 Chapter 120-3-20); 
(10)  2012 Georgia State International Building Code Appendix N, Disaster Resilient Construction; 
(11)  2012 Georgia State International Residential Code Appendix R, Disaster Resilient Construction; 
(b)  Wherever referred to in this chapter, the codes provided in subsection (a), above, shall mean the latest edition of such codes as adopted and amended by the Georgia State Department of Community Affairs. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-5), 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2013-16, 11-4-13) 
Sec. 18-16. - Optional standard codes. 
(a)  The following optional standard codes are hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein and each, except as amended hereby or by subsequent ordinance, shall provide the minimum standards for the city: 
(1)  International Property Maintenance Code; 
(2)  Standard Swimming Pool Code; 
(3)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code; 
(4)  International Existing Building Code; 
(b)  Wherever referred to in this chapter, the codes provided in subsection (a) above, shall mean the latest edition of such codes as adopted and amended by the Georgia State Department of Community Affairs. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-6), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-17. - Availability for review. 
A copy of each of the technical codes hereby recognized or adopted, and amendments thereto, are on file in the office of the building official and are available for review upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-7), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-18. - Amendments. 
Amendments to the technical codes are as set forth in article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-8), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-19. - Fire district. 
The entire area of the city shall constitute the fire district of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-9), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-20—18-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXISTING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-25. - Generally. 
Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work maybe made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-15), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-26. - Change of occupancy. 
If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-16), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-27. - Special historical buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of building within fire districts. All construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of building or structures identified and classified by the City of Kennesaw as historic shall first be approved by the City of Kennesaw Historic Preservation Committee prior to any action being taken by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-17), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-28. - Unsafe structures and equipment. 
(a)  An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn the occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
(b)  Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
(c)  A structure is unfit for human occupancy when such the structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this Code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
(d)  An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this Code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-18), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-29. - Closing of vacant structures. 
If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the structure will have a placard of condemnation posted on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the premises shall be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-19), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-30. - Notice of condemnation. 
Whenever a structure has been condemned, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall be placed on the condemned equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-20), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-31. - Form of condemnation notice. 
(a)  Such notice shall be in the following form: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(3)  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
(4)  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code. 
(5)  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
(6)  Include a statement of the right to file a lien. 
(b)  Such notice shall be served by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Delivered personally and receipt signed for by the property owner; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-21), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-32. - Placarding. 
Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the premises shall be posted with a placard bearing the word "CONDEMNED" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. The condemnation placard shall be removed whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the building official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-22), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-33. - Prohibited occupancy. 
Any occupied structure condemned and placarded shall be vacated as ordered by the building official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premise or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premise or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-23), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-34—18-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 18-45. - Generally. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes; is hereby given the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter and the technical codes; is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas; and is authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with their spirit and purpose. The building official shall be appointed by the mayor and council as a department head and shall serve full-time at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-25), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-46. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the technical codes; or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such buildings, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-26), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-47. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-27), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-48. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the technical codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application of plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-28), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-49. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-29), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-50. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-30), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-51. - Alternative materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed and approved by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent to that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-31), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-52. - Qualified inspectors and permit staff. 
The building official shall have the authority to appoint qualified inspectors and permit staff to allow for the efficient operation of the building services department, within budgetary constraints as approved by the mayor and council. 
Qualified inspectors and permit staff shall mean the following: 
(1)  A person inspecting for compliance with the International Building Code or the portion of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a building inspector; 
(2)  A person inspecting for compliance with the National Electrical Code or the electrical portion of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a Residential Electrical Inspector or an electrical contractor license from the State Construction Industry Licensing Board; 
(3)  A person inspecting for compliance of nonresidential buildings with the National Electrical Code who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a Commercial Electrical Inspector or an electrical contractor license from the State Construction Industry Licensing Board; 
(4)  A person inspecting for compliance with the International Fuel Gas Code who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a Mechanical or Plumbing Inspector or a conditioned air contractor, journeyman plumber, or master plumber license from the State Construction Industry Licensing Board; 
(5)  A person inspecting for compliance with the International Mechanical Code or the mechanical portion of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a mechanical inspector or a conditioned air contractor license from the state construction industry licensing board; 
(6)  A person inspecting for compliance with the International Plumbing Code or the plumbing portion of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a Plumbing Inspector or a journeyman plumber or master plumber license from the State Construction Licensing Board; 
(7)  A person inspecting for compliance with any portion of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a one and two-family dwelling inspector; 
(8)  A person inspecting for compliance with the Georgia Accessibility Code who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as an accessibility inspector; 
(9)  A person inspecting for compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a property maintenance and housing inspector; 
(10)  A person receiving or issuing permits who holds certification from the International Code Council (ICC) as a permit technician; 
A qualified inspector shall be empowered to perform any inspection required by the applicable codes including but not limited to inspections for footings, foundations, concrete slabs, framing, electrical, plumbing, heating ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), or any and all other inspections necessary or required for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-32), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-53—18-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS 

Sec. 18-66. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for that work. 
(b)  Exceptions. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code; 
(5)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(c)  State license required. Applications for electrical, mechanical or plumbing permits may only be made by, and will only be issued to, an individual holding a valid state electrical, mechanical or plumbing license or to an individual performing work on a single-family dwelling or farm owned and occupied by the individual applicant; provided, however, all work pursuant to such permit must be in conformity with all provisions of the technical codes and this chapter. Effective July 1, 2008, applications for building permits may only be made by, and will only be issued to, an individual holding a valid state building contractor license or to an individual performing work on a single-family dwelling or farm owned and occupied by the individual applicant, provided, however, all work pursuant to such permit must be in conformity with all provisions of the technical codes and this chapter. 
(d)  Joint responsibility. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and contractor to see that a permit is obtained before any work is commenced. 
(e)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(f)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(g)  Fire damaged structure. The building official or designee shall inspect all fire damaged structures prior to any and all utility services being re-connected. 
(h)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent; or, if subsection 18-48(b) applies, then the application must be signed by the licensed contractor or individual owner/occupant. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(i)  Time limitations of applications. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 30 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(j)  Expiration of permits. Every permit shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the permitted work is commenced. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 30 days each may be allowed by the building official for the permit provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. The definition of work being completed on the site authorized by such permit shall be an inspection being completed and passed by the building services department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-33), 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 18-67. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, three or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, and one digital copy of drawings and specifications shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal, name, and signature of the person responsible for the design. One copy of the specifications and drawings shall be in digital format acceptable to the building official. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal, name, and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(c)  Design professionals. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to such drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E and I occupancies, as determined and defined by the International Building Code. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more in height. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 3,000 square feet or more in area. For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(4)  Any building, structure, or system as deemed necessary by the building official. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a state registered land surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms and evacuation routes. Each hazardous material storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-35), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-68. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Plan review completion time. Plan reviews normally will be completed with initial review comments within ten full working days after submittal. However, this review period is subject to indefinite extension dependant upon the quality and completeness of plans received prior to submittal and the workload within the building services department. Partial plans will not be accepted or reviewed by the city, until all required technical/specialty drawings are included. One final set of approved plans shall be retained by the building services department, one by the Cobb County Fire Marshal, and one set, with original signature approvals, shall be placed on the job site and shall remain there throughout construction for the fire marshal and building inspector reference. If the approved plans are not on the job site, there shall not be an official inspection completed by the building inspector and a re-inspection fee may be assessed. 
(c)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the building code as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. 
The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as to inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-69. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue a permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit will be proceeding at his or her own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where such building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant presents to the building official a plat or survey certified by a state-registered land surveyor, or other evidence acceptable to the building official showing the location of applicable street rights-of-way and building set back lines; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in Chapter 32 of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-36), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-70. - Contractors responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing, including a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-37), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-71. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the technical codes. Reference subsection 18-66(j) for time limitations for permit activity. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are approved by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse in writing or by stamp on all submitted plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the remaining sets shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-38), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-72. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees as prescribed in subsection 18-71(d) have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, has been paid. 
(b)  Working commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to the penalties as outlined in subsection (o) below. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges maintained by the city clerk and established by the mayor and council. 
The multiplier for area adjustment shall be determined as follows: 
(Building services department budget)(% of budget provided by building permit revenue) divided by the total annual construction value (as determined by the previous fiscal year permit valuations) 
For example: All budget numbers and construction values are based upon data from FY 2004 — 2005 for this example. 
Building services department budget is $359,357.48. 
Expected building permit revenue (building permits, reinspection fees, mobile home setup fees, demolition fees, and foundation only fees) is $182,221.00 percent of budget provided by building permit revenue is 51 percent ($182,221.00 divided by $359,357.48). 
Total annual construction value is $45,010,091.56. 
($359,357)(51%) = $183,272.31 then $183,272.31 divided by $45,010,091.56 = 0.0041. 
Building permit fees shall be calculated as follows: 
(square foot of structure)($ value per square foot) = (number)(multiplier for area adjustment) = building permit fee. 
The dollar value per square foot is located within Table A of this chapter. 
Plan review fees (commercial projects only) shall be calculated as follows: 
(building permit fee)(½) = plan review fee 
Remodel building permit fees shall be calculated as follows: 
(square foot of proposed remodel area)(½ of dollar value per square foot) = (number)(multiplier for area adjustment) = remodel building permit 
The dollar value per square foot is located within Table A of this chapter. 
Commercial shell only permit fees shall be calculated as follows: 
(square foot of structure)(½ of dollar value per square foot) = (number)(multiplier for area adjustment) = building permit fee 
The dollar value per square foot is located within Table A of this chapter. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building alteration, structure, electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. The permit valuation adjustment shall be limited to 25 percent of the calculated value determined by the building official. Building valuation data is included as Table A in this chapter. 
(f)  Mechanical, electrical and plumbing permit fees. Calculated separately per schedule listed on each technical trade application type. Reference Table B for these. 
(g)  Occupancy permit fees. $25.00 when a new tenant occupies an existing space where no construction or remodeling is needed. A new inspection is required after approval from the Cobb County Fire Marshal. 
(h)  Demolition permit fees. $75.00 for any demolition of a structure. 
(i)  Reinspection fees. These shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  First reinspection ..... $25.00 
(2)  Second reinspection ..... 50.00 
(3)  Third reinspection ..... 75.00 
(4)  All further reinspections shall be $100.00 per reinspection. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  Foundation only permits. $75.00 for any foundation only permit. The permit applicant will be proceeding at his/her own risk until the building permit has been issued. 
(l)  House moving permit. $75.00 for a permit to move or relocate any house or structure either within the City Limits of Kennesaw or out of the City Limits of Kennesaw. All utilities must be disconnected prior to applying for this permit. All applicable agencies(Kennesaw Police, Kennesaw Public Works, Cobb DOT, Cobb Police, etc.) must approve prior to the house moving permit being issued by the building official. 
(m)  Mobile home permits. $75.00 for a mobile home set-up permit. All applicable utility permits will be issued separately as outlined in (f) above. 
(n)  Construction trailer permit. $50.00 for a construction trailer permit. The zoning department must approve prior to the construction trailer permit being issued by the building official. 
(o)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11, up to the maximum penalty allowed under state law. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-39), 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2008-22, § 2, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 2017-07, 4-17-17) 
Sec. 18-73. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing buildings inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. Site inspections and approvals shall be performed by the environmental specialist and final approval shall be completed and received by the building official prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or his representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. The building permit shall be on the job site within ten days after the permit is received and before any inspections are requested. 
The building permit shall contain the following text: 
"The issuance of this permit authorizes improvements of the real property designated herein which improvements may subject such property to mechanics' and materialmen's liens pursuant to Part 3 of Article 8 of Chapter 14 of Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. In order to protect any interest in such property and to avoid encumbrances thereon, the owner or any person with an interest in such property should consider contacting an attorney or purchasing a consumer's guide to the lien laws which may be available at building supply centers." 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes. 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Footing/foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. This will include a site inspection by the Environmental Specialist and approval. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Meter set: To be made for temporary power prior to final occupancy of the building to allow for the starting up and testing of equipment. 
d.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. This inspection shall require a pressure test on all underground sanitary drain lines. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. This inspection shall require a pressure test on all drain and water lines. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Meter set: To be made for temporary gas service prior to final occupancy of the building to allow for the starting up and testing of equipment. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code, and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing five inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-40), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-74. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy or completion. Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy or completion. Such certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(1)  Issuing certificate of occupancy or completion. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy or completion stating the following: 
• Use and occupancy permitted; 
• Occupant load for each floor when limited by law; 
• Allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes (when applicable); 
• Building permit number; 
• Address of the building or structure; 
• Type of construction of the building or structure; 
• Statement of compliance with applicable codes; and 
• Any special stipulations or conditions of the building permit. 
(2)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-41), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-75. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group A, Group S and Group F occupancies or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-42), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-76. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-43), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-77. - Removal of grading and construction debris. 
All trash debris, tree limbs, stumps, brush, logs, building scraps, leaves and other such debris and rubbish shall be removed from t he construction site or burned in accordance with the Cobb County fire safety code after a burning permit is issued, in writing, by the Cobb County Fire Department. 
(1)  No debris of any kind shall be buried at the construction or development site. 
(2)  A grading permit must be issued by the building services department prior to any grading being done as provided hereinafter. 
(3)  No fill shall be made until after an inspection by the building services department. 
(4)  Any violation of the terms of this section shall be punishable, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-44), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-78. - Standard for sound control. 
Each of the following places, conditions or things is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever the code enforcement officer determines that any of these conditions exist upon any premises, the officer may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this article: 
(a)  Noise: creating unnecessary noise. 
Excessive and disturbing sound is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare, safety, and the quality of life. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive and disturbing sound may be substantially abated. People have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive and disturbing sound that may jeopardize their health, safety, or welfare or degrade the quality of life. 
In order to ensure attractive residential and commercial areas, it is necessary that an audibly satisfying environment be maintained. The City of Kennesaw is more likely to attract permanent residents and commercial enterprises if it controls and maintains appropriate noise quality and the residents will ultimately gain financial improvements and protection in their quality of life as a result of these regulations. 
(1)  Definitions. All terminology used in this article, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words and terms, when used in this Article, shall have the following meanings: 
A-weighting is the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
Background sound level is the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest. 
Boom box means any self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or reproduction equipment capable of emitting sound. 
Boom car means any vehicle with loudspeakers, amplifiers, radio receiving sets, musical instruments, phonographs or other equipment capable of producing, reproducing or emitting noise which is cast upon public property or private property. 
C-weighting sound level is the sound pressure level in sound level meters using the C-weighting network as specified in ANSI or its successor body documents for sound level meters. This level is postscripted dB(C) or dBC and captures a lower frequency sound. 
Commercial or business property category is all property which is used primarily for the sale of merchandise or goods, or for the performances of service, or for office or clerical work. 
Construction is any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
Decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
dBA is the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
dBC is the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
Emergency is any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work is any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Impulsive sound is a sound having duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Industrial or manufacturing property category is any property which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing. 
Institutional property category is any property which is used primarily for public purposes such as city hall or a city park. 
Legal holidays recognized by Kennesaw include New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Day after Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. 
Muffler is a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
Multi-family dwelling is any multifamily structure, multifamily building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but not limited to, multifamily dwellings, multifamily apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, group homes and flats. 
Noise is any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans or violates this article. 
Noise disturbance is any sound that (a) endangers the safety or health of any person, (b) disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers personal or real property or violates this chapter. 
Noise nuisance is the making, continuing or causing to be made or continued acts which are done or accomplished or carried on in such a manner, or with such volume, intensity, or with continued duration so as to annoy, to distress, or to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person of reasonable nervous sensibilities within the vicinity or hearing thereof, or so as to endanger or injure the safety or health of humans or animals, or so as to interfere with the physical well-being of humans or animals, or so as to endanger or injure personal or real property except in the case of alerting persons to an emergency; or the operation of emergency vehicles; or motor vehicles while moving on a public right-of-way, public waterway, airport runway, or railway; or sounds produced by any governmental body in the performance of a governmental function; or sounds generated at a scheduled and permitted function, parade or outdoor celebration, or any violation of this chapter. 
Noise sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, and places of worship. 
Public space property category is any real property or structures thereon that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Real property line is the line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another. 
Receiving property is the area from which the measurement of sound pressure levels is being taken, provided said area is not within the property lines of the sound projecting property or within the confines of the sound projecting unit in properties with common ownership such as condominiums and/or apartments. 
Residential property means property used for human habitation, including but not limited to: 
a.  Private property used for human habitation; 
b.  Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for human habitation including mixed use properties, including the operation of accessory uses such as deliveries; the collection of trash by private vendors; amplified or live music, movies or televisions, whether originating from inside of a structure or on an outdoor deck or patio; taxi stands, valet parking and similar commercial noise sources; 
c.  Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation; and 
d.  Community service property used for human habitation. 
Sound level meter (SLM) is an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified in ANSI Standard S 1.4-1983 or as amended. 
Sound pressure level (SPL) as determined by the (SLM) is the measurement of a sound relative to the threshold of human hearing in units of decibels. 
Weekday is any day, Monday through Friday that is not a legal holiday. 
(2)  Sound level limitations. 
a.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit a domestic animal or the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 1 when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. 
TABLE 1  Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property 

 
b.  If the noise is an impulsive sound, the fast response setting shall be used and the daytime (7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.) limits of Table 1 shall be increased by ten dBA. 
(3)  Exemptions. 
a.  Noise generated from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events shall be exempt from these provisions. 
b.  The following are exempt from the sound level limits: 
1.  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
2.  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is not intermittent or ten minutes if intermittent; 
3.  Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five continuous minutes of its activation if the sound is not intermittent or ten continuous minutes if the sound is intermittent; 
4.  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
5.  Noise resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of learning, including, but not limited to band, choir, and orchestral performances; 
6.  Carillons, chimes or unamplified bells while being used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; 
7.  Emergency work approved by the chief building inspector of the city; 
8.  Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad; 
9.  Events with amplified or un-amplified sound that are operating within the parameters set forth in an approved special events permit; 
10.  Organized band and/or sports league activity sponsored by a school or the City of Kennesaw that is otherwise in compliance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
11.  Noise that results from landscaping and lawn maintenance between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
12.  Noise that results from construction both private and commercial between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(4)  Restricted uses and activities. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) and the exemptions set forth in subsection (3) above, the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: 
a.  Non-commercial or non-industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in subsection (2). At all other times, the limits set forth in subsection (2) do not apply to non-commercial or non-industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment, provided that all motorized equipment is operated with a functioning muffler. 
b.  Commercial or industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall be operated with a muffler. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall not be operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential property line, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends, unless: 
1.  Such activities are deemed emergency work, or 
2.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in subsection (2). 
At all other times, the limits set forth in subsection (2) do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment. 
c.  Owners and the agents of owners of domesticated animals shall not permit any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, or making any other noise) for more than ten continuous minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. Each occurrence will result in a separate offense. 
d.  Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction equipment, including, but not limited to boom cars, shall not be operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the equipment between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. such equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction. 
e.  Boom boxes, or any similar device, shall not be operated in a public place or public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., such equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction. 
f.  No amplified sound or outdoor performances (with or without amplified sound) shall be permitted after 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday or after 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday. For purposes of this section "outdoor performance" shall include activities conducted indoors or under a roof but open to the outside by means of open windows, doors, screens or other openings but excluding the normal opening and closing of doors for entry and exit. 
g.  The use of fireworks shall be in compliance with all state and federal laws and regulations. 
(5)  Code enforcement officers and police officers. 
a.  Where the provisions of this ordinance require the measurement of sound with the use of a sound level meter, code enforcement officers or police officers (hereinafter "officers") of the City of Kennesaw shall make such measurement. 
b.  Upon occurrence of a violation of this article, officers may issue a citation for the violation returnable to the Municipal Court of Kennesaw. 
(6)  Procedures for the determination of sound levels. 
a.  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rate. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the receiving property, unless otherwise directed in this ordinance or when directly observed by an officer. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this ordinance, noise measurements are measured on the A- weighted sound level or the C-weighted sound level as applicable, on a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI. 
b.  A field check of meter calibration and batteries must be conducted before and after every set of measurements. 
(7)  Requests for temporary relief or stay. 
a.  Any person requesting temporary relief or a stay from the enforcement of this ordinance shall apply to the zoning administrator or designee for a special administrative permit for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. The zoning administrator or designee has discretion to consider and grant or deny the special administrative permit (with such conditions as may be warranted), if strict enforcement of this ordinance will result in exceptional and undue hardship to the applicant. 
b.  Applications for special administrative permits shall be on a form prescribed by the zoning administrator or designee which shall, among other matters, address the nature of the noise, attenuation measures, and the hardships to the applicant and others if the permit is not granted. 
c.  A special administrative permit may be revoked and the issuance of future permits withheld, if there is a: 
1.  Violation of any conditions of the permit; 
2.  Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or, 
3.  Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the zoning administrator or designee in granting the permit. 
d.  No special administrative permit shall be granted for amplified sound. 
e.  No special administrative permit shall be authorized to delete, modify, or change in any manner any requirement imposed as a condition of zoning or as a condition of a special or conditional land use permit imposed by the city council. 
f.  Appeals of any special administrative permit decision made by the zoning administrator or designee shall be to the city council. 
(8)  Enforcement procedures. 
a.  The city may prosecute noise related violations by issuance of a city ordinance violation citation: 
1.  To the owner and/or occupier of the residential property from which the noise is generated. 
2.  If the origin of the noise generated is a business, the violation citation may be issued in the name of the business (whether incorporated, a sole proprietorship, or a limited liability company), with service of the citation in the name of the business made upon the owner of the business, or a manager, agent or licensee of said business. In addition, the owner of the property upon which the business is located may also be served with a citation. 
3.  If the municipal court finds that this chapter has been violated, the offender cited shall be punished as follows: 
i.  First offense within 12-month period: Warning. 
ii.  Second offense within 12-month period: Warning. 
iii.  Third offense within 12-month period: A fine of $250.00 plus statutory surcharges. 
iv.  Fourth offense within 12-month period: A fine of $500.00 plus statutory surcharges. 
v.  Fifth offense and each offense thereafter within 12-month period: A fine of $1,000.00 plus statutory surcharges. 
b.  In addition to issuing a fine as provided, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. Failure to abate such noise as ordered by the court may result in a charge for contempt of court. 
c.  No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefore, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or from other law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-45), 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2017-08, 6-19-17) 
Secs. 18-79—18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING LOT DESIGN AND DRIVEWAY STANDARD 

Sec. 18-91. - General. 
These provisions shall be used on all developments, private property and city right-of-way. These off street parking rules shall apply to any parking area where three or more vehicle stalls are required. Parking lots should be graded and drained to allow for the disposal of all surface water accumulated within the area and should be arranged and identified so as to provide for an orderly, safe loading or unloading, parking and storage of all vehicles. Any conflict between this chapter and the development standards for the City of Kennesaw, the most stringent requirement shall be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-47), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-92. - Sub grade design. 
(a)  Sub grade preparation should be completed according to the City of Kennesaw Developmental Standards. 
(b)  Grading and compaction of the area should be completed so as to eliminate yielding or pumping of soil. 
(c)  Sub grade must be uniform and have a minimum of 95 percent standard proctor density. 
(d)  Unsuitable soil shall be removed from the area. If unsuitable soil cannot be removed from the area due to environmental conditions, a soil reinforcement mat and additional gravel stone base shall be used to meet the required compaction density. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-48), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-93. - Drainage. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas should be designed and graded in such a manner as to dispose of all surface water accumulation from within the area. Drainage over sidewalks or onto adjacent property shall not be permitted. A stormwater drainage management plan shall be required for all new off street parking areas. This plan may include detention areas with-in the parking lot. 
(b)  Off-street parking should be designed for a maximum six percent slope and a minimum two percent slope. Driveways are recommended to not exceed an eight percent slope. Driveways may drain surface water to the street drainage system or to the site the driveway is serving and is located on. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-48), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-94. - Pavement requirement for parking lots. 
Rigid and flexible pavement design life should be for 20 years. Pavement thickness for parking lot areas shall be as follows: 
• Rigid pavement design: Portland cement concrete type A 
Class A - General purpose concrete 3000 PSI 
• Flexible pavement design: Hot mix asphalt shall be per the thickness charts stated in sections 18-50 through 18-53. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-49), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-95. - Areas subject to light loads. 
Parking lots subject to 200 or less autos per day and/or two or less trucks per day or equivalent axle loads, as determined by the director of public works, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
Table 1 Light Loads 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-50), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-96. - Areas subject to moderate loads. 
Parking lots subject to 201 to 700 autos per day and/or three to 50 trucks per day or equivalent axle loads, as determined by the director of public works, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
Table 2 Moderate Loads 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-51), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-97. - Areas subject to moderately heavy loads. 
The pavement for entrances, perimeter travel lanes, frontage roads, trash dumpster sites, and delivery truck parking as well as approach areas to these spaces must be increased in thickness to prevent pavement failure caused by weight and dynamic loading. These areas should be constructed with thickness that will support this special type of pavement loading. Failure to provide this could result in severe pavement failure. 
Table 3 Moderately Heavy Loads 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-52), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-98. - Areas subject to heavy loads. 
Industrial parking lots/truck stops, and those areas designed primarily for trucks, require a thicker pavement. For those parking lots greater than 200 trucks per day, as determined by the director of public works, shall require be subject to the following requirements: 
Table 4 Heavy Loads 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-53), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-99. - Curb and guttering options. 
(a)  Where possible off street parking and associated driveways, access roadways and frontage roads are required to have curb and gutter. 
(b)  All concrete curbing shall be at least three feet from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structure where parking, driveways, or aisles are located. 
(c)  All concrete curbing shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the city development standards. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-54), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-100. - Additional driveways. 
The provisions of this section shall be applied on all requests for driveways that are not part of a site plan under a current plan review/approval process. 
(1)  An "Additional Driveway Request Form" must be completed and submitted to the building services department. This submittal shall include a scaled drawing or sketch with the dimensions of the parcel and requested driveway. 
(2)  There is a $25.00 fee per residential driveway and a $50.00 fee per commercial driveway requested. 
(3)  All other applicable provisions of section 402 of the city development standards shall apply. 
(4)  The director of public works shall be responsible for the review of all requests. The director of public works shall conduct a site visit prior to approval or disapproval of the request. 
(5)  Construction shall not begin on any driveway request until the request has been approved by the director of public works. Any construction started before the request has been approved shall be required to be returned to the original condition of the parcel prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-55), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-101—18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 18-116. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals. The board shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-56), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-117. - Membership. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall consist of seven members and shall include one architect or professional engineer, one general building construction contractor, one state licensed master plumbing contractor, one state licensed conditioned air contractor, one state licensed electrical contractor, two at-large member from the general public. Each member shall have at least six years experience in his or her field of expertise. The board shall be comprised of a majority of residents from the city or Cobb County residents when the majority of board membership can not be filled by city residents. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-57), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-118. - Terms. 
Members shall be appointed for a term of four years, but shall continue to serve until reappointed or a replacement is named by the mayor and council. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and council. Continued absence (two consecutive absences) of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the mayor and council, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-58), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-119. - Quorum and voting. 
Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting all business of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-59), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-120. - Secretary of board. 
The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and failure of a member to vote. The building official shall not be considered as a voting member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-60), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-121. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 18-118 to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-61), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-122. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes or any of the regulations there under have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  The special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of these codes. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city manager or the city clerk's office at 2529 J.O. Stephenson Ave, Kennesaw, Georgia 30144. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-62), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-123. - Procedures of the board. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes. The board shall meet on call of the chairman or the secretary of the board. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in each case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after the filing. Every decision of the board shall be final subject to any such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(c)  Open records act. All decisions and records of the board shall be available under the Open Records Act as required by the State of Georgia from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-63), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-124—18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 18-131. - The optional codes. 
(a)  Each "optional standard code" is hereby amended by deleting "Chapter 1, Administration," the provisions of this chapter having been enacted in substitution thereof. 
(b)  The Standard Housing Code is amended to provide that the term "Housing Official" as it appears therein shall be deemed to be the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-72), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-132—18-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-136. - Advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who is not an electrical, mechanical, or plumbing contractor duly licensed by Georgia State Construction Industry Board to display a sign stating or implying that he or she is conducting a business of an electrical, conditioned air or plumbing contractor within the city, to claim orally that such is the case or to advertise by use of a business card, stationery, publication, or any other means that he or she or they are operating a contracting business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-73), 2-21-06) 
Sec. 18-137. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or agent to violate a provision of the technical codes or this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or to erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted under the technical codes or this chapter. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the technical codes or this chapter is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by ordinance or charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-74), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-138—18-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 18-146. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of adjustment and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the technical codes, acting for the city in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or board member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the technical codes shall be defended by the city attorney (department of law) until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-83), 2-21-06) 
Secs. 18-147—18-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 18-156. - Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Kennesaw, Georgia," or, for brevity, the "Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. This article has been prepared and adopted by the Mayor and City Council of Kennesaw, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of Kennesaw, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(2)  This article shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Kennesaw, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-157. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The Mayor and City Council of Kennesaw, Georgia, finds and declares: 
(1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kennesaw; and 
(2)  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
(3)  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this article is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this article to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Kennesaw and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(c)  Intent. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.); and the applicable minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning and the development impact fee compliance requirements, both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-158. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
The provisions of this article shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kennesaw. 
(a)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this article and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Kennesaw, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this article. 
(2)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
(6)  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
(7)  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(8)  The use of "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
(9)  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(10)  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this article. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
Administrator means the City Manager of Kennesaw, Georgia, or the city manager's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this article. 
Building permit is the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the mayor and city council. 
City means Kennesaw, a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
Mayor and city council means the Mayor and City Council of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Commencement of construction, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Comprehensive plan means the Kennesaw Plan or planning elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.) and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this article has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this article or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Kennesaw, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Kennesaw, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means: (A) Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; and (B) Public safety facilities, including police facilities. 
Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-159. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(a)  Construction not subject to impact fees. The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this article, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
(1)  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this article that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
(2)  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
(3)  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
(4)  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence and operation prior to the effective date of this article. 
(5)  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
(6)  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
(7)  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(b)  Grandfathered projects. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this article shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(2)  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of this article may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article, provided that: 
a.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this article shall be or have been paid in full; and, 
b.  Said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within 180 days, whichever is later. 
(c)  Method of calculation. 
(1)  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and which: 
a.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
b.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
(3)  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this article shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Kennesaw, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
(4)  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-160. - Fee assessment and payment. 
(a)  Fee schedule. 
(1)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A for a property located inside of Kennesaw, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Kennesaw, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
(3)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
b.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this article, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the city's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the mayor and city council. 
d.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the mayor and city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(b)  Timing of assessment and payment. 
(1)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. 
(2)  All development impact fees shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
(4)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(c)  Individual assessment determinations. 
(1)  Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(2)  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A. 
a.  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
i.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or, 
ii.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Kennesaw or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and, 
iii.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
(3)  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this article. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the mayor and city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(4)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Kennesaw, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Fee certification. Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Attachment A referenced above are not set out at length, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 18-161. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exemption policy. The City of Kennesaw recognizes that certain office, retail trade and industrial development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the city's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. To encourage such development projects, the mayor and city council may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such development projects upon either the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to City of Kennesaw, in accordance with adopted exemption criteria. It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. 
(b)  Process for exemption approval. An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: 
(1)  Application for exemption approval must be made by the building permit applicant to the administrator. A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made, or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and payment of impact fees have been paid. 
(2)  Documentation must be provided to the administrator that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted by the city. This documentation constitutes the application for exemption. 
(3)  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted by the city and is complete. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the mayor and city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(4)  The administrator or the mayor and city council shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the standards and procedures contained in the exemption criteria adopted by the mayor and city council. If action by the mayor and city council is required, the application for exemption shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-162. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  Maintenance of funds. 
(1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this article shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
(2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
(3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(b)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
(1)  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
(2)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the following shall be considered general revenue of Kennesaw, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Kennesaw for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and, 
c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Annual report. 
(1)  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the mayor and city council as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
(2)  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-163. - Credits. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(a)  Credits; restrictions. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this article. 
(2)  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this article for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Kennesaw, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
(3)  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Granting of credits. 
(1)  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
a.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan; 
b.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and, 
c.  The mayor and city council shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
(2)  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private agreement executed under the provisions of section 18-165 of this article. 
(c)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
(1)  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
(2)  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
(3)  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Kennesaw, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
(4)  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
(5)  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the mayor and city council in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(d)  Credits; application. 
(1)  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
(2)  The administrator, in his or her reasonable discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
(3)  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(e)  Credits; abandoned building permits. In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the city, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-164. - Refunds. 
(a)  Eligibility for a refund. 
(1)  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or, 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
(2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(b)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Kennesaw within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(c)  Filing a request for a refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
(d)  Payment of refunds. 
(1)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(3)  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Kennesaw for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-165. - Private contractual agreements. 
(a)  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
(1)  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan; and, 
(2)  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(b)  Private agreements; provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the city to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this article. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(c)  Private agreements; procedure. 
(1)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the mayor and city council of Kennesaw, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-166. - Periodic review and amendments. 
(a)  Ordinance amendments. 
(1)  This article may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. 
(2)  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under subsection (c) are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the mayor and city council when this article is subsequently amended. 
(b)  Capital improvements element periodic review. 
(1)  Update. At least once each year, the mayor and city council shall review and may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional development center for their review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the mayor and city council may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
b.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
d.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(c)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the mayor and city council to undertake a periodic review of the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-167. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Eligibility to file an appeal. Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the city or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
(b)  Appeals process. 
(1)  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the appellant; 
b.  The location of the affected property; 
c.  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken); 
(3)  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
(4)  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the mayor and city council within 30 days of receipt by the appellant of the administrator's decision. Delivery by hand or certified mail to, or posting upon the property at, the address given by the appellant in the application for relief shall constitute "receipt by the appellant" under this provision. 
(5)  The mayor and city council shall thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days provided that at least two weeks' written notice thereof can be given to the appellant. The mayor and city council shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing, but in no case more than 15 days following the hearing, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
(c)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
(1)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
(2)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be stopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-168. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement authority. 
(1)  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
(2)  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the administrator in his or her reasonable determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. 
(3)  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals. if the provisions of this article have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(2)  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(3)  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(4)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinances. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the mayor and city council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 18-169. - Repealer, severability, and effective date. 
(a)  Repeal of conflicting laws. Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Severability. If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this article is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
(c)  Incorporation by reference of Georgia Law. It is the intent of the mayor and city council that the Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Kennesaw, Georgia comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). To the extent that any provision of this article is inconsistent with the provisions of said Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this article is silent as to any provision of said Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise made mandatory by said Chapter 36-71, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-15-10) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 90; unified development code, app. A. 
State Law reference— Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; exemption from local licensing of disabled veterans and blind persons, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; exemption from taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Private detectives. 
No person shall engage in the business of private detective within the city until he has secured a city business license and paid the city license tax. No person shall receive a city license until he has made application to the state board of private detective and security agencies as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-2) 
Sec. 22-2. - Wrecker and towing services. 
(a)  All licenses for wrecker or automobile or truck towing shall be subject to certain rules and regulations of the city. 
(b)  All licensees for the towing of motor vehicles shall exercise due care for all vehicles in their care, custody and control, and shall not permit any private use thereof by the licensee or the licensee's family or employees, agents or servants. 
(c)  The licensee for the towing of motor vehicles shall place the vehicles within an enclosure at least six feet in height and consisting of a chainlink fence or other comparable fencing, and no person shall be permitted within the enclosure other than the licensee, his agents, servants and employees. 
(d)  In the event of the failure of the licensee for the towing of motor vehicles to strictly observe the provisions of this section, a public hearing may be held thereon and the license may be suspended or revoked upon due cause being shown. 
(e)  The violation of this section shall subject the licensee to penalties as prescribed in section 1-11. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-4; Ord. of 8-18-86, §§ 3-201—3-205) 
Sec. 22-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-01, adopted February 7, 2000, repealed former section 22-3, which pertained to itinerant contractors' registration permit, and derived from Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 2-6-95. 
Secs. 22-4—22-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2001-24, adopted October 1, 2001, repealed in their entirety §§ 22-11—22-45, and enacted new §§ 22-11—22-45 as set out herein. Said former sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 11-7-94(1), §§ 3-2-11(A)—(D), 3-2-12—3-2-15, 3-2-16(A)—(F), 3-2-17—3-2-22, 3-22(A)—(L), and Ord. No. 1999-16, adopted December 12, 1999. Said ordinance also designated division 2 as §§ 22-29—22-45. Said sections have been redesignated at the discretion of the editor, as §§ 22-31—22-45, to better fit the format of the Code. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-11. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "City of Kennesaw" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "City of Kennesaw, Georgia"; wherever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean "City of Kennesaw, Georgia." 
(b)  Definitions provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 are incorporated in this article for the benefit of uniformity. The definitions of "business license" and "business registration certificate" have the same intent, with "business registration certificate" being the new and more proper name. 
(c)  As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business shall mean any corporation, firm, partnership, person (other than an employee), or other business entity who within the corporate limits of the city engages in, causes to be engaged in, or represents himself or herself to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage either directly or indirectly. Said term shall include independent contractors. 
Any person advertising by any means, including but not limited to signs, cards, circulars, newspapers, etc., that he or she is engaged in a business of any kind shall be liable for the appropriate occupation tax required under this chapter 22 and the payment of the approximate amount therefore. 
No business required by this Code to secure an occupation tax certificate shall be exempt from the payment of an occupation tax on the grounds that the business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent of the proceeds from the business are devoted to that purpose. 
Business license means a business registration certificate as defined in this section for a business license as defined by ordinances prior to November 7, 1994, adopted by the city council. 
Business registration certificate means a certificate issued by the business license office evidencing registration of and payment of all required regulatory fees and occupation taxes by persons engaged in business in the city. For the purposes of compliance with other city ordinances referring to a "business license," the term shall be construed to mean a business registration certificate as defined in this section. 
Classifications are the separate classifications provided for the determination of that part of the occupation tax to be levied as a fixed sum and measured by ranges of taxable gross receipts, the purpose of which is to recognize the ability of businesses to pay as determined by nationwide averages. Tax shall be classified on the entire gross receipts by dominant service or product. Person whose dominant business activity is legally exempted or otherwise limited by city ordinances or by state or federal law from the tax shall be classified according to his/her principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of an occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple-line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Engaged in business means any person who within the incorporated area of the city engages in any activity with the object of profit, gain, benefit or advantage, including but not limited to selling real or personal property or services; leasing or renting real or personal property; sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer; or who is involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer; or who is involved in the development or construction of real property; the foregoing shall include but is not limited to owner, operator, representative or agent in any business, trade, profession or occupation who represents itself to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit or advantage either directly or indirectly. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred. 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness. 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services. 
(4)  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered. 
(5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
The term gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowance and discount; 
(3)  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent/subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; 
(6)  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location of office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Municipal court is the court of the City of Kennesaw. 
New business means any person, enterprise, partnership, corporation or other business entity which is engaged in business in the city who has not previously filed for a business registration certificate. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. An occupation tax may be required in connection with a regulatory fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph (8) of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Retailer is a person who sells to the consumer or any other person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property. 
Services is the accommodating or performing a duty or work by person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Tax year shall be from January 1 st to December 31 st . 
Wholesaler is a person who sells to jobbers or to another person other than the consumer anything in the form of tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-12. - Scope and levy—Businesses with no location in Georgia. 
(a)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 36-1-22 and 48-13-6 et seq. and effective January 1, 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the business license manager or his designees or to any police officer of the city upon his or their request. 
(c)  Every person required to pay an occupation tax or license fee or a renewal of a license of occupation tax certificate under the provisions of this Code shall submit an application to the supervisor of the business license office, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this Code. 
(d)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  If the business or practitioner owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-13. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The mayor and city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of business or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the public hearing of mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-14. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government; tax exemption for state or local authority, or nonprofit organization; occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
(a)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(b)  Tax exempt organizations shall provide a federal tax exempt letter showing the section of the U.S. Code under which exemption is claimed. The city shall not levy an occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. Notwithstanding the free registration, such applicants are required to comply with the same laws and regulations as are other registered businesses within the city. 
(c)  An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-15. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this part of the Code but may be assessed any occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 46; 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46 Chapter 3; 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq.; 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55; 
(11)  Alcoholic beverages; 
(12)  Any other businesses not governed by this part of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-16. - More than one place or line of business; each line of business to be identified on occupation tax certificate; separate businesses. 
(a)  Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location shall be entered on a separate occupation tax return and each different line of business shall be identified on a form to be furnished by the business license and revenue division. 
(b)  The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the business license and revenue division and that line of business being noted by the business license and revenue division upon the occupation tax certificate which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(c)  Where a person conducts a business at more than one store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this chapter and a separate tax shall be required. Should more than one business on which an occupation tax is levied by this Code be conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each business shall be separately licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-17. - Basis for fees; classification of business; administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. 
(2)  Ranking the classification codes according to nationwide averages of profitability ratios which will be updated from time to time by the city. 
(3)  Determining the profit class, tax class, and tax rate on gross receipts for each business, trade, profession or occupation as indicated in schedule A attached hereto and made a part herein by reference which will be updated from time to time by the city. The schedule of fees shall be as approved and adopted and may be amended in the future by the city council. The schedule of fees, including those that pertain to all sections of this article, shall be on file and available in the city clerk's office and/or the business license office. 
(b)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $55.00 shall be required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(c)  A nonprorated regulatory fee will be imposed as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(d)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
(2)  Address where the proposed business is to be located; 
(3)  Kind and class of business to be conducted; 
(4)  Current classification code, taxable gross revenues for the preceding 12 calendar months, and number of employees; 
(5)  Any information as may be required by the supervisor of the business license office for the purpose of determining the amount of any occupation taxes to be collected under this Code; and 
(6)  Any additional information which the supervisor of the business license office may find reasonably necessary for the fair administration of this part of the Code which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer, director or stockholder of the applicant or spouses, children or parents thereof for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
(b)  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(c)  False statements on any application for a license or occupation tax certificate shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license or occupation tax certificate or denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-18. - Review and approval or denial of applications. 
(a)  If any provision of this part of the Code provides for the review and approval of an application for a license or occupation tax certificate by the business license manager designated therein, the business license manager shall act, favorably or otherwise, on the application as required by this Code. 
(b)  The granting of a business license or occupation tax certificate under any provisions of this Code shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in that business. 
(c)  An application for a business registration certificate shall be complete at the discretion of the business license manager. Once the business license manager deems an application to be complete for purpose of processing, the business license manager shall either deny the application or grant the certificate no later than ninety days after the date the application became complete for purposes of processing. 
(d)  Except as hereafter provided, upon the decision of the business license manager or his designee to approve or deny a license under this chapter, such decision being in writing and including notice of the decision and notice of the appeal procedures to the mayor and city council as provided hereafter, the applicant or any aggrieved citizen may appeal the decision of the business license manager to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within five calendar days of the decision by the business license manager or his designee. Every appeal shall be in writing and identify the basis for such appeal and upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall forward same to the city council which shall schedule a hearing within 45 days of receipt of such notice. The city council may sustain or overrule the decision of the business license manager. No license shall be issued by the business license manager or designee during the appeal notification period or while an appeal is pending before the city council. The action of the mayor and council shall be final and may be appealed to superior court in accordance with Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-19. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra or interstate locations. 
For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14(a)(2). Upon request the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more that one jurisdiction shall provide the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-20. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for the convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, and the necessity of making numerous returns, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied in section 22-12 shall, on or before the times set forth in this section, file with the business license manager the returns specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as an estimate for making payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in a current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the termination of the year, in accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, or by March 31 st of the current calendar year, file with the business license manager or the city, on a form furnished by said revenue collection officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year, to be used as an estimate of the gross receipts for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. 
(d)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of the tax provided for in this Code, exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by the business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 22-20(a), the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city by March 31 st of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before such date. 
(e)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this Code, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by the business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 22-20(a), the difference in such amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if such business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by such business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the taxpayer and shall be submitted in writing to the business license manager. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-21. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 22. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (22) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(a)  The occupation tax bases on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 22-17. 
(b)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid for the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(c)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(d)  It being the intention of the city council that no portion of the taxation scheme in this article be construed to be, or have the practical effect of, regulation of or a precondition on the practice of law, or other state regulated professions, if any provision of this article shall be construed by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful regulation of such professions, then such provision shall be considered rescinded by the city council as if such provision had not been adopted, and in such case, the remaining provisions of this article shall be applied to such practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-22. - Temporary use certificates. 
(a)  Any person intending to utilize property for a temporary use must first obtain from the mayor and council a temporary use certificate. The requirements for obtaining a temporary use certificate are as follows: 
(1)  Temporary use must be a permitted use under the existing zoning classification; and 
(2)  The applicant must submit the request for a temporary use certificate on forms provided by the business license officer; and 
(3)  The applicant must submit a letter signed and notarized by the property owner granting express permission and consent to use the property for such temporary use; and 
(4)  The applicant must submit a drawing, sketch or plat of the property showing all intersections, parking, zoning, existing structures and location of such temporary use; and 
(5)  The temporary use must be in a state of good repair and aesthetically, structurally consistent with the surrounding area to which the applicant seeks to locate; and 
(6)  The applicant shall submit a regulatory fee of $100.00. 
(b)  The mayor and council may issue a temporary use certificate, at its sole discretion, and in their discretion may take into consideration, in addition to the requirements of this section, the affect that the temporary use would have on the public safety as well as the aesthetics of surrounding areas. 
(c)  The certificate may be issued for a period of time not to exceed 30 days and no extensions will be granted. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee may suspend or revoke any temporary use certificate issued in accordance with this section on any one or more of the following bases: 
(1)  For any cause for which issuance of the license could have been refused had it then existed and been known to the city; 
(2)  Material misstatement, misrepresentation, omission or fraud in obtaining the certificate; 
(3)  Conviction of a felony; 
(4)  Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of the business under the certificate; 
(5)  Failure to comply with the provision of this section; 
(6)  Failure to maintain all the general qualifications and conditions applicable to the initial issuance of the certificate; 
(7)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article or any other applicable city ordinance; 
(8)  For violation of any part of this article by the certificate holder, its agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. 
(e)  A temporary use certificate granted under this section shall be subject to suspension or revocation. Whenever in the opinion of the business license department, there is cause to revoke or suspend such certificate, a written notice of intention to suspend or revoke and the grounds therefore shall be furnished the holder thereof at least three days before an administrative hearing before the city manager or his designee, at which time the holder of the certificate may make such showing as he or she may deem appropriate relative to the grounds for suspension or revocation. After the administrative hearing, the city manager or his designee may revoke or suspend said certificate if, in his discretion, it is the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 1, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 22-23. - Penalty of ordinance violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this part of the Code shall, upon order of the municipal judge, be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500.00, in the discretion of the municipal judge. There shall be no criminal penalty imposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Secs. 22-24—22-30. - Reserved 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22-31. - Responsibility for enforcement; administration of chapter; appeals. 
(a)  The business license manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the levy, assessment and collection of occupation taxes and penalties imposes herein. 
(b)  It is made the duty of the business license manager and police department to see that the provisions of this part of the code relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is made the further duty of the business license manager, members of the police department, and their assistants, to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is proper for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(c)  Under the direction of the business license manager, one or more city employees designated by the business license manager shall seek out violations of the City Code, particularly the taxing and regulation portions thereof. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by any action of the business license manager or his designees in the enforcement of this chapter 22 of the Code or rules and regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter 22 of the Code, including grievances over the amount of taxes assessed and classification of the business, may be appealed by the person as follows: 
(1)  The aggrieved person shall first submit in writing to the business license manager a complaint which sets forth in reasonable detail the matters complained of. The complaint may take a letter form and it shall be the duty of the business license manager to review it and to issue a written reply stating the business license manager's position and opinion to the aggrieved person within 30 days from the receipt of the complaint. Such written reply shall include notice of the appeal procedures to the mayor and city council as provided hereafter. 
(2)  An appeal of the business license manager's decision in the enforcement of this section by the aggrieved person to the city council shall be allowed and perfected by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal for scheduling on the city council agenda. The notice of appeal shall state in general terms the objections or exceptions taken to the action and opinion of the business license manager. The notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within 15 days following the date of the decision in subsection (d)(1) above complained of and it shall be the duty of the business license manager upon receipt thereof to transmit to the city clerk all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to place the appeal upon the agenda of the city council meeting no later than 45 days after the date of appeal. Moreover, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to so notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place when the matter shall be heard. 
(3)  The city council may, in conformity with this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the opinion, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the business license manager. The city council may direct any action as it may deem proper in conformity with this article and it shall be the duty of the business license manager to carry out the decisions of the city council in conformity with this chapter. 
(4)  An appeal under this section shall stay all legal proceedings with regard to the collection of the occupation tax and penalties from the appellant. The appellant shall have the right to present before the city council for their consideration any duly sworn witnesses or other evidence at the time such matter appealed from is heard. In the event the business license manager fails to render a written opinion to the aggrieved person within the 30 days as required above, the aggrieved person shall, if desired, appeal to the city council within the time limit state above as if the business license manager had rendered an adverse opinion with regard to the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-32. - Duties of business license manager, generally; food establishments; zoning. 
(a)  The business license manager shall have, among other, the following duties. 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration and application for a business license and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  To issue to each person a business license or occupation tax certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the license fee or occupation tax assessed and any personal property or other city taxes levied in this Code; provided however, where under other portions of this Code, permits, certifications, and compliance with enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the business license manager shall not issue a business license or occupation tax certificate until the applicant exhibits to the city manager the obtained permits, certification, and compliance. 
(b)  The business license manager shall not issue any city license or occupation tax certificate for a restaurant, lunch wagon or other food preparation establishment unless a copy of a valid certificate issued by the county health department for the operation of the business has been filed with the business license manager by the applicant. 
(c)  The business license manager shall not issue any city license or occupation tax certificate for any business unless city personnel charged with the enforcement of the city's zoning regulations certify to the city manager's satisfaction that the applicant's proposed location is not in violation of the city's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-33. - When occupation tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; when renewal registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall accrue on January 1 of each year and shall be due and payable no later than March 31 of each year, and be subject to a ten percent penalty plus one and one-half percent interest per month for delinquency. On any new professions, trades or callings begun in the city in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration shall be submitted and occupation taxes shall be paid within 30 days upon beginning business. If said registration is not submitted and occupation taxes are not paid within 30 days upon beginning business, a ten percent penalty per year plus one and one-half percent interest per month from the date the tax first became delinquent. For the purposes of this chapter any portion of a month shall be considered to be one month. The tax registration or occupation tax certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the business license manager. 
(b)  Any business license or occupation tax certificate referred to in this part of the Code shall automatically expire on December 31 st of the year of its issuance unless otherwise provided. 
(c)  If a business continues to transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this Code after notification by the office of the business license and revenue division that such registration tax or penalties are due, and if such registration, tax or penalties are not submitted as directed by the office of the business license and revenue division, then said business or its representative shall be subject to a citation. Such offender shall, upon conviction by the municipal judge, pay all fees and occupation taxes due and be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500.00, which may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court. 
(d)  In addition to the above remedies, the business license manager may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(e)  The administrator may collect any delinquent business license or occupation taxes due the city for a period not to exceed seven years from the date such first became delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-34. - Inspections of books and records. 
(a)  In any case the business license manager of the city, or his or her designee, may inspect the books of the business or profession for which the returns are made and such books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city shall be submitted for inspection by the office of the business license and revenue division of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for the examination by the business license manager at his or her discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of the under reporting, interest will be assessed for the period delinquent. If, after subsequent examinations of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under-reporting, then a penalty of ten percent and interest shall be assessed as per O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
(b)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the supervisor of the business license office, the applicant may appeal the decision of the supervisor of the business license office to the mayor and city council for the city by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the decision of the business license manager. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and city council for the city within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the mayor and city council, city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the business license manager or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be to the Superior Court of Cobb County filed within 30 days to the final action of mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the business license manager, as provided herein, the decision of the business license manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-35. - Business or landlord required to provide names and addresses of tenant businesses. 
Every person required to pay an occupation tax or license fee or a renewal of a license or occupation tax certificate under the provisions of this Code who leases or rents space to another business or businesses operating within the city shall submit a list of such businesses, upon request of the business license manager, to the city as referenced in section 22-34 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-36. - Returns confidential. 
Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15(c), as amended, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the City of Kennesaw or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this chapter. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia or the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-37. - Change of location; fee; taxes not transferable. 
(a)  Change of location and/or name fee. Any person or practitioner of profession or occupation taxable under this Code moving from one location to another shall notify the business license manager of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the business license manager no later than the day of moving and shall pay a ten-dollar fee. 
(b)  Any person or practitioner of profession or occupation taxable under this Code changing its business name from one name to another shall notify the business license manager of the name change in writing on a form provided by the business license manager no later than the day of the proposed name change and shall pay a ten-dollar fee. 
(c)  The transfer of ownership of a business license or occupation tax certificate shall be considered in the same manner as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. In the event that the owner of a business license or occupation tax certificate desires to transfer the same, or in the event that any interest in the business for which the license or certificate was issued is sold or otherwise transferred, then the purchaser or transferee of such license or tax certificate shall apply to the city as for an original license or tax certificate on or before the date on which such sale or transfer is made. Ownership of such business license or tax certificate shall remain unchanged until the application of such purchaser or transferee is approved by the city and all proper fees and taxes are paid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of a corporation, a new license or tax certificate shall not be required as herein provided unless a change in stock ownership in the corporation results in ownership of more than 50 percent of the outstanding corporate stock, voting or otherwise, by persons or combinations of persons not owners of such stock at the time the license or tax certificate was issued. 
(d)  In case of the death of any natural person holding a city business license or occupation tax certificate, or any interest therein, the license or certificate may be transferred to the administrator, executor of the lawful heir or devisee of the deceased person by filing a new application with the city for the change of ownership within 30 days of such death. The business involved may continue to operate until disposition of the application is determined as for an original license or certificate. No additional fees or occupation taxes shall be charged above what would be due if the business, or portion thereof, remained under the deceased person's ownership. 
(e)  The change of ownership of a business shall not affect the distance requirements previously approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-38. - Display of licenses and registrations; evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed; city registration effective; evidence of qualification if applicable. 
(a)  All persons shall exhibit and display all licenses and registrations issued to them under this Code in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at which address the license or registration was issued. Any nonresident person, firm or corporation doing business within the city shall carry the license or registration, or a copy of the license or registration, issued by another jurisdiction either upon his or her person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(c)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(d)  No city registration shall become effective until each person or business who is required to obtain a license from the State of Georgia has registered with the state and is in good standing with the state or has received such license. 
(e)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-39. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The supervisor of the business license office shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a business registration certificate in accordance with the procedures set forth below. In the event the supervisor of the business license office seeks to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate, the supervisor of the business license office shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The supervisor of the business license office shall be authorized to deny, suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate in the event of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original or renewal application process; 
(2)  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
(3)  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the State of Georgia (a misdemeanor or a felony) to occur on the premises; and that such violation is materially related to the operation of said business; 
(4)  An applicant (or licensee) has been convicted of any drug related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the State of Georgia or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter; 
(5)  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance of the city; 
(6)  An applicant or the owner alters or allows to be altered, the business license occupation tax certificate (license document) or the applicant or the owner changes the information, defaces, destroys, misuses, abuses, or improperly alters or misrepresents the business license or occupation tax certificate; and 
(7)  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of any provision of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-171, as amended. 
(c)  The city manager shall approve any proposed action prior to proceeding toward any suspension or revocation of any occupation tax certificate and/or business license. 
(d)  In the event the supervisor of the business license office shall suspend or revoke any occupation tax certificate hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the supervisor of the business license office. Any suspension or revocation shall be sent by the city by certified mail, return receipt requested. For the first offense, the suspension shall be for a period of one to 90 days; second offense, suspension for one to 180 days and third offense, suspension for one to 365 days. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with section 22-31(d). No applicant may apply for an occupation tax certificate during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted, the supervisor of the business license office shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension or revocation and the duration of either. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 2010-16, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 22-40. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the business license manager of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for said tax all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of said city and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff's department of Cobb County upon the property of defendant located in said city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as it is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of said city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution is issued pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-41. - Amendment; repeal of provision; applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
(a)  The ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. No tax may be implemented hereunder prior to the date of its adoption and no tax may be retroactively assessed or collected. 
(b)  The ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-42. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
(a)  After April 11, 1995, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the City of Kennesaw shall hold at least one public hearing as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-43. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions; severability; saving clause; repeal of conflicting provisions. 
(a)  Where there is an apparent conflict in the ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(b)  If any section, provision or clause of any part of the ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of the ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to effect the portions of the ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code not so held to be invalid, or the application of the ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that the ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(c)  The ordinance codified as chapter 22 of this Code does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance not included herein which shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment and adopted by mayor and city council. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or prohibit the city or any court or any board or authority of the city from enforcing any previous tax or obligation (including penalties and/or interest) incurred prior to the effective date of this Code. Any such enforcement of the prior Code is hereby authorized to continue after the effective date hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 22-44. - Annexation incentive. 
As an incentive for occupations, businesses, and industries located adjacent to the corporate limits of the city to annex into the city, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Occupations, businesses and industries located in areas annexed to the city, otherwise subject to the requirements of this article, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article for a period of five years from the effective date of the annexation. 
(2)  Occupations, businesses and industries located in areas annexed to the city, otherwise subject to the requirements of this article, shall be required to comply with the requirements of this article after the initial five-year exemption period outlined in subsection (1) above and shall pay occupation and business license fees to the city based on the following schedule: 
a.  Year six after the effective date of annexation—20 percent of the occupation or business license fee otherwise due. 
b.  Year seven after the effective date of annexation—40 percent of the occupation or business license fee otherwise due. 
c.  Year eight after the effective date of annexation—60 percent of the occupation or business license fee otherwise due. 
d.  Year nine after the effective date of annexation—80 percent of the occupation or business license fee otherwise due. 
e.  Year ten after the effective date of annexation—100 percent of the occupation or business license fee otherwise due. 
The incentives outlined in this section shall apply only to businesses in existence within the annexation area upon the effective date of the annexation or established within 12 months after the effective date of the annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 1, 6-3-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-18, § 1, adopted June 3, 2002, enacted a new § 22-42. The newly enacted § 22-42, pertaining to annexation incentive, has been renumbered as set out herein at the discretion of the editor to preserve the style of the Code. 
Sec. 22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BAIL BONDSMEN[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Persons deemed professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50; certain persons prohibited from engaging in bail bond business, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-8. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bondsmen, professional or surety means any persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bail bonds for compensation, and who are licensed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-1; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-47. - Persons prohibited from signing bonds. 
No attorney at law and no official authorized to admit to bail, nor any city or county official, shall become surety on any bond. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-6; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-48. - Fees of sureties. 
(a)  Sureties on criminal bonds in any court shall not, when receiving compensation, charge or receive more than 12 percent of the principal amount of bonds set in the amount of $10,000.00 or less and shall not charge or receive more than 15 percent of the principal amount of bonds set in an amount in excess of $10,000.00 as compensation from defendants or from anyone acting for defendants. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-7; Ord. of 6-19-89(2); Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-08, 3-19-01) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 17-6-30 
Sec. 22-49. - Additional compensation prohibited. 
No professional bondsman, becoming surety on a bond and receiving the compensation in the case for signing such bond as surety, shall thereafter receive any other sum in the case to the final disposition of such case. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-8; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-50. - Prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment. 
(a)  All professional bondsmen engaged in the bail bond business who accept money or any other consideration for any bail bond which they execute must, for payment received, give to the person paying the money or giving the consideration a prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment, which receipt shall state the date, name of the principal, amount of money or consideration received and purpose for which received, number of the power of attorney form attached to the bond, penal sum of the bond (amount of cash bond), and name of person making payment or giving consideration. 
(b)  All professional bondsmen must retain a duplicate copy of each receipt issued as part of their records. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-9; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-51. - Power of attorney. 
All professional bondsmen must attach to each bail bond a duly executed power of attorney in an amount of at least the penal sum of the bond. This section shall not apply to any card or certificate of membership of any automobile club. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-10; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-52. - Bondsmen to have equal access to jail. 
All professional bondsmen who hold a currently effective license issued by the business license supervisor shall be entitled to equal access to the jail of this city for the purpose of making bond. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-11; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-08, 3-19-01) 
Sec. 22-53. - Unlawful inducements for benefit of bondsman; unlawful execution of bond. 
No professional bondsman shall: 
(1)  Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to a jailor, police officer, peace officer, municipal court judge or any other person who has power to arrest or to hold in custody; or to any city official or city employee in order to secure a settlement, compromise, remission or reduction of the amount of any bail bond. 
(2)  Pay a fee or rebate or give anything of value to an attorney in bail bond matters, except in defense of any action on a bond. 
(3)  Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to the principal or anyone in his behalf. 
(4)  Sign or countersign in blank any bond, or give a power of attorney to, or otherwise authorize anyone to countersign his name to bonds unless the person so authorized is directly employed by the bondsman giving such power of attorney. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-54. - Display of signs. 
(a)  Each professional bondsman duly licensed by the city shall be allowed to display a sign of his own making or choosing in a place designated by the chief of police at or near the book-in, book-out section of the city jail. 
(b)  Two signs per licensed bondman shall be permitted and shall be limited to lettering and numbering of no more than three inches high and one and one-half inches in width for each letter or numeral. 
(c)  Signs shall be limited to two lines to allow the name of the business licensed under this article at the top and the phone number at the bottom. 
(d)  The overall dimensions of the said signs shall be limited to four inches in height and 12 inches in width. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-13; Ord. of 6-19-89(2); Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-08, 3-19-01) 
Sec. 22-55. - Conditions of bond. 
If a person is admitted to bail for his appearance in municipal court, the condition of the bail bond shall be that he will appear for such hearing, at the time and date specified on the copy of charges, to answer the charge, and will submit himself to the orders and processes of the municipal court judge trying the case and will not depart without leave of the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-21; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-56. - Forfeiture of bond; surrender of custody of defendant; procedure. 
(a)  The clerk of the court shall give the surety on all appearance bonds at least 72 hours written notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before the time of the required appearance of the principal. Such notice shall not be necessary if the time for appearance is within 72 hours from the time of arrest, provided the time for appearance is stated on the bond, or where the principal is given actual notice in open court. 
(b)  On the date required for appearance of the principal, the presiding municipal judge or designee shall call the case, and, if the accused is not in court and does not answer the call, and, if no good and sufficient reason is given for non-appearance, the judge shall, at the end of the court day, upon the failure of the principal to appear, enter on the docket where the case is stated "bond forfeited" or similar words thereby forfeiting the bond and order an execution hearing not sooner than 120 days but later than 150 days after such failure to appear. Notice of the execution hearing shall be served within ten days of such failure to appear by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the surety at the address listed on the bond or by personal service to the surety within ten days of such failure to appear at its home or office or to its designated registered agent. Service shall be considered complete upon the mailing of such certified notice. 
(c)  If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgment should be entered, the judge shall so order and a writ of fieri facis shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the court where such judgment is entered. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-22; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-08, 3-19-01) 
Cross reference— O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70(b); O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71(a); O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71(b). 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71(a). 
Sec. 22-57. - Conditions not warranting forfeiture of bond for failure to appear; remission of forfeiture. 
(a)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court by the written statement of a licensed physician that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending by some mental or physical disability. 
(b)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending because he or she was detained by reason of arrest, sentence, or confinement in a penal institution or jail in the State of Georgia, or so detained in another jurisdiction, or because he or she was involuntarily confined or detained pursuant to court order in a mental institution in the State of Georgia or another jurisdiction. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be considered proof of the principal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon the presentation of such written notice to clerk of the proper court, the prosecuting attorney, and the sheriff or other law enforcement officer having jurisdiction over the case, along with a letter of intent to pay all costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed upon the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and after such presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(c)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that prior to the entry of the judgment on the forfeiture the principal on the bond is in the custody of the sheriff or other responsible law enforcement agency. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be proof of the principal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the proper court, the prosecuting attorney, and the sheriff or other law enforcement officer having jurisdiction over the case along with a letter of intent to pay all of the costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed upon the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and after such presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(d)  In cases in which paragraph (3) of this subsection is not applicable, on application filed within 120 days from the payment of the judgment, the court shall order remission under the following conditions: 
(1)  Provided the bond amount has been paid within 120 days after judgment and the delay has not prevented prosecution of the principal and upon application to the court with prior notice to the prosecuting attorney of such application, said court shall direct remission of 95 percent of the bond amount remitted to the surety if the surety located the principal in the custody of the sheriff in the jurisdiction where the bond was made, apprehends, surrenders, or produces the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal was substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal caused the adjudication of the principal in the jurisdiction where the bond was made. Should the surety, within two years of the principal's failure to appear, locate the principal in the custody of the sheriff in the jurisdiction where the bond was made or another jurisdiction causing the return of the principal to the jurisdiction where the bond was made or in another jurisdiction causing the return of the principal to the jurisdiction where the bond was made, apprehend, surrender, or produce the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal is substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal by the surety causes the adjudication of the principal in the jurisdiction in which the bond was made, the surety shall be entitled to a refund of 50 percent of the bond amount. The application for 50 percent remission shall be made no later than 30 days following the expiration of the two-year period following the date of judgment. 
(2)  Remission shall be granted upon condition of the payment of court costs and of the expenses of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the surety; or 
(3)  If, within 120 days after judgment, the surety surrenders the principal to the sheriff or responsible law enforcement officer, or said surrender has been denied by the sheriff or responsible law enforcement officer, surety locates the principal in custody of another jurisdiction, the surety shall only be required to pay costs and five percent of the face amount of the bond, which amount includes all surcharges. If it is shown to the satisfaction of the court, by presentation of competent evidence from the sheriff or the holding institution, that said surrender has been made or denied or that the principal is in custody in another jurisdiction or that said surrender has been made and that five percent of the face amount of the bond and all costs have been tendered to the sheriff, the court shall direct that the judgment be marked satisfied and that the writ of execution, fi. fa., be cancelled. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-23; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Cross reference— O.C.G.A. § 17-6-72. 
Sec. 22-58. - Cancelling bond. 
When the condition of the bond is satisfied or the forfeiture of the bond has been discharged or remitted, the municipal court judge shall make an order canceling the bond. Conviction or acquittal of the defendant shall satisfy the terms of the bond written by any bail bondsman. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-24; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-59. - Officer taking insufficient bail or accepting unqualified surety. 
Any person authorized to take bail, who takes bail which he knows to be insufficient, or accepts as surety any professional bondsman who is not qualified to act as surety, shall be guilty of an act of misconduct and shall be subject to disciplinary action by the department head in accordance with existing rules and regulations for same. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-25; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-60. - Employee termination. 
Any professional bondsman who terminates the appointment of any employee authorized to sign bonds shall immediately file written notice thereof with the chief of police and business license supervisor, together with a statement that he has given or mailed notice to the employee. Such filed notice shall state the reasons, if any, for such termination. Information so furnished shall be privileged and shall not be used as evidence in any action against the professional bondsman. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-5; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-08, 3-19-01) 
Secs. 22-61—22-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 22-71. - Required; qualifications; application; guidelines. 
(a)  No person shall act as a bail or professional bondsman in the city without having a license therefore from the city as provided in this article. 
(b)  To qualify for a license under this article, the following certified information must affirmatively appear on, or be annexed to, the application that: 
(1)  The applicant is a citizen of the United States, and has been a bona fide resident of this state for one year last past. 
(2)  The applicant is a natural person who has reached the age of 21 years. 
(3)  The place of business of the applicant shall be located in this state and that such applicant will be actively engaged in the bail bond business and maintain a place of business or residential address accessible to the public. 
(4)  Complete documentation showing the composition of the company for which applicant is applying to be an individual, a trust, or group of individuals, whether or not formed as a partnership or other legal entity, or a corporation or a combination of individuals, trusts, or corporations and setting forth the names and addresses of each partner, officer, director, shareholder, trust, member or other entity composing the company. 
(5)  The employee applicants qualified to sign bonds, are persons of high character and provable integrity and each shall be vouched for by two other reputable citizens who are residents of the county. 
(6)  A complete set of fingerprints and a recent credential-size, full face photograph of the applicant. The applicant's fingerprints shall be processed by the chief of police, who shall conduct a background check, including but not limited to the submission of the applicant's fingerprints to federal, state and local authorities and certify the applicant to be free of any record of any crime involving moral turpitude, felony or any violation of law applicable to the bail bonding business within previous five years. 
(7)  A complete set of fingerprints and a recent credential-size, full face photograph of each individual authorized to execute bonds on behalf of the company. Such application shall request and provide personal information sufficient to perform a background investigation on the employee applicant. The employee applicant's fingerprints shall be processed by the chief of police, who shall conduct a background check, including but not limited to the submission of the applicant's fingerprints to federal, state and local authorities and certify the employee applicant to be free of any record of any crime involving moral turpitude, felony or any violation of law applicable to the bail bonding business. Any person who will have power of attorney extended for the purpose of writing bonds must submit the above described application. 
(8)  An affidavit listing all real property in which the applicant has an interest, stating the ownership of such real property, any liens or encumbrances thereon and describing such property in detail, including but not limited to the true market value of such property. Such affidavit is to be submitted according to the standards promulgated by the chief of police. 
(9)  The applicant has, or has applied for a business license with the city and has or will pay that rate which is specified in the business license schedule. 
(c)  A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be submitted with each application to the mayor and council, such fee to defray the cost of conducting a character investigation required by this section. 
(d)  No person shall be permitted to sign professional bonds or act as an agent or representative of a bonding company if such person: 
(1)  Has been convicted of a felony offense; 
(2)  Has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Has failed to meet bonding obligations in the city or any other city or county in the state of Georgia or elsewhere. This provision shall apply to all persons who have an ownership interest in a bonding business in another jurisdiction regardless of the name of the entity; or 
(4)  Fails to qualify as a bondsman under applicable state statutes governing who may act in such capacity. 
(e)  No person shall be permitted to write professional bonds which are prohibited as a matter of law. 
(f)  Persons employed by the city will not be permitted to operate, own an interest in, or act in any capacity as an agent for a professional bonding company. In the event this provision is violated, the approved bonding company's privileges shall be suspended and/or revoked until such time as the conflict is remedied and such persons are no longer affiliated with the bonding company. 
(g)  These provisions in no way prohibit the city or its authorized agents from establishing additional standards with which bonding companies must comply, nor does it an any way limit the city's legal right to regulate the privilege of writing bail bonds. 
(h)  Applicants seeking permission to act as professional bondsmen in the city must qualify as follows: 
(1)  Applicants must sign an agreement with the city providing for an escrow account in any one or more financial institutions designated as city depositories. This escrow shall be ten percent of that company's bonding capacity and shall not be less than $2,500.00. If this escrow is encroached upon for any reason or if the city's chief of police otherwise determines that additional escrow is required to ensure the solvency or reliability of the professional bonding business, the city's chief of police may amend the escrow through written notice to the professional bonding business. 
(2)  The president of a corporation operating a professional bonding business in the city shall provide the chief of police with the names of all partners, officers, stockholders, and any other person(s) or corporation(s) having an interest in or involved with the business of the corporation. This information shall be provided prior to the bonding company initiating business or upon the renewal of its license. The bonding company shall immediately notify the chief of police of any changes of ownership or direction. Failure of the corporation to comply with these provisions shall result in the immediate suspension of bonding privileges. 
(3)  All employees and/or owners of a professional bonding company must be fingerprinted and photographed by the identification division of the city police department. 
(4)  Each employee of a bonding company must file a properly executed power of attorney from that bonding company. 
(5)  Professional bonding companies must receive the approval of the chief of police prior to posting a bond or any combination of bonds which total $25,000.00 or more for any one individual. 
(i)  No professional bonding company may sign a bond in which another bonding company or third party receives compensation to arrange the release of an inmate from the city jail. 
(j)  All bonding companies shall file with the chief of police a monthly report. These reports will include the following information and shall be filed in the form of an affidavit: 
(1)  List by name, in alphabetical order, amount, and date of bonds signed during each month. 
(2)  List by name, in alphabetical order, case or indictment number and date of all bonds officially settled during each month. 
(3)  List by name, amount, and date of bond, all judgments rendered by the city, state and/or Superior Court of Cobb County and/or any other counties, subject to collection in the city. 
(4)  List by name, amount, and date of bond all forfeitures pending in Kennesaw and/or other cities or counties, subject to collection in the city. 
(5)  List personnel in the employment of submitting bonding company. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-2; Ord. of 6-19-89(2); Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-08, 3-19-01) 
Sec. 22-71.1. - Renewal of licenses. 
(a)  Any professional bonding company licensed under this chapter shall be required to renew its license before December 31 of each consecutive year. Failure to pay the license fee by January 31 shall automatically revoke the license. 
(b)  Each application for renewal of such license shall be accompanied by a certified statement from the professional bonding company that it is in compliance with all requirements of any agreements with the city and the provisions of this Code section, along with copies of the monthly reports filed each month with the chief of police as required by section 22-71(j) of this section for the previous year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, 3-19-01) 
Sec. 22-72. - Denial; suspension; revocation; nonrenewal. 
Each year upon application for a license under this article, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this article, and the license shall be granted, renewed or denied in accordance with this article. The mayor and council may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued in accordance with the requirements of this article for any of the following causes: 
(1)  For any cause for which issuance of the license could have been refused had it then existed and been known to the mayor and council. 
(2)  Material misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining the license. 
(3)  Misappropriation, conversion or unlawful withholding of money belonging to others and received in the conduct of business under the license. 
(4)  Conviction of a felony. 
(5)  Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of business under the license. 
(6)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Failure to return collateral security to the principal when the principal is entitled thereto. 
(8)  When in judgment of the mayor and council, the licensee has, in the conduct of affairs under the license, demonstrated incompetency or untrustworthiness, or conduct or practices rendering him unfit to carry on the bail bond business, or making his continuance in such business detrimental to the public interest, or that he is no longer in good faith carrying on the bail bond business, or that he is guilty of rebating, or offering to rebate, or offering to divide his compensation, and for any or all such reasons, is found by the mayor and council to be a source of detriment, injury or loss to the public. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-4; Ord. of 6-19-89(2); Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-73. - Return of license upon termination of business. 
Any professional bondsman who discontinues writing bail bonds during the period for which he is licensed shall notify the chief of police and the city clerk and immediately return his license. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-3; Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-74. - State statutes governing professional bondsmen. 
Bondsmen shall comply with all applicable state statutes which control bonding procedures within the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 22-75. - Individuals other than professional bondsmen. 
The chief of police may allow an individual property owner to sign a bail bond under the following conditions: 
(1)  The individual must own real property in Kennesaw or Cobb County. 
(2)  The individual must prove ownership of said real property by either: 
a.  A current tax receipt; or 
b.  A copy of warranty deed transferring full interest in described piece of property. 
c.  The individual must sign an affidavit that he/she has equity in said property of at least twice the amount of said bail bond, excluding homestead exemption on each bond written. 
d.  Individual bondsmen shall not receive any compensation, gift or collateral for making or signing a defendant's bond and must sign an affidavit affirming such. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-19-00) 
Secs. 22-76—22-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-96. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988 as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. is by this reference incorporated herein and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full in this article. 
Secs. 22-97—22-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOLICITATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-02, adopted Feb. 28, 2011, amended the former Art. V, §§ 22-116—22-131, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to commercial solicitations and derived from Code 1986, §§ 9-3-1—9-3-6; Ord. No. 2010-20, adopted Oct. 10, 2010. 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-97; 43-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-116. - Legislative findings. 
In enacting this article, the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw make the following legislative findings: 
(a)  The orderly flow of motorized traffic is a major concern in congested urban areas, particularly because an obstruction or delay in traffic at one point along a traffic artery results in delays and backups far down the roadway. 
(b)  There exists a substantial disruption in crowd and traffic control caused by the solicitation of contributions. 
(c)  Solicitation and selling requires "stopping [individuals] momentarily or for longer periods of time as money is given or exchanged for literature." Heffron v. International Society of Krishna Consciousness, Inc., 452 U.S. 640, 653 (1981). 
(d)  Restrictions on the solicitation of contributions or sale of items on public streets and highways is necessary to assure the free movement of vehicle traffic on those streets and highways. 
(e)  Unlike oral advocacy of ideas or the distribution of literature, successful solicitation of contributions or sales requires the individual to respond by searching for currency and passing it to the solicitor. 
(f)  After the solicitor has departed, the driver must then secure any change returned, replace a wallet, or close a purse, and then return proper attention to his or her full responsibilities as motor vehicle driver. 
(g)  The direct personal solicitation from drivers and occupants of motor vehicles distracts the driver from his or her primary duty to watch the traffic and potential hazards in the road, observe all traffic control signals or warnings, and prepare to move through the intersection. 
(h)  The distraction of motorists occasioned by solicitation not only threatens to impede the orderly flow of traffic, but also raises concerns of traffic and public safety. 
(i)  Evident dangers of physical injury and traffic disruption are present when individuals stand in the center of busy streets trying to engage drivers and solicit contributions from them. United States Labor Party v. Oremus, 619 F.2d 683, 688 (7th Cir. 1980). 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-117. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this article whether or not capitalized, shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
(a)  Charitable organization. 
(1)  The term "charitable organization" means either of the following: 
a.  Any entity that is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be a tax exempt entity pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
b.  Any entity that is or holds itself out to be established for any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, educational, humane, scientific, public health, environmental conservation, civic, or other eleemosynary purpose or for the benefit of law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons who protect the public safety, or any person who in any manner employs a charitable appeal as the basis of any solicitation or an appeal that suggests that there is a charitable purpose to any solicitation. 
(2)  The term "charitable organization" is not limited to only those entities to which contributions are tax deductible under Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  The term "charitable organization" does not include an employer who is not engaged in the business of soliciting contributions or conducting charitable sales promotions but who incidentally solicits contributions for a charitable entity or purpose; or a compensated employee of an employer not engaged in the business of soliciting contributions or conducting charitable sales promotions, when the employee solicits contributions or conducts charitable sales promotions at the direction of the employee's employer. 
(b)  Charitable purpose. 
(1)  The term "charitable purpose" means either of the following: 
a.  Any purpose described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
b.  Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, educational, humane, scientific, public health, environmental conservation, civic, or other eleemosynary objective or any objective that benefits law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons who protect the public safety. 
(2)  The term "charitable purpose" is not limited to only those purposes for which contributions are tax deductible under Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  City means the City of Kennesaw. 
(d)  Commercial co-venturer means any person and/or entity who for profit regularly and primarily is engaged in trade or commerce other than in connection with soliciting for charitable entities or charitable purposes and who conducts a charitable sales promotion. 
(e)  Contribution means the promise, pledge, or grant of any money or property, financial assistance, or any other thing of value in response to a solicitation or received as part of or in response to a charitable sales promotion. The term "contribution" does not include any bona fide fees, or any dues or assessments paid by members, provided that membership is not conferred solely as a consideration for making a contribution in response to a solicitation. 
(f)  Business solicitor means a person and/or entity who is soliciting the purchase of goods or services from business owners within the city. A business solicitor shall be exempt from then registration requirements contained in section 22-120 of this article. 
(g)  Door-to-door means the visiting of residential dwellings for the purpose of offering goods, wares, merchandise, services, or other things of value for sale. 
(h)  Fund-raising counsel means any person and/or entity who, for compensation, plans, manages, advises, consults, or prepares material for or with respect to the solicitation in the city of contributions for any charitable organization or at any time has custody of contributions from such a solicitation, but does not solicit contributions and does not employ, procure, or otherwise engage any compensated person to solicit contributions. The term "fund-raising counsel" does not include the following: 
(1)  An attorney, investment counselor, or banker who in the conduct of the attorney's, investment counselor's, or banker's profession advises a client; 
(2)  A charitable organization or a bona fide officer, employee, or volunteer of a charitable organization, when the charitable organization has full knowledge of the services being performed on its behalf and either of the following applies: 
a.  The services performed by the charitable organization, bona fide officer, employee, or volunteer are performed on behalf of the charitable organization that employs the bona fide officer or employee or engages the services of the bona fide volunteer; 
b.  The charitable organization on whose behalf the services are performed shares some element of common control or an historic or continuing relationship with the charitable organization that performs the services or employs the bona fide officer or employee or engages the services of the bona fide volunteer. 
(3)  An employer who is not engaged in the business of soliciting contributions or conducting charitable sales promotions but who incidentally solicits contributions for a charitable organization or purpose without compensation; 
(4)  A compensated employee of an employer who is not engaged in the business of soliciting contributions or conducting charitable sales promotions, when the employee solicits contributions or conducts charitable sales promotions at the direction of the employee's employer. 
(i)  Internal Revenue Code means the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986," 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. § 1 et seq., as amended. 
(j)  Police department means the Kennesaw Police Department. 
(k)  Professional solicitor means any person and/or entity who, for compensation, performs on behalf of or for the benefit of a charitable organization any service in connection with which contributions are or will be solicited in the city by the compensated person or by any person it employs, procures, or otherwise engages directly or indirectly to solicit contributions. The term "professional solicitor" does not include the following: 
(1)  An attorney, investment counselor, or banker who in the conduct of the attorney's, investment counselor's, or banker's profession advises a client; 
(2)  A charitable organization or a bona fide officer, employee, or volunteer of a charitable organization, when the charitable organization has full knowledge of the services being performed on its behalf and either of the following applies: 
a.  The services performed by the charitable organization, bona fide officer, employee, or volunteer are performed on behalf of the charitable organization that employs the bona fide officer or employee or engages the services of the bona fide volunteer; 
b.  The charitable organization on whose behalf the services are performed shares some element of common control or an historic or continuing relationship with the charitable organization that performs the services or employs the bona fide officer or employee or engages the services of the bona fide volunteer. 
(3)  An employer who is not engaged in the business of soliciting contributions or conducting charitable sales promotions but who incidentally solicits contributions for a charitable organization or purpose without compensation; 
(l)  Solicitor means a person and/or entity who is soliciting the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, services, or other things of value by doing so door-to-door. Unless otherwise indicated in this article, the term "solicitor" shall not include business solicitor. Any person and/or entity who is soliciting orders for goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value from any person by going door-to-door on behalf of: a charitable organization: or, any religious organizations; or , any political organization, or any political candidate as described in O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9, as amended, is not a solicitor as defined in this article and shall not be subject to the provisions of this article, with the exception of section 22-124 of this article. All persons and/or entities offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, services, or other things of value shall be subject to section 22-124 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-118. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person and/or entity violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the city ordinances of the City of Kennesaw. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-119. - Applicability of article to business solicitors. 
(a)  This article shall be inapplicable to any person and/or entity who is solely a business solicitor and does not engage in any door-to-door solicitation. 
(b)  A business solicitor shall not engage in any door-to-door solicitation without first complying with all of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-120. - Registration required—Solicitor. 
Any person desiring to be a solicitor within the city shall register with and obtain a solicitor permit from the business license department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-121. - Application for permit. 
(a)  No solicitor shall be authorized to solicit orders until he or she files an application with the business license department and is issued a solicitor permit from the city. It is the applicant's responsibility to assure that his or her application is complete as any incomplete application will not be processed by the city. 
(b)  Once the application is filed, the license department shall conduct an investigation which includes, but is not limited to, an investigation of the applicant's police record and moral character. The license department shall furnish the police department with a duplicate of the application for a soliciting permit. 
(c)  The police department, within ten business days, shall furnish a report to the license department of the police records, if any, of the applicant. No permit shall be given to any applicant who shall have either a pending charge or a conviction for a crime of moral turpitude or an offense involving unethical or improper business actions or any felony or any civil judgments involving unethical or improper business actions, including but not limited to actions which would constitute fraud and deceit under the law of this state. 
(d)  No application for a permit under this section shall be received or acted upon if the applicant has submitted the same or a similar application for a permit within the preceding 12 months, which prior application has been dismissed, denied, or abandoned. 
(e)  No license shall be granted if the applicant is in violation of any portion of this article or has within 12 months preceding the filing of an application under this section been in violation, preceding the filing of the application, of this article or other law or ordinance regulating the activities for which that permit is sought. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-122. - Issuance of permit; identity card. 
(a)  Upon proper registration as provided in this article with the business license department, a written permit shall issue, to be valid for a period of 30 calendar days from and after the date of issuance. The permit may be renewed by filing a renewal application with the business license office upon forms prescribed by the office and paying a renewal fee. Such renewal is within the discretion of the business license office taking into account the number of such permits issued within the 30 calendar days preceding the request for such renewal. 
(b)  In addition, identity cards shall be issued by the license department that must be carried by all solicitors in the city. The permit holder shall wear the identity card on his or her left or right shoulder of his or her outer garment so that such badge can be readily seen by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-123. - Requirements of solicitors. 
Soliciting or canvassing door-to-door in the city shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  All soliciting or canvassing in the city shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  The number of solicitors in the city from or representing any single firm, corporation or entity shall not exceed 25 in number at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-124. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is soliciting, canvassing, or calling on any business or residence to do any of the following: 
(1)  Falsely represent, directly or by implication that funds are being solicited on behalf of any person and/or entity other than as registered with the business license department. 
(2)  Without the express prior permission of an occupant or property owner, solicit at any residence, address, apartment complex or business establishment where there is posted a sign forbidding any solicitation. 
(3)  Remain on private premises after being asked to leave the premises or continue solicitation after being refused; such action shall constitute trespass or harassment, respectively. 
(4)  Enter any residential dwelling except at the express invitation of the occupant. 
(b)  A solicitor shall, at all times, maintain a courteous decorum and shall not use opprobrious words to any homeowner or occupant. 
(c)  No solicitor shall remain upon the premises of an occupant or owner after such occupant or owner has requested that the solicitor leave the premises. 
(d)  No solicitor shall remain upon the premises of an occupant or owner after such occupant or owner has indicated that he or she is not interested in purchasing the good or service being represented by that solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 12-125. - Records of license office, complaints. 
(a)  The business license department shall maintain true and accurate records of the name and identification number of each solicitor, together with other requirements of this article, and shall maintain a log of all complaints made against each solicitor or entity represented by such solicitor. If the license office shall receive any ordinance violation complaints concerning a particular solicitor, or three violation complaints concerning an entity, the business license office shall notify the solicitor and the entity that the solicitor represents of the complaints, and the business license supervisor may suspend the permit of either the solicitor or of all solicitors representing that entity until such time as the solicitor or entity can show cause that he, she or it is in compliance with the rules and regulations of this article. 
(b)  The license office shall maintain a true and accurate log of each complaint showing the name of the complainant, the address of the complainant, and the substance of the complaint. Such records shall be available to the solicitor, or his or her entity, and shall be deemed a public record. 
(c)  A hearing shall be set before the supervisor of the license office within five business days after notification of the solicitor of the complaint, at which time the license office shall investigate the nature of the complaints and the solicitor may use witnesses or other evidence to show his or her compliance with this article. 
(d)  If the supervisor of the license office shall determine a violation on the part of the solicitor of the ordinances of the city has occurred, he or she shall revoke the permit of that solicitor. 
(e)  If the supervisor of the license office shall determine three or more violations have occurred on the part of one or more solicitors representing a single organization or entity, the supervisor shall revoke all of the permits then held by the solicitors associated with or representing that organization or entity. 
(f)  A solicitor or the entity or organization shall have the right to file an appeal from the ruling of the business license office to the city manager. Appeal requests must be made in writing and submitted within ten calendar days of revocation of the permit or permits of the solicitors. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-126. - Registration of charitable organizations. 
(a)  Every charitable organization, except those exempted under section 22-127 of this article, that intends to solicit contributions in the city by any means or have contributions solicited in the city on its behalf by any other person, charitable organization, commercial co-venturer, or professional solicitor, or that participates in a charitable sales promotion, prior to engaging in any of these activities and annually thereafter, shall file a registration statement with the city upon a form prescribed by the city prior to any charitable solicitation in the city. No charitable organization that is required to register under this article prior to registration, shall solicit contributions in the city by any means, have contributions solicited in the city on its behalf by any other person, charitable organization, commercial co-venturer, or professional solicitor, or participate in a charitable sales promotion. 
(b)  The registration statement shall be signed and sworn to, under penalty of perjury, by the chief executive officer, treasurer, or chief financial officer of the charitable organization and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the charitable organization, the purpose for which it is organized, and the name or names under which it intends to solicit contributions; 
(2)  The address and telephone number of the principal place of business of the charitable organization or, if the charitable organization does not maintain an office in this state, the name, address, and telephone number of the person that has custody of its financial records; 
(3)  The names and addresses of the officers, directors, trustees, and executive personnel of the charitable organization; 
(4)  A statement of whether the charitable organization is registered with or otherwise authorized by any other governmental authority in this state or another state to solicit contributions; 
(5)  A statement of whether the charitable organization has had its registration or authority denied, suspended, revoked, or enjoined by any court or other governmental authority in this state or another state; 
(6)  A statement of whether the charitable organization intends to solicit contributions from the public directly by using its own resources or to have solicitations made on its behalf through the use of another charitable organization, fund-raising counsel, professional solicitor, or commercial co-venturer; 
(7)  The names, addresses, and the telephone numbers of any other charitable organization, fund-raising counsel, professional solicitor, and commercial co-venturer who act or will act on behalf of the charitable organization, together with a statement setting forth the specific terms of the arrangements for salaries, bonuses, commissions, expenses, or other remunerations to be paid the other charitable organization, fund-raising counsel, professional solicitor, and commercial co-venturers; 
(8)  The charitable purpose or purposes for which the contributions to be solicited will be used; 
(9)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the persons within the charitable organization who will have final responsibility for the custody of the contributions; 
(10)  The names of the persons within the charitable organization that will be responsible for the final distribution of the contributions. 
(c)  With the annual registration form, the charitable organization shall file with the city the following: 
(1)  A copy of the current charter, articles of incorporation, articles of organization, instrument of trust, constitution, or other organizational instruction, and a copy of the by-laws or operating agreement of the charitable organization; 
(2)  A certificate of insurance indicating that the charitable organization has insurance coverage during the time period it is going to engage in the solicitation of contributions. 
(d)  The charitable organization shall pay the annual registration fee prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-127. - Organizations not required to file annual registration. 
The following shall not be required to file a registration statement as provided in section 22-126 of this article: 
(a)  Any religious agencies and organizations, and charities, agencies, entities, and organizations operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious entity or organization; 
(b)  Any charitable organization that meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  It has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of at least two years; 
(2)  It has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the charitable organization is exempt from federal income taxation under Subsection 501(a) and described in Subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  Any educational institution, when solicitation of contributions is confined to alumni, faculty, trustees, or the student membership and their families; 
(d)  Every person other than an individual, when solicitation of contributions for a charitable purpose or on behalf of a charitable organization is confined to its existing membership, present or former employees, or present or former trustees, and their families; 
(e)  Any public primary or secondary school, when solicitation of contributions is confined to alumni, faculty, or the general population of the local school district; 
(f)  Any booster club that is organized and operated in conjunction with and for the benefit of students of public primary or secondary schools. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-128. - Fund-raising counsel requirements. 
(a)  No person or entity shall act as a fund-raising counsel unless the person first has complied with the requirements of this article and any rules adopted under this article. 
(b)  Any fund-raising counsel that, at any time, has custody of contributions from a solicitation shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Register with the city. Applications for registration or renewal of registration shall be in writing, under oath, and in the form prescribed by the city, and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $200.00. Any corporation, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, sole proprietorship, or other business entity that intends to act as a fund-raising counsel may register for and pay a single fee of $200.00 on behalf of all its members, officers, employees, and agents. In that case, the names and addresses of all the officers, employees, and agents of the fund-raising counsel and all other persons with whom the fund-raising counsel has contracted to work under its direction shall be listed in the application. The registration or renewal of registration shall be for a period of one year or part of one year. All such registrations shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(2)  At the time of making an application for registration or renewal of registration, file with and have approved by the city a bond in which the fund-raising counsel shall be the principal obligor, in the sum of $25,000.00, with one or more sureties authorized to do business in this state. The fund-raising counsel shall maintain the bond in effect as long as the registration is in effect; however, the liability of the surety under the bond shall not exceed an all-time aggregate liability of $25,000.00. The bond, which may be in the form of a rider to a larger blanket liability bond, shall run to the city and to any person who may have a cause of action against the principal obligor of the bond for any liability arising out of a violation by the fund-raising counsel of any provision of this article or any rule adopted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  No person or entity shall serve as fund-raising counsel, or be a member, officer, employee, or agent of any fund-raising counsel, who has been convicted in the last five years of either of the following: 
(1)  Any violation of this article or any rule adopted under this article, or of any charitable solicitation legislation or regulation of a political subdivision of this state or charitable solicitation law of any other jurisdiction that is similar to this article; 
(2)  A felony in this or another state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-129. - Professional solicitors. 
(a)  No professional solicitor shall engage in any solicitation unless it has complied with the requirements of this article and any rules adopted under this article. 
(b)  Every professional solicitor, before engaging in any solicitation, shall register with the city. Applications for registration or renewal of registration shall be in writing, under oath, and in the form prescribed by the city, and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $200.00. Any corporation, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, sole proprietorship or other business entity that intends to act as a professional solicitor may register for and pay a single fee of $200.00 on behalf of all its members, officers, employees, agents, and solicitors. In that case, the names and addresses of all the officers, employees, and agents of the professional solicitor and all other persons with whom the professional solicitor has contracted to work under its direction, including solicitors, shall be listed in the application or furnished to the city within five days of the date of employment or contractual arrangement. The registration shall be for a period of one year or part of one year. All such registrations shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(c)  At the time of making an application for registration or renewal of registration, the professional solicitor shall file with and have approved by the city a bond in which the professional solicitor shall be the principal obligor, in the sum of $25,000.00, with one or more sureties authorized to do business in this state. The professional solicitor shall maintain the bond in effect as long as the registration is in effect; however, the liability of the surety under the bond shall not exceed an all-time aggregate liability of $25,000.00. The bond, which may be in the form of a rider to a larger blanket liability bond, shall run to the city and to any person who may have a cause of action against the principal obligor of the bond for any liability arising out of a violation by the professional solicitor of any provision of this article or any rule adopted pursuant to this article. 
(d)  No person or entity shall serve as a professional solicitor, or be a member, officer, employee, or agent of any professional solicitor, who has been convicted in the last five years of either of the following: 
(1)  Any violation of this article or any rule adopted under this article, or of any charitable solicitation legislation or regulation of a political subdivision of this state or charitable solicitation law of any other jurisdiction that is similar to this article; 
(2)  A felony in this or another state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-130. - Distribution of literature and soliciting upon city streets, roadways. 
(a)  Individuals, entities, and/or organizations may distribute literature on a street or highway if they comply with all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The person, entity, or organization engaging in the distribution of literature shall apply for and receive a permit to do so. The permit shall specify the days on which the distribution of literature shall occur. 
(2)  The distribution of literature shall occur only at the intersections designated in writing by the police department. The police department shall maintain a list of intersections at which distribution of literature may occur. When obtaining a permit, the individual, entity, or organization shall select the intersection or intersections at which he, she, or it wants to distribute literature, unless another individual, entity, or organization has already selected that intersection for either the distribution of literature or solicitation of contributions. Only one entity or organization shall solicit at each such intersection at any given time. If an entity or organization selects an intersection from the list approved by the police department and no other entity or organization has previously selected that intersection for the distribution of literature or solicitation of contributions during the same time period, the police department shall have no discretion in precluding that entity or organization from distributing literature at that intersection. 
(3)  If the distribution is occurring by or on behalf of an entity or organization, that entity or organization shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance indicating insurance coverage for the activities. 
(4)  Each and every person engaging in the distribution of literature activities is older than 18 years of age. 
(5)  Each and every person engaging in the distribution of literature activities must wear a high visibility vest approved by the police department. The police department shall promulgate written standards for such vests. 
(6)  There shall be a maximum of four persons distributing literature or soliciting contributions at each intersection assigned to the entity or organization. 
(7)  Each such individual must return to a neutral area when the traffic signal changes to yellow for the cross traffic. 
(8)  The distribution of literature shall be limited to the time period that commences one hour after sunrise and ends one hour prior to sunset, local time. 
(b)  Charitable organizations, persons or entities operating on behalf of charitable organizations, and political parties and candidates may solicit contributions on a street or highway and solicit contributions, but may not sell any items, if they comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  The entity engaging in the solicitation shall apply for and receive a permit to do so. The permit shall specify the days on which such solicitation shall occur. Solicitation at intersections shall be limited to the following days: Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and any federal holiday. 
(2)  The entity soliciting the money or funds has received a permit from the city and paid the required fee to the city for that permit. The maximum duration of each such permit shall be 30 calendar days. A charitable organization shall receive no more than six such permits during any 52-week period of time. 
(3)  The solicitation shall occur only at the intersections designated in writing by the police department. The police department shall maintain a list of intersections at which solicitation may occur. When obtaining a permit, the entity or organization shall select the intersection or intersections at which it wants to solicit, unless another entity or organization has already selected that intersection for the distribution of literature or solicitation of contributions. Only one entity shall solicit at each such intersection at any given time. If an entity selects an intersection from the list approved by the police department and no other entity has previously selected that intersection for the distribution of literature or solicitation of contributions, the police department shall have no discretion in precluding that entity from soliciting funds literature at that intersection. 
(4)  The entity soliciting contributions has provided the city with a certificate of insurance indicating insurance coverage for the solicitation activities. 
(5)  Each and every person engaging in solicitation activities is older than 18 years of age. 
(6)  Each and every person engaging in solicitation activities must wear a high visibility vest approved by the police department. The police department shall promulgate written standards for such vests. 
(7)  There shall be a maximum of four persons soliciting at each intersection assigned to the entity. 
(8)  Each such individual must return to a neutral area when the traffic signal changes to yellow for the cross traffic. 
(9)  The solicitation shall be limited to the time period that commences one hour after sunrise and ends one hour prior to sunset, local time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Sec. 22-131. - Violation of safety rules governing distribution and solicitation of contributions on streets or highways. 
(a)  Should any officer of the Kennesaw Police Department observe any person violating any of the safety provisions contained in subsections 22-130(a) or 22-130(b) or engaging in disorderly conduct in the distribution of literature or solicitation of contributions, he may direct such persons to immediately discontinue the distribution of literature or the solicitation of contributions, as the case may be. No further distribution of literature or the solicitation of contributions shall then occur until the person or persons distributing the literature or soliciting the contributions come into full compliance with safety regulations and/or discontinue the disorderly conduct. 
(b)  If the person or persons fail to adhere to the directions of the police officer on the scene requiring them to come into compliance with the safety regulations or to discontinue the disorderly conduct, the permit under which those persons are operating can be immediately suspended by any supervising officer of the Kennesaw Police Department. 
(c)  Once the permit is so suspended, no further distribution of literature or solicitation of contributions shall occur. Any further distribution of literature or solicitation of contributions after the suspension of the permit by a supervising officer of the City of Kennesaw shall be a violation of this article and punishable as set forth in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(d)  The permit shall remain suspended unless and until the permit is reinstated by the business license manager. The permit holder may appeal the suspension, in writing, to the manager of the business license office. Within five business days of the receipt of the request from the permit holder that the suspension be lifted, the business license manager shall either uphold the suspension and permanently revoke the permit; or, reinstate the permit. 
(e)  Any appeal of the revocation of the permit shall be made to the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw. That appeal must be in writing, and must be filed with the clerk of the City of Kennesaw and the city manager within five business days from and after the date on which the permit holder receives the decision of the business license manager. The mayor and city council shall issue a decision on the appeal within 30 days from and after receipt of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 2-18-11) 
Secs. 22-132—22-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-141. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 43-37-1 through 43-37-7 on the subject of dealers in precious metals and gems are by this reference incorporated herein and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as if set out in full in this article. 
Secs. 22-142—22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLEA MARKETS 

Sec. 22-161. - Findings. 
The mayor and council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The city believes that flea markets are a special type of business which requires specific approval of operations from the mayor and council. 
(2)  The general appearance of the city and specifically areas surrounding flea market locations is marred when operations are unsightly, inappropriate and poorly maintained, and when, in some instances, unsafe structures, sheds and sales areas exist and debris and refuse accumulate. Failure to properly construct and maintain improvements upon the premises further detracts from the general appearance of the area and presents safety hazards. 
(3)  The aesthetic quality and economic value of both commercial and residential areas surrounding the flea markets as well as the economy of the city are adversely affected by the unregulated operation of flea markets. 
(4)  Lives and property are endangered by traffic created by the flea markets which have been unregulated and uncontrolled and by vehicles for which no provisions for parking and safe ingress and egress have been made by flea market operators. 
(5)  Flea markets create difficulty in police supervision because of lack of any controls over the number, identification and types of vendors and merchandise sold, and may become targets for sale or dealing in stolen merchandise. 
(6)  Most flea markets fail to provide even minimum facilities for the protection of the health or comfort of persons on the premises in the nature of plumbing, electrical and bathroom facilities. 
(7)  The public health, safety and welfare of the city can be detrimentally and adversely affected by the unregulated operation of flea markets. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(A)) 
Sec. 22-162. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prevent future problems and those foreseen to occur in the future through reasonable regulation, it being determined that the regulations contained in this article are minimum requirements needed to attempt to rectify identified problems. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(B)) 
Sec. 22-163. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all businesses and locations in the city which meet the definition of flea market and all flea market vendors, promoters, owners and operators as defined in this article. This article shall not apply to developed and operating shopping centers, antique shops, jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores or special sales events not to exceed 14 days in duration or other businesses dealing in merchandise common to that dealt in by flea markets, where vendors therein are not operating among a collection of vendors renting or securing individual spaces within an overall operation. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(C)) 
Sec. 22-164. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Flea market means any business whereby there is operated a center for shopping among collected flea market vendors marketing merchandise to the public from booths, stalls, tables, benches, individual rooms or display areas, and similar display and marketing configurations and arrangements, for the sale of new and used merchandise. Flea markets shall not include developed and operating shopping centers, antique stores, jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores or special sales events as accessory uses not to exceed 14 days in duration, or other businesses of merchandise in common with flea markets where the vendor therein is not operating among a collection of vendors or renting or securing individual space within an overall operation. 
Flea market promoter, operator or owner means all persons or other forms of business entities operating, maintaining, managing and promoting flea markets. 
Vendor or flea market vendor means all persons or other forms of business entities of every type and character operating among collections of other flea market vendors for sales to the public of new and used merchandise in collected marketing centers for sales from stalls, booths, tables, benches, rooms and other similar displays or marketing configurations and arrangements, excluding those operations defined under this section. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(D)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-165. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section, every violation of the terms of this article by any person shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued; and such violation is subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state. 
(c)  Any violation of this article shall be subject to injunction. Violations shall also be punished by revocation, suspension or probation of the license or permit. 
(d)  The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative. Pursuance of any one remedy shall not be deemed an election of remedies and shall not prohibit pursuance of more than one remedy simultaneously. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(K)) 
Sec. 22-166. - Business certificate requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to conduct a flea market business or for any flea market promoter, operator or owner to operate or allow to be operated such a business, or for any flea market vendor to display or sell wares of any kind at a flea market without a business license from the city. Business licenses issued for a flea market or any flea market promoter, operator or owner shall be valid only for the licensed location. A business license issued for a flea market vendor shall be valid when the vendor is operating from any duly licensed flea market in the city. It shall be unlawful for any flea market promoter, owner, operator or agent providing or renting space for flea market vendors to rent any sales area to any vendor or to provide space free of rent or to allow any vendor to use any sales area within a flea market unless the vendor has a valid business license from the city. It shall be the duty of the flea market promoter, operator, owner or agent renting or providing space to verify that such license is in effect for each vendor. Failure to verify that each vendor has a valid business license, or the renting or provision of space for any unlicensed vendor to display or sell wares, shall subject the business license of the flea market operator, owner or promoter to revocation. 
(b)  All persons desiring to obtain a business license as a vendor or for a flea market as a flea market promoter, operator or owner shall make written application to the city through the business license office on forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Applicants shall supply such reasonable information as may be required by the city. If the license is for a flea market operation, the information shall include the square footage of sales area within the flea market. An application fee, which is nonrefundable if a permit is not issued, shall be submitted with each application to operate a flea market. 
(c)  All applicants for a license under this article shall furnish all data, information and records reasonably related to the evaluation of an application, as may be requested by the city or any interested city department. An applicant, by filing an application for a license under this article, agrees to produce for oral interrogatories any person under the applicant's supervision or control who might have information pertinent to the application, upon the request of the city to do so. Failure to furnish such information or produce persons within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(d)  No application for any license under this article shall be granted where the application or investigation shows any of the following to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any license issued under the police power of any city or other governmental entity previously suspended or revoked. 
(3)  The location, if applicable, is not properly zoned. 
(4)  The applicant, as a previous holder of a license as a flea market promoter, operator, owner or vendor, has violated any law, including this article, relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(5)  No flea market use permit is in effect for the location, if applicable. 
(6)  The applicant has supplied false information either upon his application or in any communication with any official of the city relative to his application. 
(7)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee required under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(8)  The application, during the 12-month period next preceding the filing of his application, has engaged in any deceptive business practice as defined by this article. 
(9)  No original license under this article shall be issued to any person for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder owning at least 25 percent of the stock of the corporation, such interest being direct or indirect, beneficial or absolute, or his spouse or manager of the operation, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal or city ordinance except traffic violations. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a municipal or city ordinance or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the council may, after investigation, if appealed by the applicant, waive such violation as a disqualification. 
(10)  In addition to the provisions of subsections (d)(1) through (d)(9) of this section and in determining whether or not any license applied for under this article shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted business thereunder, and particularly as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.  The location for which the license is sought, if applicable, as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.  If it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(e)  All applications for business licenses for a flea market owner or operator required by this article shall be investigated by the city police department. The police department shall report its recommendations to the business license office. The applicant for a license to operate a flea market shall be fingerprinted and shall supply such other information as the police department deems necessary to complete its investigation. 
(f)  License fees for flea market owners, promoters, or operators and for flea market vendors shall be as established in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(g)  Any license issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously at the place of doing business of the licensee. 
(h)  No license issued under this article shall be transferable. 
(i)  Each license for a flea market or flea market promoter, operator or owner shall be for one location only. Flea markets or flea market promoters, operators or owners shall obtain a separate license, paying a separate fee, for each place of business. 
(j)  Those vendors operating in the city a maximum of three consecutive days selling merchandise as a part of a show, festival, fair, or promotion shall be required to obtain a business license that shall be valid only for the period of time that special show, fair, or promotion is being held. This temporary license shall not apply to flea market vendors, special tent sales, peddlers or any business not connected with a show, festival, fair, or promotion. The fee for this license shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(E)) 
Sec. 22-167. - Use permit required. 
(a)  No flea market shall be operated upon any realty or in or upon any personal property located on any realty unless and until a special use permit for a flea market is granted by the council. This special use permit for a flea market, referred to in this section as a "flea market use permit" or "permit," shall be in addition to all other requirements of the city. 
(b)  Applications for flea market use permits shall be applied for and advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted, as may be amended from time to time. Fees for filing and processing of applications shall be in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. A schedule of such fees shall be maintained on file in the planning and zoning department and in the office of the clerk of the council. 
(c)  Flea market use permits may be issued for such period of time as the council deems appropriate under the circumstances of each application. 
(d)  Flea market use permits shall be granted only if the council determines that there will be no significant adverse effect on the surrounding neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located; that no nuisance as defined by state law would result to the general area; that the quiet enjoyment of surrounding property would not be adversely affected; and that property values of surrounding property would not be adversely affected. No permit shall be issued where the application or any investigation shows the existence of any of the conditions enumerated in this article under section 22-166(d). 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(E)) 
Sec. 22-168. - Use regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to all flea markets licensed under this article: 
(1)  There shall be no on-street parking at any flea market. Each flea market shall provide on-site paved parking at the rate of one space per 100 square feet of sales area. No parking or parking spaces shall be located on or within any road right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of the promoter, operator or owner to assure at all times that no vehicle of any vendor, customer, patron, visitor, guest, invitee or other person frequenting the flea market is parked on any street or road or street or road right-of-way or off the site of the flea market, but is parked in a space acceptable under the city parking regulations and this article. 
(2)  The flea market owner or operator shall do whatever is necessary, based upon the circumstances of his individual property, to ensure ingress and egress only at curb cuts and locations approved by the public works department. 
(3)  There shall be no outside storage of any kind whatsoever. There shall be no outside sales of any kind whatsoever from any space, stall, shed or area which is not permanently covered by a roof and completely floored by a concrete floor of a minimum thickness of four inches, except at locations designated as such and approved at the time of the granting of the use permit. However, no sales or displays shall occur within required parking areas or interfere with general traffic flow. 
(4)  No sales of any kind whatsoever shall be made from any shed, structure or building of any kind unless such structure meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of all the city codes (for example, building code, fire code, plumbing code, electrical code, etc.). Structures shall require building permits and inspections by the city the same as for other construction. Flea markets shall be classified as group M, mercantile occupancy, under the city building code and shall meet all such requirements except that applications for permits for all open structures shall require plans to be submitted which are signed and sealed by an architect or engineer along with design calculations to substantiate compliance with code wind uplift requirements. 
(5)  All plumbing shall meet minimum code requirements, except that each flea market shall provide, at a minimum, for use by the public, facilities based on occupant loads as follows: 
a.  For flea markets located within enclosed structures, the occupant load shall be determined in the same manner as mercantile occupancy and exit capacity. 
b.  For a flea market located in the open air, the occupant load shall be determined as two people for each table, counter, or booth of no more than 20 square feet. 
c.  After the occupant load is identified, toilet facilities will be provided in the same manner as for commercial buildings of multiple tenants. 
d.  No temporary bathroom facilities shall be permitted. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, no person, including but not limited to a flea market promoter, operator, owner, employee, manager, vendor or invitee, shall be allowed to camp or reside overnight with or without a recreational vehicle, tent, sleeping bag, vehicle or other structure at a flea market, except that the owner may allow a reasonable number of overnight security personnel who may be either the owner or agents or employees of the owner. 
(7)  No animal, fish, fowl or insect of any kind shall be sold, traded, housed, caged, bartered, swapped or given away at any flea market. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-24(F)) 
Secs. 22-169—22-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INSURERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 22-191. - Insurers license fees. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Kennesaw, Georgia in an amount of $100.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-192, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  The license fee amounts levied under this section are derived from the population fee schedule contained in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1). The exact dollar amount levied is based on the 2010 official census report for the City of Kennesaw, Georgia (29,783 citizens). Fees for subsequent years may change in accordance with subsequent population census reports for the City of Kennesaw, Georgia in order to properly reflect the statutory fee owed. 
(Ord. No. 90-289, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 2001-20, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 2011-25, 10-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-26, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 22-192. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
(a)  For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $35.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(b)  The additional license fee levied under this section is derived from O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2); the greater of $10.00 or 35 percent of the amount due under O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1). Such additional fees for subsequent years may change with subsequent population census reports for the City of Kennesaw, Georgia in order to properly reflect the statutory amount owed under O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 90-289, § 2, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 2001-20, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 2011-26, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 22-193. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-191 hereof in the amount of $100.00 for each such location within the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 90-289, § 3, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 2001-20, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 2011-25, 10-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-26, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 22-194. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to the one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-191 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-289, § 4, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 2011-26, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 22-195. - Gross premiums, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-8-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-2. Gross direct premiums as used in the section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-191 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-289, § 5, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 2011-26, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 22-196. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 22-191, 22-192 and 22-193 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of January 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 90-289, § 6, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 2011-26, 11-21-11) 
Secs. 22-197—22-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESSES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, adopted Nov. 5, 2007, amended the former Art. IX, §§ 22-216—22-230, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1986, §§ 9-7-1—9-7-11, 9-7-13—9-7-15; Ord. of Nov. 4, 1991(1), §§ 9-7-16—9-7-18); Ord. No. 2007-17, adopted May 21, 2007 (rescinded Nov. 5, 2007). 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A et seq. 

Sec. 22-216. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all businesses employing massage therapists. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect, restrict, or prevent the practice, services, or activities of those individuals and/or entities specifically delineated in O.C.G.A § 42-24A-19, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-12) 
Sec. 22-217. - Penalty for violation; enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any provisions, requirements, terms or conditions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Revocation or suspension of license. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article governing massage therapy business subjects any license under this article to revocation or suspension as provided in this article. 
(c)  Abatement of violations as nuisance. Every violation of the terms of this article governing massage therapy businesses shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued, and such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state. 
(d)  Injunction. The violation of any provisions of this article as they pertain to massage therapy businesses may be enjoined by proceedings in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(e)  Remedies cumulative. Each of the remedies set out in subsections (a) through (d) of this section is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the right of any resident, property owner, or other person from bringing any proper action for enforcement of this article as it pertains to massage therapy businesses. 
(f)  Reporting. The violation of any provision, requirement, term or condition of this article shall be reported by the business license department to the following: 
(1)  Georgia Board of Massage Therapy; 
(2)  Better Business Bureau; and 
(3)  Owner of the property where violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, 12-5-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, adopted Dec. 5, 2016, amended § 22-217 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 22-217 pertained to penalty for violation and derived from Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, adopted Nov. 5, 2007. 
Sec. 22-218. - License required; application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business that will employ one or more massage therapists shall, before engaging in such business, file an application for a business license addressed to the mayor and city council. Such application shall be in writing and shall set forth or show compliance with the following: 
(1)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6, as amended, the applicant must provide evidence that each massage therapist to be employed by the business has the license required under the Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. No business license shall be issued to any applicant without such licensure being presented. 
(2)  The applicant must be fingerprinted by the city police department and a character reference check shall be completed for him or her. The applicant shall also submit a list of all persons who he or she intends to hire as employees for the business. A character reference check shall be completed for all persons who will be employed by the business, including, but not limited to, all massage therapists. It is the applicant's responsibility to provide the names of all such prospective employees and the forms required to complete the reference checks on those prospective employees. Additionally, any person hired as an employee after the application is submitted and after the business opens must also have a character reference completed on him or her. Fingerprints must be submitted no less than 15 days prior to issuance of a license to allow for investigation of the applicant and the employees. The fingerprints submitted shall be taken no earlier than 30 days prior to the submission of the application. 
(3)  If the applicant is an individual, his or her name and home or business address (P.O. boxes or their equivalent are not sufficient), telephone number, fax number, and email address must be provided. If the applicant is a corporate entity (which shall include a corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, professional corporation, professional association, and/or any other such similar entity), the corporate entity shall provide: the name of the corporate entity; the name of the person completing the application; his or her position or title with the corporate entity; the address of the principal place of business of the corporate entity; the telephone number of the corporate entity; the fax number of the corporate entity; the email address of the person completing the application; and, the names and addresses of all persons who have served in as an officer, manager, managing member, or general partner of the corporate entity during the two years immediately preceding the date shown on the application. 
(4)  If the applicant is an individual, the name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant for a period of two years or longer. 
(5)  If such applicant is a corporate entity, a certificate of good standing from the Georgia Secretary of State must be attached to the application. 
(6)  Qualifications must be plainly stated together with required exhibits annexed to such application. 
(7)  Three letters of reference for the applicant must accompany the application. Such letters shall not be required for annual renewals of licenses issued under this article. 
(8)  Should the applicant be a corporate entity, such corporation shall also submit with such application a certificate, executed as described in subsection (6) of this section, certifying as to the good moral character of the employees and agents of the corporation who are actually engaged in such business for the corporation. 
(b)  After the business license is issued, the applicant shall have a continuing obligation to submit the necessary documentation for reference checks of all new employees and to provide for each new massage therapist a true and accurate copy of the license issued to such massage therapist under the Massage Therapy Practice Act prior to such person engaging in massage therapy at the business, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, 12-5-16) 
Sec. 22-219. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  In accordance with, and in addition to, all state requirements for licensure of massage therapists any applicant under this article, prior to making application for a license, must have the following qualifications: 
(1)  The applicant and licensee must be a U.S. Citizen or a legal alien for at least one year prior to making application. 
(2)  The licensee is required to be a resident of the State of Georgia and a Georgia State Licensed Massage Therapist. 
(3)  Such applicant must furnish, with the application, two copies of a current health certificate of a medical doctor for each and every person, whether an employee or independent contractor, providing massage therapy at the proposed business location of the applicant. 
(b)  A massage therapist shall provide massage for physical therapy and health only and shall be entitled to engage in such profession within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, 12-5-16) 
Sec. 22-220. - Issuance of license; fee; change of location of business; transfer. 
(a)  If the application for a business license under this article is submitted in proper form and is approved by the mayor and council, then the business license department is authorized to issue a business license to such applicant upon the payment of an annual license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the mayor and council and/or business license bureau. 
(b)  No licensee under this article shall change the location of the business without applying for and receiving a new license for such location from the business license department. 
(c)  No license under this article shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, 12-5-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, adopted Dec. 5, 2016, amended § 22-220 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 22-220 pertained to issuance of license; fee and derived from Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, adopted Nov. 5, 2007. 
Sec. 22-221. - Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  A business license under this article shall be subject to denial, suspension, or revocation for cause. Whenever in the opinion of the business license department there is cause to suspend or revoke such business license, a written notice of intention to suspend, or revoke it and the grounds therefore shall be furnished the holder thereof at least three days before a regular or called meeting of the mayor and council, at which time the holder of the business license may make such showing as he may deem proper. After a hearing, the mayor and council may suspend, or revoke such license if such cause is determined to exist. The business license clerk shall have authority to deny an application for a new license under this article upon a finding that any one or more of the conditions for application have been violated. Upon such a denial, the applicant shall have the right to an appeal to the city manager within ten days of written notice to the applicant of the decision to deny on such basis. In the event that the applicant is dissatisfied with the ruling of the city manager, the applicant may appeal that decision to the mayor and council within ten days of written notice to the applicant of the city manager's decision. 
(b)  In addition to the standards stated elsewhere in this article, due cause for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license for a massage therapy practitioner or licensee shall include the following: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee has been convicted of fraud. 
(2)  The applicant or licensee is or has been engaged in business under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another person of a like or different name. 
(3)  There is evidence that the application or license is a guise or dummy application or license for another person who cannot or does not meet the qualifications of this chapter for issuance or retention of a massage therapy license. 
(4)  The applicant or licensee has violated or is guilty of criminal attempt or conspiracy to violate any laws relating to racketeer-influenced and corrupt organizations as defined in the Georgia RICO (Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations) Act (O.C.G.A. § 16-14-1 et seq.), crimes against the person as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 16-5-1 et seq.), sexual offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq.), gambling offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 12, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq.), obscenity and related offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 12, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq.), or contributing to the delinquency of a minor, all as defined by state law as it presently exists or may be hereafter amended. 
(5)  Failure of the applicant or licensee to have or maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license. 
(6)  Failure of the applicant or licensee to provide or maintain any of the documentation required for the application for or retention of the license. 
(7)  The applicant or licensee is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed massage practitioner and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in the establishment except as may be allowed by state law. 
(8)  The premises in which the business is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants. 
(9)  There is evidence that the applicant or licensee or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant or licensee is or was an officer, director, principal shareholder, general partner, or managing agent is delinquent in the payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the city, the county, or the state. 
(10)  Failure of the applicant or licensee to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers. 
(c)  Any applicant or licensee under this article who has his or her license application denied or license revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license for 12 months immediately following the revocation or denial. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, 12-5-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, adopted Dec. 5, 2016, amended § 22-221 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 22-221 pertained to revocation of license; hearing and derived from Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, adopted Nov. 5, 2007. 
Sec. 22-222. - Signed copy of regulations to be filed with license application. 
A signed copy of this article or the ordinance from which this article is derived will be filed with any business license application by the business license department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07) 
Sec. 22-223. - Authority to train personnel. 
Any applicant granted a business license under this article shall have the authority to employ those individuals granted provisional massage therapists license by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy in accordance with the Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq., provided that the business licensee shall furnish to the business license department, there to be kept by such department, a health certificate of each such employee from a medical doctor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-12) 
Sec. 22-224. - Information concerning employees to be filed with business license department. 
Within three business days of commencement of operations of the business, the applicant shall file with the business license department an affidavit stating the names of all employees. After hiring each new employee and prior to that employee's commencement of employment, the applicant shall provide the name of each such prospective employee and the documentation, including fingerprints, to conduct a reference check on such employee. If the employee is a massage therapist, the applicant shall provide two copies of the employee's license issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-12) 
Sec. 22-225. - Record of treatments to be maintained; inspections. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a business license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the person at the establishment administering such treatment. The city, through the employees of the business license department or the city police department, shall have the right to inspect the place of business and records of any licensee under this article during the hours authorized under this article for the conducting of business to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, 12-5-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, adopted Dec. 5, 2016, amended § 22-225 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 22-225 pertained to record of treatments to be maintained and derived from Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, adopted Nov. 5, 2007. 
Sec. 22-226. - Exceptions. 
Each client or customer of a massage therapist shall have the unfettered right to select his or her massage therapist. The requirements of this section shall not apply to treatments given at the office of a licensed chiropractor, licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, or in a regularly established and licensed hospital or sanitarium. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, 12-5-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-34, Att. A, adopted Dec. 5, 2016, amended § 22-226 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 22-226 pertained to maintenance of patient log and derived from Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, adopted Nov. 5, 2007; and Ord. No. 2012-02, adopted March 19, 2012. 
Sec. 22-227. - Patronage of massage therapy businesses. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to patronize any massage therapy business unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given signed by a regularly licensed physician. 
(b)  Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of a massage therapy business to determine the age of the persons patronizing such massage therapy business, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage therapy business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-12) 
Sec. 22-228. - Massages by unlicensed persons. 
Massages may be given by persons not holding a license as a massage therapist only in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-9, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07) 
Sec. 22-229. - Prohibited contact. 
No massage therapist shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs of any person. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07) 
Sec. 22-230. - Licensed massage therapist. 
Any person licensed pursuant to the Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1, as amended, shall be entitled to practice as a massage therapist as required by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, Att. A, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-12) 
Secs. 22-231—22-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 22-251. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. "Depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-23(A)) 
Sec. 22-252. - Minimum amount of tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 22-251 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-23(B)) 
Sec. 22-253. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied under this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the business license office on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioners of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The city business license office shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-23(C)) 
Sec. 22-254. - Due date. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 22-253, unless extended by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-23(D)) 
Sec. 22-255. - Copies of article to be provided. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the city and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the city. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-23(E)) 
Sec. 22-256. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1999-15, adopted December 6, 1999, deleted in its entirety former section 22-256, which pertained to temporary certificates, and derived from Ord. of 11-7-94(1), § 3-2-25. 
Secs. 22-257—22-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PAWNBROKERS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 22-276. - Issuance of license. 
Licenses may be issued by the mayor and council to applicants desiring to operate as pawnbrokers, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  No license shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude as defined by the laws of the state unless a full and complete pardon has been granted. 
(2)  No license shall be issued to any applicant under the terms of this article if any false information is furnished upon the application by the applicant to the appropriate authorities of the city. 
(3)  No license shall be issued under the terms of this article if the applicant has ever been convicted of usury under the laws of this state or of any other state. 
(4)  No license shall be issued until the applicant has been investigated by the police department of the city, and a favorable report received from the police department as to his general reputation in the business community. 
(5)  No license shall be issued to any applicant who is not a resident of this county. 
(6)  No license shall be issued to any applicant who does not provide proof of financial responsibility. 
(7)  No license shall be issued unless the names and addresses of all persons holding any interest in the business are listed and those persons have signed the application. 
(8)  No license shall be issued to any applicant who is engaged in any finance or lending business unless this requirement is expressly waived by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 22-277. - Entry and examination by police. 
Upon making application for and receiving a license from the city to operate as a pawnbroker, the holder of the license expressly authorizes the police department of the city to enter upon his premises and to inspect and examine any articles in the business for the purpose of determining whether or not they have been stolen or otherwise illegally obtained by the applicant or the pawnor, and the applicant expressly agrees that no search warrant shall be necessary, but consents to such examination and inspection at any time upon request by any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-2) 
Sec. 22-278. - Persons from whom articles may not be received. 
No holder of a pawnbroker's license shall accept any article of pawn from: 
(1)  Any person under the age of 21 years; 
(2)  Any person who is intoxicated; or 
(3)  Any person who is not a resident of the state. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 22-279. - Record of pawned articles. 
The pawnbroker shall keep available for inspection by the appropriate authorities of the city, including but not limited to the police department, an itemized list of all articles pawned, together with a full and complete description thereof, the amount loaned on each article, the due date of the loan, the name and address of the pawnor, the age of the pawnor, and the place of employment of the pawnor. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 22-280. - Evidence of loan. 
The pawnbroker shall make a loan only by written, negotiable instrument or by receiving a receipt for the amount of the loan by the pawnor. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 22-281. - Compliance with lending laws. 
The pawnbroker shall comply with all the laws of the state as to the rate of interest and all provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code of the state applicable to lending. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-6) 
Sec. 22-282. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be good cause for suspension and/or revocation of the license. If the city clerk or any police officer should determine that a probable violation has occurred, he shall place the issue before the mayor and council at its next regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting called for the purpose of determining whether a violation has occurred. At least ten days' notice of the hearing before the mayor and council shall be provided the licensee. At the conclusion of the hearing the mayor and council may issue a warning, suspend the license for a definite period of time, revoke the license or take no action if the council finds no violation by the licensee. In the event of a revocation or suspension, no portion of the annual license fee shall be returned to the licensee. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-7) 
Sec. 22-283. - Additional restrictions authorized. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to impose additional restrictions on the pawnbroker, and the pawnbroker shall be required to comply therewith upon 30 days' notice. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-8) 
Secs. 22-284—22-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - GARAGE AND YARD SALES 

Sec. 22-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage or yard sale means a sale by a private property owner of personal property used by the homeowner's family or neighbors, either in the garage area of the house, basement, interior of the house or on the lawn of the house. No new or additional personalty shall be sold in such sales. 
(Code 1986, § 8-5-231) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-302. - Restrictions. 
Garage or yard sales shall be permitted only under the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Only homeowners may apply to the city clerk for a permit for a garage or yard sale. 
(2)  No sale shall be held on property in any residentially zoned district more than three days in succession, and no more than three weekends per calendar year. 
(Code 1986, § 8-5-232; Ord. No. 2003-13, § 1, 4-21-03) 
Sec. 22-303. - Parking; signs. 
A garage or yard sale shall be conducted in a neat and orderly fashion, and automobile traffic and parking shall be controlled. All signs shall be removed within 24 hours. 
(Code 1986, § 8-5-233) 
Sec. 22-304. - Exemptions from article. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to govern sales conducted by nonprofit organizations. 
(Code 1986, § 8-5-234) 
Secs. 22-305—22-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-350. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business license means the license required of all persons engaged in business in the city as set forth in chapter 22, concerning licenses, permits and businesses, as amended. 
Chauffeur means, for purposes of this article, any person with a Georgia state driver's license who meets the qualifications as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.10 and who is authorized by the public service commission to drive a sedan, limousine, extended limousine, van or minibus. 
Chief means the chief of police. 
Dispatcher means a person assigned to a base of operations, in contact with taxicabs of the licensee's company having access to a telephone to talk with passengers or place phone calls in the event of an emergency. 
Domicile means the place where the corporate establishment is maintained; its principal place of business. 
Licensee means a person licensed by the city business license office to engage in the vehicle for hire business. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten passengers with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and as a limousine. Limousines and limousine carriers shall be fully regulated by the state under the public service commission. 
Motor vehicle safety standards means standards promulgated by the police department for approval by the mayor and council that all vehicles for hire regulated under this article must meet. 
Operator's permit means the written authority granted by the police department to persons who qualify to operate vehicles for hire. Sometimes referred to as driver's permit. 
Permittee means a person granted a permit to operate vehicles for hire in the incorporated areas of the city. 
Sedan means any luxury or nonluxury sedan or town car type vehicle which has a seating capacity of not more than five passengers and the driver and which does not contain a taximeter designed to measure electronically or mechanically the distance traveled or time. 
Sedan carrier means any person operating a service regularly rendered to the public by furnishing transportation as a motor common carrier for hire, not over fixed routes, by means of sedans driven by chauffeurs on the basis of telephone contract, written contract or other prearrangement. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle used as a public conveyance which does not meet the requirements of a limousine, is not a van, minibus or sedan, has a taximeter and is subject to the rules and regulations of this article. 
Valid complaint means a complaint against an operator or business to the business license office where the complainant provides his name, address and substance of complaint, and expresses a willingness to attend any hearing regarding his complaint. 
Van means any motor vehicle, other than a limousine, extended limousine, minibus or a sedan, with a designed seating capacity for no more than 15 passengers, including the driver. 
Vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used. Such term does not include vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. For the purposes of this article, vehicles for hire shall mean taxicabs and sedans. 
Vehicle for hire or taxicab stand means any area where vehicles for hire or taxicabs park, stop, wait or stand for the purpose of accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee in exchange for transportation. 
Vehicle permit sticker means a sticker issued to a licensee upon proof of insurance and verification of compliance with city vehicle mechanical safety standards, to be placed on each vehicle for hire operated under this article and renewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-351. - Persons deemed engaged in business of vehicles for hire. 
Any person who within the city stops, parks, or waits in a vehicle for hire at a vehicle for hire stand or engages in picking up passengers and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by an agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transportation is deemed to be engaged in the business of vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-352. - Sedan carriers and chauffeurs exempt from certain provisions. 
(a)  The following provisions of this article shall not apply to sedan carriers: 
(1)  Subsection 22-381(c)(4), regarding a copy of the rate schedule and operation hours. 
(2)  Subsection 22-381(c)(8), regarding dispatcher's address and operating hours. 
(3)  Subsection 22-383(1)a, regarding submitting a company logo and/or identification color scheme. 
(4)  Subsections 22-355(a), (b) and (c), regarding vehicle markings and rates. 
(5)  Subsection 22-356(c), regarding the prominent display of the telephone number of the business license office. 
(6)  Subsection 22-363(a), regarding the first sentence pertaining to notification of a dispatcher concerning personal property left behind. 
(7)  Subsection 22-364(a), second sentence, regarding display of the business license office telephone number. 
(b)  The following provisions shall not apply to a chauffeur if such chauffeur can show that he has provided substantially the same information to the public service commission within the last 12 months: 
(1)  Subsection 22-381(c), regarding submitting to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. 
(2)  Subsection 22-391(c), regarding submitting to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. 
(c)  All other provisions of this article shall remain in full force and effect with regard to sedan carriers and chauffeurs. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-353. - Previous denial or revocation of business license or operator's permit. 
All persons who have had their business license or operator's permit revoked must reapply for a license or permit. No license or operator's permit shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of the application the applicant for a license, operator's permit or renewal has had an application denied or a license or operator's permit revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-354. - Vehicle safety standards; verification. 
(a)  Each person operating a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall maintain each vehicle thus operated in a good, safe and serviceable mechanical condition. 
(b)  The police department shall recommend minimum motor vehicle safety standards for approval by the mayor and council. These standards will be filed with the clerk of the city, the business license office and the police department. All persons or entities operating, owning or leasing vehicles for hire shall be presumed to have knowledge of such standards. All vehicles for hire operating on the roads and streets of the city will be required to maintain their motor vehicles in compliance with such standards. A verification statement that the motor vehicles to be used in the business meet or exceed the requirements and standards approved by the mayor and council shall be required before vehicle permit stickers may be issued. Such verification must be executed by the sole proprietor, named partner or president or CEO of a corporation. 
(c)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time by the police department and business license office. A vehicle found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and will remain removed from service until adequate proof is provided to the chief of police or his designee or the supervisor of the business license office that the vehicle is compliant with the standards approved by the city. Proof that a vehicle has been brought into compliance with the standards shall not affect the ability to assess any and all civil or criminal penalties or actions against the business or driver for violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-355. - Vehicle markings; rates. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall plainly and prominently advertise the name and telephone number of the person who holds the business license to operate the vehicle. Such advertisement shall be permanently affixed to both sides of the vehicle in a manner that prohibits the transfer of the advertisement from one vehicle to another. 
(b)  A schedule of rates and hours of operation shall be marked on the side of the taxicab so as to be plainly visible to persons seeking to engage such vehicle for hire and shall be filed with the business license office by the licensee. 
(c)  Each taxicab shall have a taxi rooflight mounted on the roof of the vehicle. Such rooflight shall have a lighting system functional for nighttime operation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-356. - Interior requirements of vehicles for hire. 
(a)  The interior of each vehicle for hire shall be maintained in a clean condition, free of foreign matter and offensive odors. There shall be no litter in the vehicle or trunk and the seats shall be kept clean and without holes or large wear spots. 
(b)  All vehicles for hire shall present a clean environment for passengers. 
(c)  The telephone number of the business license office shall be prominently displayed within the taxicab, designating such number as the number to call when filing complaints. 
(d)  Permittees and licensees shall be responsible for compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-357. - Parking of taxicabs. 
The driver of a taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a taxicab stand, except that this section shall not prevent the driver of such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers, and from making emergency repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-358. - Daily dispatch log sheets. 
In order to maintain a license to operate a vehicle for hire service, a licensee must maintain daily dispatch log sheets, which shall be kept on file at the licensed business premises for a minimum of one year. Dispatch log sheets shall indicate all passengers carried, the time, place of entry and destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-359. - Cruising. 
Operators of taxicabs are prohibited from cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the city or any private property for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Licensees under this article are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-360. - Call jumping. 
Licensees under this article shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-361. - Appearance and hygiene of drivers. 
Drivers of vehicles for hire must practice good personal hygiene and wear proper dress while operating a vehicle for hire. Proper dress shall mean the wearing of shoes, ankle-length pants, a shirt or blouse with sleeves and collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-362. - Business audits. 
Each person licensed to do business under the provisions of this article, including limousine carriers, shall be subject to audit by the city. The city shall conduct such audit at reasonable times and with prior notice to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-363. - Drivers' duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Drivers of taxicabs shall notify their dispatcher of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire and such property shall be noted on the daily dispatch log sheets. Within 24 hours of discovery of any personal property left by a passenger, a driver shall forward such property to the police department or to its company's headquarters. Licensees shall maintain an accurate log of all private property held by them and the names of all persons claiming and receiving such property for a minimum of one year. 
(b)  A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle for hire who is not permitted and for any person who is not licensed to solicit or engage passengers within the city. 
(d)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(e)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin or religious belief. 
(f)  No driver shall be permitted to carry nonpaying passengers in a taxicab while transporting a paying passenger or passengers except for the purpose of driver training. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a driver to operate his vehicle in a manner which threatens a passenger or anyone else, or to threaten or otherwise abuse a passenger. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for a driver to discharge any passenger before reaching the passenger's destination unless the driver has a reasonable belief that the passenger is dangerous, or unless street or area conditions do not permit a safe discharge to either the passenger or driver. 
(i)  No television sets may be operated on the front seat on which the driver sits inside of a moving vehicle. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for drivers to drive, or for companies or other entities to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have a valid inspection sticker, is not validly insured or, if a taxicab, has an unsealed or improperly working taxifare meter. 
(k)  Persons or other entities operating a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall be prohibited from allowing such vehicles to be operated by persons not holding valid operator permits. 
(l)  Drivers shall not be required to carry more than $15.00 in change. 
(m)  Upon request of a passenger of a taxicab, drivers shall give receipts showing the amount of fare paid, name of company, license number, number of passengers, location of trip origination and location of trip termination. Upon request of a passenger of a sedan carrier, drivers of sedans shall give receipts showing the amount paid. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-364. - Complaints; records; hearings. 
(a)  The business license office shall be responsible for receiving complaints concerning the operation of vehicles for hire in the city. Pursuant to sections 22-355 and 22-356, the telephone number of the business license office shall be prominently displayed outside and inside the taxicab and shall designate such number as the number to call for filing complaints. 
(b)  The business license office shall maintain true and accurate records of the names and identification numbers of each driver permitted to drive vehicles for hire and each business licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier, together with other requirements of this article, and shall maintain a log of all complaints for each operator and licensee. If the business license office shall receive any article violation complaints concerning a particular operator, or three violation complaints concerning a licensee, the business license office shall notify the operator and licensee of the complaints if the business license supervisor sets a hearing on such complaints or suspends the operator's permit or business license. The operator or licensee will have the right to show cause that he is in compliance with the rules and regulations of this article. 
(c)  A hearing shall be set before the license review board no later than 30 days after the supervisor has notified the licensee or permittee of a hearing or has suspended a permit or license. The operator may use witnesses or other evidence to show his compliance with the ordinances of the city. If the license review board shall determine a violation on the part of the operator or licensee of the ordinances of the city, it may suspend or revoke the operator's permit or recommend to the mayor and council suspension or revocation of the business license. 
(d)  The business license office shall maintain a true and accurate log of each complaint showing the name of the complainant, the address of the complainant and the substance of the complaint. Such records shall be available to the operator and licensee, and shall be deemed a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-365. - Reciprocity with other counties and municipalities. 
The mayor and council are authorized from time to time to adopt operator permit fees, vehicle permit sticker fees, and/or other regulatory fees for companies and drivers operating or otherwise doing business within the city. The city shall make no distinction between companies and drivers having locations within the city and those without locations within the city in determining the amount of and imposing and collecting such fees. (Ref. O.C.G.A. 48-13-8(b)) 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-366. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  The police department and the business license office shall enforce the regulations contained in this article. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished by the payment of fines up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment up to six months, or both. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person, corporation, partnership or other entity, whether a licensee or permittee, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunctions in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of the city. 
(d)  Violations of any provision of this article by any licensee shall be due cause for revocation of any Cobb City business license, after notice and hearing before the mayor and council of the city of Kennesaw. 
(e)  Violations of any provision of this article by any permittee shall be due cause for revocation of any permit after notice and hearing as provided in this article. 
(f)  The remedies set forth in subsections (a) through (e) of this section are cumulative to each other. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Secs. 22-367—22-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSES AND VEHICLE PERMITS 

Sec. 22-381. - License requirements generally. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire, except limousines, in the city without first having been issued a business license. Limousine carriers and other vehicles not regulated by this article but engaged in the business of vehicles for hire which are domiciled within the city must be issued a business license and pay business license fees. All licenses shall be issued by the city business license office. 
(b)  The license must be posted in public view at the license location. 
(c)  In order to secure a business license to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier, an applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the business license office of the city, information requested by the police department and must submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a 20 percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. An applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere or been on probation or parole, for a period of five years previous to the date of application for the violation of any of the following criminal offenses of the state or any other stated or of the United States: criminal homicide; rape; aggravated battery; mayhem; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; child molestation; any sex-related offense; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; leaving the scene of an accident; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; any crime of violence or theft or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. 
(4)  Provide a copy of the rate schedule and the daily hours of operation. 
(5)  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual who is a fulltime employee in a management position of the applicant residing in the city who will be the registered agent for the purpose of serving of process. 
(6)  Provide proof of insurance pursuant to section 22-382. 
(7)  Provide information and verification pursuant to section 22-383. 
(8)  Provide the address of an office staffed by company agents or employees, including a dispatcher, that will be open between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and during any additional hours that any vehicle for hire associated with that company is being operated. 
(d)  All taxicab companies and vehicle for hire companies shall submit to the city business license division a list containing each make, model, separate vehicle number, vehicle identification number, tag number, and insurance for each taxicab or vehicle. 
(e)  All licenses obtained through the business license office of the city for taxicab companies or other entities shall not be transferable. 
(f)  Any license holder shall have at all times that taxicab services are offered within the city, an interpreter who can communicate in English with the city or emergency personnel. 
Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-382. - Insurance coverage. 
(a)  An applicant for a business license to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall provide with the application proof of a single motor vehicle insurance policy which documents that all vehicles are to be used as a vehicle or vehicles for hire, covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurer authorized to do business in the state and in the applicant's name, which insurance shall have a term of at least six month in the following amounts per vehicle: 
(1)  $25,000.00 per death or bodily injury per person. 
(2)  $50,000.00 per death or bodily injury per occurrence. 
(3)  $25,000.00 personal property damage. 
Should the state law which requires motor vehicle liability minimum insurance coverage as evidence of security for bodily injury and property damage liability (O.C.G.A. § 40-9-1 et seq., the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act) be changed to require greater minimums in any category of liability listed in subsections (1) through (3) of this subsection, the minimum amounts listed in this subsection shall be automatically amended to require such amounts upon the effective date such legislation with no additional notice to the public and no formal action required by the mayor and council. Additionally, should there be enacted at any time laws affecting requirements of vehicles for hire particularly, this article will automatically incorporate such requirements with no additional notice to the public and no formal action required by the mayor and council. Surplus line insurance and direct purchase insurance is not acceptable insurance for coverage of city taxicabs and city vehicles for hire. Applicant must further provide certifications from the insurer or the insurer's agent that notification of the cancellation of the insurance for a vehicle or vehicles of the applicant shall be provided to the department of the city police department that oversees the enforcement of the city's vehicle for hire ordinance. 
(b)  All persons licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier in the city as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be entitled to continue doing business, provided such person or entity submits to the business license office of the city proof of current insurance in the manner and amounts described above and verification pursuant to section 22-354 on or before Sept. 15, 2003. 
(c)  Proof of insurance must be submitted in accordance with the term of the individual policy, but in any event at least on an annual basis. Such proof shall be in accordance with requirements established by the business license office. 
(d)  Before the policy is canceled for nonpayment of premium or other cause, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the business license office of the city at least 30 days before the policy lapses. 
(e)  A licensee shall report any additional vehicles to be operated pursuant to this article to the business license office and shall provide proof of insurance on such vehicles pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-383. - Vehicle permit stickers with license. 
A business duly licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier pursuant to this article will be issued, at the time of licensing or at the time of providing proof of insurance as required by subsection 22-382(b), vehicle permitting stickers for each vehicle owned, leased or operated by such business, pursuant to the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee must: 
a.  List all vehicles to be operated in the business, indicating their make, model, year, VIN, tag number and color, on a form to be provided by the business license office. Each company shall submit a company logo and/or identification/color scheme, which shall not be the same or similar to any other company. The logo and/or identification/color scheme shall be approved by the business license office. 
b.  Execute a verification statement concerning the mechanical safety of each vehicle listed in subsection (1)a of this section pursuant to section 22-354. 
c.  Provide proof of insurance for each vehicle listed in subsection (1)a of this section as set forth in section 22-383, along with vehicle registration, both of which must be in the applicant's name. 
(2)  Stickers must at all times be displayed on the passenger's rear side window and in the front windshield, bottom righthand corner for sedan carriers. Each vehicle will be assigned a numbered sticker and that sticker may not be used on any other vehicle. 
(3)  No vehicle to which a permit sticker is affixed may be leased, subleased or otherwise assigned for the purpose of operating a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier under this article. 
(4)  A licensee shall report any additional vehicles to be operated pursuant to this article and shall provide all information necessary and pay all fees required to obtain additional vehicle permit stickers. 
(5)  A fee schedule for vehicle permit stickers will be recommended by the supervisor of the business license office and approved from time to time by the mayor and council. Such schedule will be on file with the clerk of the city, the business license office and the police department. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to renew vehicle permit stickers annually. Any licensee who fails to timely renew its vehicle permit and pay such fee when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the permit sticker fee for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date. To be considered a city business for purposes of determining vehicle sticker permit fees, a business must have or operate out of one or more offices in the unincorporated part of the city. A post office box will not constitute an office. 
(6)  If a business license is suspended, all vehicle permit stickers associated with such license shall be null and void for the period of the suspension. If the suspension is in effect on the annual renewal date of the business license or on the annual renewal date of the vehicle permit sticker, then immediately upon the suspension ending, such person or entity shall renew its license and vehicle permit stickers. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-384. - Denial, suspension and revocation of business license; hearing. 
(a)  A business license or an application for a business license under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (d) of this section. A business license shall be granted by the supervisor of the business license office if the application meets all the legal requirements of this article and the police department provides a clearance consistent with the requirements of this article. If the application does not meet all the legal requirements of this article or the police department does not provide a clearance on the application, it shall not be granted by the supervisor of the business license office. Any decision of the supervisor shall be final unless an appeal is filed by any aggrieved party within ten days from the date of notice to the applicant regarding the denial of the application. The appeal shall be to the license review board as provided for in section 2-115 of this code. 
(b)  Upon summary consideration of facts that indicate due cause under subsection (d) of this section, the supervisor of the business license office may suspend a license under this article. The suspension shall be reported in writing to the mayor and council and the mayor and council will review such action at the next regularly scheduled public meeting. A notice shall be sent to the licensee setting forth the time, place and purpose of the meeting. After a hearing, if the mayor and council determines due cause to exist, the board may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the license or licensee. 
(c)  A business license previously issued by this city may be revoked only after a hearing before the mayor and council upon a prior written notice to the licensee setting forth the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the reason why the license would be revoked. Unless the circumstances justify otherwise, three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor and council may deem the circumstances justify. The hearing shall be held no later than 30 days after the supervisor notifies licensee of a hearing before the mayor and council. The hearing before the mayor and council shall follow the procedures specified in section 6-63 of this code. After a hearing, if the mayor and council determines due cause to exist, the board may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the license or licensee. 
(d)  A business license may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a business license. 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article, as they may be amended. 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license. 
(4)  For violation of any part of this article by the licensee, its agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. 
(5)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. 
(6)  Allowing taxicabs to operate in the city that do not meet the requirements and standards adopted by the mayor and council pursuant to section 22-54. 
(7)  Three violation complaints received pursuant to section 22-364 and determined to be valid by the license review board. 
(e)  Licensees under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their vehicle operators, whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Secs. 22-385—22-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER PERMITS 

Sec. 22-391. - Regulation of drivers of vehicles for hire. 
(a)  No person shall operate a taxicab or sedan without an operator's permit issued by the police department. No business licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall employ any driver who has not been issued an operator's permit. 
(b)  Operator's permits shall not be issued to any driver not employed by or representing a licensed company. Proof of employment or representation shall be presented upon application of a permit. 
(c)  An applicant for a permit must furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the police department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. Operator permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; provided, however, any driver between the age of 18 and 21 who was operating a taxicab on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be subject to this age provision. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Possess a current, valid Georgia state driver's license, which must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere or been on probation or parole, for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following criminal offenses of the state or any other state or of the United States: criminal homicide; rape; aggravated battery; mayhem; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; child molestation; any sex-related offense; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; leaving the scene of an accident; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; any crime of violence or theft, or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. 
(d)  All operator permits automatically expire two years from the date they are issued. It shall be the responsibility of the operator to renew his permit and pay the applicable fee. 
(e)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or status from information previously supplied to the police department within ten days of such change. 
(f)  Operator permits must be posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Drivers of sedans must have their operator's permits in their possession and they must be visible to passengers. Licensees under this article are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current operator's permit in his possession and that such permit is posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being operated. 
(g)  A schedule of permit fees, as adopted from time to time by the mayor and council, shall be posted in the offices of the clerk of the city and the police department. Any permittee who fails to timely renew his permit and fails to pay such fee when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date. If the fees adopted from time to time by the mayor and council provide for different fees for city drivers/operators than for noncity drivers/operators, to be considered a city driver/operator and pay fees associated therewith, a driver must have or operate out of one or more offices in the unincorporated part of the city; a post office box will not constitute an office. Proof of a current lease, if applicable, for the company premises, an affidavit as to ownership or occupancy or proof of association with a city licensee must be submitted to the police department upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 22-392. - Denial, suspension, revocation of permits; hearing. 
(a)  An operator's permit or an application for an operator's permit under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (d) of this section. An operator's permit shall be granted by the chief of police or his designee if the application meets all the legal requirements of this article and the police department provides a clearance consistent with the provisions of this article. If the application does not meet all the legal requirements of this article or the police department does not provide a clearance on the application, it shall not be granted by the chief of police or his designee. Any decision of the chief or his designee shall be final unless an appeal is filed by any aggrieved party within ten days from the date of notice to the applicant regarding denial of the application. The appeal shall be to the license review board as provided for in section 2-115 of this Code. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee may suspend or revoke an operator's permit for due cause as defined in subsection (d) of this section. The suspension or revocation shall be reported in writing to the license review board, and the license review board will review such action at the next regularly scheduled meeting. A notice shall be sent to the permittee setting forth the time, place and purpose of the meeting. After a hearing, the license review board may affirm the decision of the chief to suspend or revoke the permit, or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without the conditions, the permit or operator. If the decision of the chief is disaffirmed, the permit shall be returned to the permittee immediately. 
(c)  The decision of the license review board shall be final unless appealed as provided for in section 2-115 of this Code. 
(d)  An operator's permit may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(2)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a permit. 
(3)  Failure to pay any fees imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Failure to maintain all the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a driver's permit. 
(5)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period. 
(6)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin or religious belief. 
(7)  Operating a vehicle with knowledge, actual or implied, that the required insurance coverage is not current or has lapsed. 
(8)  Operating a vehicle in a manner which threatens a passenger or anyone else. 
(9)  Operating a vehicle the driver knows or should know is not in compliance with the motor vehicle safety standards approved by the mayor and council. 
(10)  The permit applicant, during the 12-month period next preceding the filing of his application, has suffered a revocation of his operator's permit. 
(11)  A complaint is received pursuant to section 22-364 and determined to be valid by the license review board. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions in this section, any permits issued through administrative error or an error in the completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 9-15-03) 
ARTICLE XIV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 22-393. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A "substantial business activity" exits where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(2)  At least 25 percent of the wholesale value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(3)  At least 25 percent of the retail value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(4)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of the foregoing items; or 
(5)  The establishment devotes at least 25 percent of its interior business space or, if less than 25 percent, devotes at least 500 square feet of its interior business space to the display, sale, and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in the term "interior business space"); or 
(6)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 1,000 of the foregoing items and limits access to the premises or to the portion of the premises occupied by said items to adults only; or 
(7)  The establishment regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, using "adult," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(8)  Maintains an adult arcade, which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means a commercial establishment or facility which regularly features live dancers, performers or other persons who appear nude. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Adult movie house means any movie theater which on a regular, continuing basis shows films rated "X" by the Motion Picture Coding Association of America or any movie theater which presents for public viewing on a regular, continuing basis so-called "adult films" depicting sexual conduct. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a fulltime, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Explicit media outlet means any commercial establishment which has an inventory of goods that is composed of at least 50 percent of books, pamphlets, magazines, or other printed publications, films or other media which depict sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct. 
Hospital. A building or portion thereof designated or used for therapeutic treatment of bed patients who are physically or mentally ill. 
Influential interest means any of the following: 
(1)  The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business; or 
(2)  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. The term "operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by any county, city or federal government or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for recreation and enjoyment to the general public. 
Person means individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
Regular or regularly means and refers to the consistent and repeated doing of the act so described. 
Religious assembly: A site or facility maintained by a bona fide religious group for the primary purpose of religious worship. Religious assemblies include but are not limited to churches, mosques, synagogues and temples. 
Residence means a house, apartment, boardinghouse or rooming house, duplex, or other multifamily housing, for human dwelling, or any property zoned therefore. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges and universities of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, or as may be amended from time to time, including any public or private location that teaches the Georgia Pre-kindergarten Program and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not include residences where home study programs are located. 
Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is female, breast, which, to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex. 
Sexual device means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall this definition be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to their premises by reason of age. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theater, an explicit media outlet, or a sexual device shop. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means: 
(1)  Any of the following specified offenses for which less than five years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
a.  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
b.  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
c.  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
d.  Any offense related to any sexually-oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; or 
(2)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relations, or excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism or zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room means the room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 2018-24, § 5(Exh. D), 10-15-18) 
Sec. 22-394. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such. 
(b)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-395. - Rationale and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Rationale and findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the mayor and city council, including the following documents and reports and transcripts and minutes from public hearings from other jurisdictions detailing first-hand accounts of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to: A Digest of Research: The Evidence of Relationships Between Adult-Oriented Businesses and Community Crime and Disorder prepared for The Mayor and Council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia July 1996; Adams County, Colorado Nude Entertainment Study 1987; Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis 1984; Adult Entertainment Business Study for Manatee County 1987; Adult Entertainment Zoning in New York City; An Analysis of the Effects of SOBs on the surrounding neighborhoods in Dallas, Texas prepared for Assistant City of Dallas, April 1987; Community Protection Committee's Final Report on Vice in Hamilton County with Recommendations to Hamilton County Executive Board of Commissioners, the Mayor and Members of the Chattanoooga City Council, May 1997; Do "Off-Site" Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence , Richard McCleary and Alan C. Weinstein, 218 Law and Policy, April 2009; Survey of Appraisers Fort Worth and Dallas, Effects of Land Uses on Surrounding Property Values prepared for City of Fort Worth, Texas, September 2004; Final Report to the City of Garden Grove, The Relationship Between Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden Grove Boulevard, October 23, 1991; December 20, 2005 Transcript of the Regular City Council meeting, City of Sandy Springs, Georgia; December 27, 2005 Transcript of the Regular City Council meeting, City of Sandy Springs, Georgia; National Law Center Summaries of "SOB Land Use" Studies, Crime Impact Studies by Municipal and State Governments on Harmful Secondary Effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses, March 31, 1996; Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City, A Survey or Real Estate Appraisers, March 3, 1986; Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, June 6, 1989; Report on the Secondary Effects of the Concentration of Adult Use Establishments in the Times Square Area, April 1994; Report on Adult Oriented Businesses in Austin, Texas prepared for the Mayor and City Council of Austin, May 19, 1986; March 6, 1985 meeting minutes of the Rome City Commission; Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance Revision Committee Legislative Report to the Houston City Council, January 7, 1997; Staff Report amendments to Zoning Regulations Adult Businesses in C-2 zone with conditional use permit, January 9, 1978; Study of the Effects of the Concentration of Adult Entertainment Establishments in the City of Los Angeles, Department of City Planning City of Los Angeles, June 1977; Summary of Review and Conclusions Regarding the City of St. Cloud's Regulation of Adult Businesses, December 1994; August 7, 2001 Transcript of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners meeting; August 3, 2011 Deposition of Robert J. Stevens, Flanigan's Enterprises v. City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, Civil Action File No. 1:09-CV-2747, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division; August 3, 2011 Deposition of Terry Sult, Flanigan's Enterprises v. City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, Civil Action File No. 1:09-CV-2747, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division; Deposition of Corazalla, Flanigan's Enterprises v. City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, Civil Action File No. 1:09-CV-2747, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division Quality of Life: A Look at Successful Abatement of Adult Oriented Businesses in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 1984-1989; City of Littleton, Colorado v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, LLC, 541 U.S. 774, 124 S.Ct. 2219, 159 L.Ed. 84 (2004); California v. LaRue, 410 U.S. 948, 93 S.Ct. 1351 (1973); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 1132, 106 S.Ct. 1663 (1986); New York State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, No. 80-813, Supreme Court of the United States, June 22, 1981; City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001);Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, Florida, 490 F. 3d 860 (11thCir. 2007); Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, 703 Fed. Appx. 929 (11 th Cir. 2017); Peek-A-Boo Lounge of Bradenton, Inc. v. Manatee County, Florida, 630 F. 3d 1346 (11 th Cir. 2011); Sammys of Mobile, LTD v. City of Mobile, 140 F. 3d 993 (11 th Cir. 1998); Wise Interprises, Inc. v. Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, 217 F. 3d 1360 (11 th Cir. 2000); Zibtluda, LLC v. Gwinnett County, Georgia, 411 F. 3d 1278 (11 th Cir. 2005); Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, 2010 WL 520542 (11 th Cir.); Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, 242 F. 3d 976 (11 th Cir. 2001); 5634 East Hillsborough Avenue, Inc. v. Hillsborough County, Florida, 2008 WL 4276370 (C.A. 11 Fla.);Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997; International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F. 3d 291 (6 th Cir. 2008); Richland Bookmart, Inc. et al. v. Knox County, Tennessee, 555 F. 3d 512 (6 th Cir. 2009); 10950 Retail, LLC, d/b/a Love Shack v. City of Johns Creek, A09A0374, July 9, 2009; Fairfax MKI, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia, 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998): World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); Maxim Cabaret, Inc. v. City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, 816 S.E. 2d 31 (Ga. 2018); Modified Permanent Injunction Order, People of the State of Illinois et al. v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Civil Action File No. 04-CH-26, Fourth Judicial Circuit Effingham County, Illinois, July 13, 2005; Order Upholding Constitutionality of Chapter 807 of the Revised Code of the Consolidated City and County of Indianapolis, Annex Books, Inc. et al. v. City of Indianapolis, Civil Action File No. 1:03-cv-00918, U. S. District Court Southern District of Indiana, Indianapolis Division; Blue Movies, Inc. v. Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, 317 S.W. 3d 23 (Ky. 2010); Cami, Inc. et al. v. Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, 2007 WL 2893435 (Ky. App.);Foster v. City of El Paso, 2013 WL 632962 (2013); Peek-A-Boo Lounge of Bradenton, Inc. v. Manatee County, Florida, 2009 WL 4349319 (M.D. Fla.); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Indiana Court of Appeals 2007); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 911 N.E. 2d 1264 (Indiana Court of Appeals 2009); Order granting motion for judgment on the pleadings, Enlightened Reading, Inc. v. Jackson County, Missouri, Civil Action File No. 08-0209-CV-W, U.S. District Court for the Western District of Missouri Western Division; Order granting summary judgment, High Five Investments, LLC et al v. Floyd County, Georgia, Civil Action File No. 4:06-CV-0190, U.S. District Court Northern District of Georgia, Rome Division; Richland Bookmart, Inc. et al. v. Knox County, Tennessee, 2007 WL 4480138 (E.D. Tenn); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 2006 WL 5779504 (W.D. Mich.); 5634 East Hillsborough Avenue, Inc. v. Hillsborough County, Florida, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla.), the mayor and city council find: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects, including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
(2)  Based upon the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, which experiences the mayor and city council finds are relevant to the problems faced by the city, and which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within this country, the mayor and city council finds that public nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult cabarets begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. The mayor and city council find that nudity and the depiction thereof, coupled with alcohol in public places, encourages undesirable behavior and is not in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. The mayor and city council have chosen to avoid the disturbances associated with mixing alcohol and nude dancing by means of a reasonable restriction upon sexually oriented businesses in relation to the consumption of alcohol on premise. 
(3)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(4)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 2018-24, § 5(Exh. D), 10-15-18) 
Sec. 22-396. - Severability. 
This article and each section and provision of said article hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-397. - Classification. 
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore; 
(2)  Adult video store; 
(3)  Adult cabaret; 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(5)  Sexual device shop. 
(6)  Explicit media outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 2018-24, § 5(Exh. D), 10-15-18) 
Sec. 22-398. - License required. 
(a)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee of a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the business license division a completed application made on a form provided by the business license division manager or his or her designee. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) of this section and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(8)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½ inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch per 200 feet. The surveyor's plat shall show the proposed location and the location of all customer entries in relation to distance, measured as provided in this ordinance, to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the distance requirements as provided in this article, together with the zoning district and present uses of all such real property and the proposed location. 
b.  A legal description of the property where the business is located; and 
c.  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. 
(9)  The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the business license division within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the office of the business license division on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by state law or court order. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-399. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Business license. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the mayor and city council shall either issue a license to the applicant or deny a license to the applicant. Any denial of an application for a license by the mayor and city council may be appealed to the Cobb County Superior Court within 30 days of the decision to deny by writ of certiorari. The mayor and city council shall issue a sexually oriented business license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article or is not in compliance with locational requirements of this article or the locational requirements of any other part of this Code or state law. If the license application is for a renewal of an existing license that, at the time issued, was in compliance with the location requirements of this article, the mayor and council may waive compliance with the location requirements on the renewal application. 
(5)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity. 
(b)  Employee license. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the mayor and city council shall either issue an employee license to the applicant or deny an employee license to the applicant. Any denial of an application for an employee license by the mayor and city council may be appealed to the Cobb County Superior Court within 30 days of the decision to deny by writ of certiorari. The mayor and city council shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-400. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license, $100.00; and for annual renewal, $50.00; 
(2)  For the initial sexually oriented business employee license, $50.00; and for annual renewal, $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-401. - Inspection. 
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the city, through its agents and officials, to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-402. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 60 days before the expiration date of the current annual license. 
(c)  If a completed application and fee submitted for an existing license indicates, on its face, that the applicant is entitled to an annual business license or employee license, the city clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the mayor and city council to renew or deny the existing annual license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-403. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend or revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article; 
(2)  The sexually oriented business employee has knowingly violated this article; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license; 
(4)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(6)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
(7)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(b)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(c)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city council revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-404. - Hearing; revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  When the mayor and city council issues a written notice of intent to suspend or revoke a license, the mayor and city council shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city clerk for the respondent. The notice shall specify a date, not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date the notice is issued, on which the mayor and city council shall conduct a hearing on the written notice of intent to suspend or revoke the license. 
(1)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his behalf, and cross examine any of the city's witnesses. The mayor and city council shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for suspending or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The mayor and city council shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
(2)  If the decision is to suspend or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the tenth day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to the Cobb County Superior Court by writ of certiorari. If the mayor and city council's decision finds that no grounds exist for suspension, or revocation of the license, the mayor and city council shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, immediately withdraw the intent to suspend or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. 
(b)  If any court action challenging the decision of the mayor and city council is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within 30 days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-405. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-406. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-407. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 foot-candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsections (5)a through (5)d of this section. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this subsection (a)(7) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-408. - Loitering, interior and exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: 
(1)  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; 
(2)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(3)  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. 
(b)  If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(d)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(e)  All premises licensed under this article shall be fully lighted on the interior, except during hours when the licensee is closed for business. Unless otherwise regulated elsewhere in this article, interior lighting shall be at least 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-409. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business licensee to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while nude, remains at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 24 inches from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee who appears nude in a sexually oriented business to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee who appears nude in a sexually oriented business to solicit or personally receive any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article for a patron to directly pay or give any gratuity to any employee who appears nude in a sexually oriented business. 
(5)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(6)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(7)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to use, possess, sell or distribute drugs, illegal or controlled substances of any kind on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(8)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to gamble on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(9)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person on the premises of a sexually oriented business to engage in specified sexual activities as defined herein. 
(b)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city clerk, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-410. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-411. - Failure of city to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a city official or council is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this article within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the city official or council under this article, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of conditions necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city's action has passed, provided all fees have been paid. This provision shall not affect the mayor and city council's right to revoke or suspend any license pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 22-412. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Measurement. For the purpose of measuring the distance required under this subparagraph, measurement shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure of the sensitive use. If there is no structure on the parcel comprising the sensitive use, then the point of measurement is to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel comprising the sensitive use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least 250 feet from another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless same is at least 500 feet from a religious assembly building, school building, governmentally owned and operated building, library building, civic center building, public park, hospital building, community club building, prison building or any residence (sensitive uses). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least 500 feet from a business licensed to sell alcohol on the premises (sensitive use). 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 2018-24, § 5(Exh. D), 10-15-18) 
Secs. 22-413—22-439. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 22-440. - Legislative findings, purpose and intent. 
The City of Kennesaw finds as follows: 
(1)  Approximately 438,000 people die in the United States from tobacco-related diseases every year, making it the nation's leading cause of preventable death. 
(2)  The World Health Organization ("WHO") estimates that by 2030, tobacco will account for 8.3 million deaths per year, killing 50 percent more people in 2015 than HIV/AIDS, and will be responsible for ten percent of all deaths worldwide. 
(3)  Each day, nearly 4,000 children under 18 years of age smoke their first cigarette, and almost 1,500 children under 18 years of age begin smoking daily. 
(4)  More than 75 percent of all current smokers in 2001 began smoking before the age of 18. 
(5)  Among middle school students who were current cigarette users in 2004, 70.6 percent were not asked to show proof of age when they purchased or attempted to purchase cigarettes from a store, and 66.4 percent were not refused purchase because of their age. 
(6)  In 2002, youth smoked approximately 540,000,000 packs of cigarettes, generating nearly $1.2 billion in tobacco industry revenue. 
(7)  Cigarette smoking remains a leading preventable cause of illness and death within the State of Georgia, with over 10,000 Georgians dying each year from smoking-related diseases. 
(8)  The City of Kennesaw also finds that approximately 36,000 middle school students and 113,000 of high school students in Georgia use some form of tobacco product. 
(9)  Approximately 23,000 middle school students and 81,000 high school students smoke cigarettes; and, 15,000 middle school students and 39,000 high school students used smokeless tobacco products. 
(10)  Approximately 1,400 of the middle school smokers and 24,000 of the high school smokers purchase their cigarettes at gas stations or convenience stores. 
(11)  A study of the effect of licensing and enforcement methods used in the Philadelphia area revealed a decrease in sales to minors from 85 percent in 1994 to 43 percent in 1998. 
(12)  A study of several Minnesota cities found that an increased licensing fee in conjunction with strict enforcement of youth access laws led to a decrease from 39.8 percent to 4.9 percent in the number of youth able to purchase tobacco. 
(13)  This article is designed to assist the Kennesaw Police Department in stemming the sale of tobacco products to minors. 
(14)  The city council and mayor also find that a violation of this article would constitute a violation that is materially related to the operation of a retail business violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 22-441. - Definitions. 
City means, for the purposes of this article only, the City of Kennesaw or a person or entity designated by the City of Kennesaw. 
Minor means any person who at the time of the sale has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Person means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, general partnership, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
Sale means the providing of tobacco products by any person or business entity in exchange for money, goods, or services. The term "sale" shall include, for purposes of this article, providing tobacco products for free by a tobacco retailer. 
Self-service display means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or an employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
Tobacco paraphernalia means cigarette papers or wrappers, blunt wraps, pipes, holders, cigarette rolling machines or other instruments or things designed for the preparation, smoking, storing, consumption, storing or ingestion of tobacco products. 
Tobacco product . 
(1)  The term means: 
a.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf in any form, including, but not limited to, the following items: bidis, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, dipping smoking, smokeless tobacco of any type and in any form, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snus, snuff, and/or tobacco used to prepare cigarettes. 
b.  Smokeless, electronic cigarettes which do not contain tobacco but are designed to appear to be a cigarette and which delivers nicotine to the user, and/or any papers, wrappers, or other products that are used for the purpose of making cigarettes or cigars. 
c.  Any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
(2)  Tobacco products shall not include items made of candy or gum products in the form of a cigarette or cigar. 
Tobacco retailer means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
Tobacco retailing means the sale of either tobacco paraphernalia or a tobacco product to any person of any age. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 22-442. - Requirements. 
(a)  Positive identification required. It shall be the responsibility of any person engaged in tobacco retailing to ascertain, through the review of an identification issued by a state, commonwealth, territory or other governmental unit that states the person purchasing a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is more than the minimum age established by state law to purchase tobacco products. An identification issued by a private company shall not be sufficient to prove the age of the person attempting to purchase a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
(b)  Minimum age for persons selling tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in sale of any tobacco paraphernalia or any tobacco product to any person. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 22-443. - Prohibitions. 
The following is prohibited: 
(1)  Offer to sell to minor. An offer by a tobacco retailer to engage in the sale of tobacco paraphernalia or tobacco products to any minor within the city limits. That the person to whom the offer is made appears to be over the age of 18 years shall not be a defense to a charge brought under this subsection. 
(2)  Sale to minor. The sale of tobacco paraphernalia or tobacco products by a tobacco retailer to any minor within the city limits. That a person to whom such a sale is made appears to be over the age of 18 years shall not be a defense to a charge brought under this subsection. 
(3)  Operation of self service display in public place. The operation by a tobacco retailer in a public place of a self service display. Notwithstanding this subsection, a bar that limits admission to the business to persons who are 18 years of age or older may install and operate one or more vending machines that dispense tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia. 
(4)  Distribution of tobacco products for free. No person or business entity in the business of selling or otherwise distributing tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for commercial purposes, or any agent or employee of any such person or business entity, shall, in the course such business, distribute any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to any person for free or at a rate that is less than average retail price for the same or a similar product taking into consideration the price charged by all retailers within the City of Kennesaw. In any case alleging a violation of this subsection of this article, it shall be the responsibility of the person attempting to distribute a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia at a reduced rate to prove the average retail price of that product or a product similar to that product within the city. 
(5)  Violation of state or federal law. In the course of tobacco retailing, it shall be a violation of this article for a tobacco retailer to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 22-444. - Penalties. 
Enforcement for violations of this article shall be carried out in accordance with this section. 
(1)  Remedies cumulative. The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(2)  Fines. Any violation of the prohibited acts set forth in this article will be enforced through the assessment fines for which the Ordinances of the City of Kennesaw provide. If the maximum fine allowable under state law for a criminal offense is less than the fines for which the ordinances of the City of Kennesaw provide, the fine assessed shall be the maximum allowable under state law. Upon a violation of the prohibited acts set forth in this article, both the individual who engaged in the prohibited act and the retailer employing him or her may be assessed the fines for the violation. 
(3)  Affect on business license. A violation of the prohibited acts set forth in this article: 
a.  May result in the revocation of the business license of the retailer that violated this article under the procedures set forth section 22-39 of the Ordinances of the City of Kennesaw; 
b.  Shall be a factor used by the city in assessing whether the business license will be renewed for any retailer who offered to sell or sold tobacco paraphernalia or tobacco products to any minor. 
(4)  Payment of fines. All fines shall be paid within 30 days from and after the date the fine is assessed. Should a retailer who has been fined fail to pay the fine within that time period, the city shall suspend that retailer's business license until such time as the fine is paid. Reinstatement of the business license shall not precluded the city from seeking revocation of that retailer's business license or preclude the city from refusing to renew that business license. 
(5)  Criminal offense. A violation of any of the provisions of this article XV, section 22-443 prohibition of the sale of tobacco products to minors, shall be a criminal offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 22-445. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article, or its application to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, or its application to any other person or circumstance. The City Council of the City of Kennesaw declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unenforceable. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 7-6-10) 
ARTICLE XVI. - REGULATION OF PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS 

Sec. 22-446. - Legislative findings of the city council and mayor. 
The mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw find as follows: 
(a)  Information received from law enforcement officials in several states indicate that criminal activity increases in areas where pain management clinics operating as no more than "pill mills" are located. 
(b)  The Grand Jury in Broward County, Florida, heard testimony and considered evidence concerning the proliferation of such pain clinics in Broward County and South Florida. 
(c)  The Broward County, Florida, Grand Jury issued its Interim Report on November 19, 2009, concerning The Proliferation of Pain Clinics in South Florida ("Broward County Grand Jury Report"). 
(d)  The Broward County Grand Jury Report found that, "In 2007 there were 4 pain clinics operating in Broward County. From those 4 pain clinics in Broward County the number swelled to 66 pain clinics operating in South Florida in 2008. From August 2008 to November 2009 the number of pain clinics opening and operating in South Florida exploded in number from 66 to 176, and the number of pain clinics opening and operating in Broward County increased from 47 to 115. Pain clinics, which dispense prescription drugs on site, dispensed almost 9 million doses units of Oxycodone in South Florida during the last months of 2008. 6.5 million dose units of the 9 million dose units were dispensed in Broward County alone." Broward County Grand Jury Report at page 6. 
(e)  The Broward County Grand Jury Report reported that the Florida Medical Examiners Commission reported as follows: 

 
Broward County Grand Jury Report at pages 9-10. 
(f)  The Broward County Grand Jury Report reported as follows: "The National Survey on Drug Use and Health conducted annually by the Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration estimates that in the last 30 days over 5 million Americans used non-medical prescription opoids or narcotic analgesics or pain relievers. In 2005, 11,300,000 Americans age 12 and above had used prescription pain medication in a non-medical use. In 2007, the number increased almost 50% to 16,280,000 Americans. One of the age groups that have shown the highest levels of prescription non-medical use has been young adults age 18 to 25. In 2007, 2,147,000 Americans were first time non-medical users of prescription pain medication." Broward County Grand Jury Report, at pages 11-12. 
(g)  The City of Kennesaw has great respect for reputable medical practitioners who are attempting to diagnose and treat pain being experienced by their patients. 
(h)  The typical pain clinic which is operating as no more than a "pill mill" has little or no interest in treating pain or the symptom of the pain but is interested in only dispensing prescription pain medication with little or no diagnosis of the "patient". See Broward County Grand Jury Report at pages 19-20. 
(i)  The Broward County Grand Jury Report found that "[a] couple of cities in Broward County have attempted to restrict the growing number of clinics in their cities by enacting ordinances to prohibit the location of pain management clinics that dispense narcotic drugs on site." Broward County Grand Jury Report at page 33. 
(j)  The typical "pill mill" prescribes and dispenses the pain medications on-site. 
(k)  The City of Kennesaw has been made aware of numerous news reports describing a "pipeline" of trafficking drugs from pain management clinics in South Florida to users in states such as Kentucky, West Virginia and Ohio. 
(l)  Prescription drug abuse is becoming a major problem in Georgia and according to the Georgia Drug and Narcotics Agency deaths due to prescription drug overdoses have surpassed those of all other illicit drugs. 
(m)  Some pain clinics have no interest in the diagnosis and treatment of medical issues or problems that are resulting in pain being experienced by the patients, but are operated solely to write prescriptions for highly addictive pain medications which are then sold by the clinic to the "patient" making such a clinic as no more than a "pill mill". 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 22-447. - Definitions. 
As used within this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth here: 
(a)  Business entity or business entities shall mean one or more persons engaging in activities for a profitable either individually or through the use of any of the following: company or corporation; general partnership; joint venture; limited liability company; limited liability partnership; limited partnership; sole proprietorship; a trust; or, any other corporate entity similar in nature or function to any of those listed above in this subparagraph (a) of this section 22-447. 
(b)  CARF International shall mean the commission on accreditation of rehabilitation facilities, an Arizona non-profit corporation, or its successor. 
(c)  Central Business District shall have the same meaning as stated in Title II, Appendix A—"Zoning"—of the Kennesaw City Ordinances, as amended. 
(d)  Church shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 22-393 of the Kennesaw City Ordinances. 
(e)  Drug addiction treatment center shall mean a clinic, facility, office, or business that satisfies all of the following requirements: 
(1)  It is established for the purpose of treating addiction to illegal drugs or pain medications by administering opoids or other controlled substances; and, 
(2)  All persons administering opoids or any controlled substance has a current certification issued to him or her by the administrator, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA); and, 
(3)  The clinic, facility, office, or business has a current certification issued to it by CARF International. 
(f)  Hospital shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 22-393 of the Kennesaw City Ordinances. 
(g)  Hospital authority shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72, as amended. 
(h)  Pain management clinic shall mean either: 
(1)  Any entity, location, or business regardless of the name of the entity and regardless of the name displayed for the general public which fulfills all of the following criteria: 
a.  A privately owned clinic, medical practice, business, entity, or office; 
b.  Which is owned by one or more persons or other business entity; 
c.  The intention of which is for it to be operated for a profit; 
d.  That is not affiliated with any of the following: 
(i)  Any facility for the treatment of the terminally ill; or, 
(ii)  A hospital authority; or, 
(iii)  A non-profit health organization; or, 
(iv)  Any hospice; or any hospital; and, 
e.  Which employs one or more physicians who are primarily engaged in the treatment of pain by prescribing pain medications; or, 
(2)  Any entity, location, or business regardless of the name of the entity and regardless of the name displayed for the general public which fulfills all of the following criteria: 
a.  Any clinic, medical practice, business, entity or office; 
b.  Which dispenses Schedule II, III, or IV drugs. Excluded from this definition is a an entity engaged in the practice of pharmacy which derives less than 25 percent of its gross revenue from the sales of Schedule II, III, or IV drugs; hospitals; physician groups owned or operated by a health care system; surgery centers; in-patient care facilities; assisted living facilities; outpatient facilities owned or operated by a hospital system; any facility owned or operated by a hospital authority; any rehabilitation center where a portion of the patients reside at the center; any nursing home where a portion of the patients reside at the nursing home, and drug addiction treatment centers. 
(i)  Pain management business license shall mean the business license issued under or pursuant to this article. 
(j)  Pain medicine shall mean: 
(1)  Any medicine requiring a prescription and which contains narcotic analgesics or opoids, including, but not limited to, fentanyl, hydrocodone, morphine, or oxcycodone; and, 
(2)  Any Schedule II, III, or IV drugs. 
(k)  Park shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 22-393 of the Kennesaw City Ordinances. 
(l)  Person shall mean a naturally born person or a business entity. 
(m)  Physician shall mean a person licensed to practice medicine under or pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-34-21. 
(n)  Physician primarily engaged in treatment of pain shall mean a physician who provides a majority of his or her patients with a written prescription for one or more pain medications. 
(o)  Practice of pharmacy shall interpretation, evaluation, or dispensing of prescription drug orders in the patient's best interest; participation in drug and device selection, drug administration, drug regimen reviews, and drug or drug related research; provision of patient counseling and the provision of those acts or services necessary to provide pharmacy care; performing capillary blood tests and interpreting the results as a means to screen for or monitor disease risk factors and facilitate patient education, and a pharmacist performing such functions shall report the results obtained from such blood tests to the patient's physician of choice; and the responsibility for compounding and labeling of drugs and devices, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-4-4, as amended. 
(p)  Residence shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 22-393 of the Kennesaw City Ordinances. 
(q)  Schedule II, III, or IV drugs shall mean the drugs defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-26 through and including 16-13-29, as amended. 
(r)  School shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 22-393 of the Kennesaw City Ordinances. 
(s)  Sensitive use structure shall mean any structure in the Central Business District, a church, building owned or leased by a school (public or private), governmentally owned and operated building, library building, civic center building, park, hospital building, community club building, prison building, jail building, building owned or leased by a hospital authority, or any residence. 
(t)  Sexually oriented business shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 22-393 of the Kennesaw City Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 22-448. - Business license required—Application. 
(a)  Business license. Any pain management clinic operating within the City of Kennesaw must obtain a valid pain management business license from the city. 
(b)  Filing requirements. An applicant for a pain management business license shall file in person at the office of the city's business license division a completed application made on a form provided by the city's business license manager or his or her designee. 
(c)  Requirements of application. The applicant for a pain management business license must provide the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  If the license is to be held in the name of a business entity, the full legal name of that business entity and the names of persons who have any ownership interest (whether legal or equitable) in that business entity including, but not limited to, the all of that business entity's shareholders, partners (general and limited), members, managers, directors, and officers. 
(3)  The current business address for both the individual applying for the license and for the business entity, if any, that he or she represents. 
(4)  A statement of whether any of the following persons has been convicted of a felony, or has plead guilty to a felony, or has plead nolo contendre to a felony in any state with the five years preceding the date of the application for a pain management business license: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  Any person who has an ownership interest in the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license whether such ownership interest is legal or equitable; 
c.  Any of the partners (general or limited), shareholders, or members of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license; 
d.  Any of the directors of the business entity that will operate under the pain management clinic business license; and, 
e.  Any of the officers or managers of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license. 
(5)  If any of the persons name in subparagraph (4) of this section has been convicted of a felony, plead guilty to a felony, or plead nolo contendre to a felony within the five years preceding the date of the application for a pain management business license: 
a.  Set forth the name of the person who was so convicted, plead guilty, or plead nolo contendre: 
b.  Provide a complete description of the crime including the date of the plea or conviction, the name of the court where it occurred, the name under which the plea or conviction occurred, and the penalty assessed. 
(6)  If any of the persons named in subsection 22-448(c)(4) of this article has been convicted of a felony, plead guilty to a felony, or plead nolo contendre to a felony, all such felonies shall be listed on the application. 
(7)  The names of all other business entities in which any of the following persons own any interest shall be listed on the application: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  Any of the partners (general or limited), shareholders, or members of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license; 
c.  Any of the directors of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license; and, 
d.  Any of the officers or managers of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license. 
(8)  The names of all physicians who will be writing any prescriptions for any pain medicine at the pain management clinic. 
(d)  Items accompanying application. The applicant shall submit, with the application for a business license, the following items: 
(1)  A driver's license or government-issued identification showing that the applicant is more than 18 years of age; 
(2)  A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, or articles of organization and operating agreement, or partnership agreement of the business entity that will be operating under the pain management business license; 
(3)  Signed, notarized authorizations from the following persons authorizing the city to conduct a GCIC/NCIC criminal records background check: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  All of the partners, shareholders, or members of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license; 
c.  All of the directors of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license; 
d.  All of the officers of the business entity that will operate under the pain management business license; 
e.  All of the physicians that will be writing prescriptions at the pain management clinic. 
(4)  The name and DEA number of every physician who: 
a.  Is to practice at the pain management clinic; 
b.  Is employed in any capacity at the pain management clinic; 
c.  Is an independent contractor or consultant retained by the pain management clinic; or 
d.  Who has a financial or ownership interest in the pain management clinic. 
(5)  A statement concerning whether the pain management clinic will dispense Schedule II, III, or IV drugs. 
(6)  A blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½ inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch per 200 feet. The surveyor's plat shall show the proposed location and the location of all customer or patient entries in relation to distance, measured as provided in this article, to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the distance requirements as provided in this article, together with zoning district and present uses of all such real property and the proposed location. 
(7)  A legal description of the property where the pain management clinic is either currently located or at which it will be located upon issuance of a pain management business license. 
(e)  Application to be signed and notarized. The application shall be signed under oath and all information contained in the application and all attachments is to be verified as true and accurate by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If a partnership, a general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, the president of the corporation; 
(4)  If a limited liability company, either the manager or the managing member; 
(5)  If any other type of business entity, the chief executive officer or chief administrative officer of the business entity. 
(f)  Pain management business license application fee. The pain management business license fee as set by the City of Kennesaw and published in the application for a pain management business license. Should the application fail to set forth a fee, the fee shall be $250.00 as the initial application fee. The fee to renew a pain management business license shall be $250.00, unless a different rate is published on the application issued by the city. 
(g)  Applicant to assure application complete. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to assure that the application for a pain management business license is complete. No employee of the City of Kennesaw shall have any responsibility to notify the applicant of any deficiency in the application. The fact that the city accepts the application from the applicant is not an indication that the application is either correct or complete. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 22-449. - Issuance of business license. 
(a)  Issuance or denial of application. Within 45 days from and after the filing of a completed application for a pain management business license, the business license manager of the City of Kennesaw shall either issue a license to the applicant or deny a license to the applicant. Any denial of an application for a pain management business license may be appealed under the appeal provisions contained in subsection 22-31(d) of the Kennesaw City Ordinances. Notwithstanding anything contained in that section, no pain management business license shall be issued during the pendency of any such appeal. 
(b)  Grant of license. The pain management business license may be granted if: 
(1)  The application is complete and conforms to all of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The required fee has been paid. 
(3)  The application does not contain a material misrepresentation of fact. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the review of that application. 
(5)  The following persons have plead not guilty to a felony, have not plead nolo contendre to a felony, and have not been convicted of a felony: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant; 
b.  If the applicant is a business entity, any of the persons holding a financial or ownership interest in that business entity whether such interest is legal or equitable; 
c.  If the applicant is a corporation, any of the officers; 
d.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, any of the managers. 
(6)  The applicant, if a business entity, is in good standing with the Georgia Secretary of State. 
(7)  All criminal background checks have been completed by the Kennesaw Police Department. 
(c)  Expiration. Each and every business license issued to a pain management clinic shall expire one year from and after the date it is issued. 
(d)  Completion date of application. The application for a pain management business license is completed on the date that the city receives the last piece of information or document for such application as required by section 22-448 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 22-450. - Renewal of pain management business license. 
Any person seeking to renew a pain management business license must provide all of the information required by section 22-448 of this article. Each renewal shall expire one year from and after the date on which it issued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 22-451. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a pain management clinic in the city, unless said pain management clinic is at least 500 feet from another pain management clinic. For purposes of measuring the distance imposed by this subparagraph, the measurement hall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of structure of the other pain management clinic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate or cause to be operated a pain management clinic in the city, unless the same is at least 500 feet any sensitive use structure. For purposes of measuring the distance imposed by this subparagraph, the measurement shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of sensitive use structure. If the sensitive use structure is a park, the measurement shall be to the public entry point to the park closest the pain management clinic. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a pain management clinic in the city, unless said pain management clinic is at least 500 feet from a business licensed to sell alcohol on the premises. For purposes of measuring the distance imposed by this subparagraph, the measurement shall be in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry to the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of the alcohol licensee. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a pain management clinic in the city, unless said pain management clinic is at least 500 feet from any sexually oriented business. For purposes of measuring the distance imposed by this subparagraph, the measurement shall be in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry to the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of the sexually oriented business. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any pain management clinic to employ, in any capacity, a physician who is on probation for issues relating to dispensing controlled substances. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any pain management clinic to employ, in any capacity, a physician who has had his or her license to practice medicine suspended or revoked by any medical board. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a physician who is on probation or whose license to practice medicine has been suspended or revoked for issues relating to dispensing controlled substances to own any type of financial interest, legal or equitable, in a pain management clinic. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to operate a pain management clinic without a pain management business license issued under the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 22-452. - Penalties for prohibited acts. 
Enforcement for violations of this article shall be carried out in accordance with this section: 
(a)  Remedies cumulative. The remedies provided in this article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(b)  Effect on pain management business license. 
(1)  Upon a violation of subparagraphs (a) through and including (d) of sections 22-451 of this article, the pain management business license shall be revoked. 
(2)  Upon a violation of subparagraphs (e) through and including (h) of section 22-451 of this article, the pain management business license shall be suspended as follows: 
a.  On the first such violation, the pain management business license shall be suspended for a time period not to exceed 90 days; 
b.  On the second such violation, the pain management business license shall be suspended for a time period not to exceed 180 days; 
c.  On the third such violation, the pain management business license shall be suspended for a time period not to exceed 360 days; and, 
d.  On the fourth such violation, the pain management business license shall be revoked and neither the applicant nor the business entity under which it was operating may apply for a pain management business license in the City of Kennesaw for a period of five years. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 22-453. - Conflict between this article and other city ordinances. 
This article is to be read in such a manner as to be consistent with the other ordinances of the City of Kennesaw. Should there arise an unavoidable conflict between the provisions of this article and any other ordinance, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-4-11) 
Secs. 22-454—22-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS ENCROACHMENT PERMITS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-22, adopted Sep. 19, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XVII, §§ 22-454—22-463. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. XVII, §§ 22-481—22-490. 

Sec. 22-481. - Purpose. 
This chapter shall apply to the establishment, operation and maintenance of all eating and drinking establishments within the downtown development authority metes and bounds area. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the downtown development authority metes and bounds area for the benefit of all businesses and citizens located there, and no right of individuals or individual businesses are created therein, and to create an aesthetic ambiance which will attract tourists to the downtown development authority metes and bounds area. Further, this chapter is designed to allow an array of cafe tables adjacent to an eating and drinking establishment allowing pedestrians to stroll by while customers dine undisturbed and shall not impede the efficiency of the pedestrian path. The chapter shall not permit single or multiple tables or displays by organizations, establishments or businesses for vending goods, for distributing information or for displaying goods, as these activities encourage people to stop, loiter, perhaps bargain, engage in dialogue or obtain correct change, all of which potentially impedes the efficiency of the pedestrian path, and conflicts with the city's style and ambience which the city seeks to preserve in the downtown development authority metes and bounds area. The city manager, finance director and his or her designee shall have broad discretion to grant, modify, or revoke permits pursuant to this chapter in the interests of improving the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-482. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the building official or the person authorized by the city manager to enforce this chapter. 
Design requirements means the standards adopted with this chapter that guide design and materials in encroachment areas. 
Eating and drinking establishment means the placing, locating, or permitting of the placing or locating of chairs and tables on the right-of-way, such as sidewalks, adjacent to a business licensed to operate as an eating and drinking establishment where food and other refreshments are served or upon public property within designated areas. 
Encroachment means tables, umbrellas, chairs, or objects related to the business on the public right-of-way, sidewalk or common area on public property. 
Finance director means the finance director or the person authorized by the city manager to enforce this chapter. 
Permittee means the recipient of an encroachment permit under this chapter. 
Planning and zoning administrator means the planning and zoning administrator or the person authorized by the city manager to enforce this chapter. 
Sidewalk means that area of public right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines reserved for pedestrian traffic, not including street crossings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-483. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Under this chapter, no merchant, vendor, business or property owner shall: 
(1)  Place any tables, or chairs on any portion of the public property other than that directly in front of his existing place of business without the written consent of adjacent landowners and businesses. In no event shall such items be placed in the landscaped areas or extend beyond 25 feet from each side of the owner's business. 
(2)  Block or restrict the passageway on the sidewalk to less than five feet in width or block the ingress/egress to any building. Also, no items shall be placed so as to block any driveway, crosswalk, counter service window or public parking. 
(3)  Arrange the cafe tables and chairs so as to impede the efficiency of the pedestrian path. In areas of congested pedestrian activity, the building official is authorized to require a wider pedestrian path for the protection and welfare of the public. 
(4)  Place or allow single or multiple tables or displays by organizations, establishments or businesses for vending goods, for distributing information or for displaying goods in the permitted encroachment, as these activities encourage people to stop, loiter, perhaps bargain, engage in dialogue or obtain correct change, all of which potentially impedes the efficiency of the pedestrian path, and conflicts with the city's style and ambience which the city seeks to preserve on the downtown development authority metes and bounds area, unless sidewalk sale, festival or other appropriate permits have been granted. 
(5)  Sublicense, sublet, assign, or otherwise convey the encroachment area separately to non-occupants of the premises. 
(6)  Place objects around the perimeter of an area occupied by tables and chairs which would have the effect of forming a physical or visual barrier. 
(7)  Use tables, chairs, umbrellas and any other objects of such quality, design, materials, and workmanship that are not approved or otherwise authorized by the planning and zoning administrator. 
(8)  Use umbrellas or other decorative material which are not fire retardant, pressure treated, or manufactured of fire resistive material. 
(9)  Fail to secure permission of the landlord where a building has multiple occupants. 
(10)  Vend or display without the insurance coverage specified. 
(11)  Sound or permit the sounding of any device on the public property which produces a loud noise or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device. The city reserves the right to decrease noise levels of businesses if interfering with public activities of the downtown development authority metes and bounds area. 
(12)  Fail to daily pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse left by the business on the public right-of-way. 
(13)  Store, park, or leave any stand or items overnight on any street or sidewalk except for tables and chairs which may be kept in the permitted area at the permittee's risk. 
(14)  Store, park, or leave any vehicle, truck, or trailer within the encroachment area. 
(15)  Use the encroachment area to place, display, or sell non-food or non-beverage merchandise. 
(16)  Use the encroachment area to stock or store tables, chairs, or other items not in use. 
(17)  Fail to daily remove from the public right-of-way all grease, stains, food spots, etc. caused by the operation of the eating and drinking establishment. 
(b)  The encroachment permit is a temporary license which may be denied, suspended or revoked for any conduct that is contrary to this section or for conduct of the business that creates or may create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the operator's or public's health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-484. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in the business of running an eating and drinking establishment or place eating and drinking establishment items upon the sidewalks or public property in the zoned downtown development authority metes and bounds area in the city unless (s)he shall hold a currently valid permit issued under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  A permit shall be issued only to a validly licensed business that wishes to provide cafe tables and chairs on the public property directly adjacent to the business for an outdoor eating and drinking establishment to be used by the general public. 
(c)  A permit shall only be issued for the operation of an eating and drinking establishment directly adjacent to and by a restaurant which receives over 50 percent of its annual revenue from the sale of prepared food items, including soft drinks and coffee, or for the operation of a duly licensed brew pub, wine specialty shop, growler shop or event space. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-485. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by this division shall be made at the business license office in a form prepared and deemed appropriate by the finance director. Such application shall include but is not limited to the following information: 
(1)  The name, home and business address, and telephone number of the applicant, and the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the business. 
(2)  The name, home address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's encroachment. 
(3)  A copy of a valid business license to operate a business establishment adjacent to the public property, which is the subject of the application. 
(4)  Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the encroachment permit. The policy shall be reviewed by the finance director or his or her designee for verification the insurance adequately protects the city and meets the intent of this section. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without 30 days' advanced written notice to the city. The policy shall be a minimum of $1,000,000.00 or higher, if deemed necessary by the city attorney. 
(5)  A sketch to scale of the proposed location showing the layout and dimensions of the existing public area and adjacent private property. 
(6)  Proof of any required alcohol license, health permits or other state permits for the business involved. 
(7)  Photographs, drawings, or manufacturer's brochures fully describing the appearance of all proposed tables, chairs, umbrellas, or other objects related to the business. Umbrellas shall not have advertising on them and shall be placed so that they do not pose a hazard to pedestrians. Plastic tables and chairs shall not be allowed. 
(b)  Not later than 15 days after the filing of a complete application for a temporary encroachment permit, the applicant shall be notified by the business license office of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. Upon issuance of the permit, an annual fee shall be due and payable as follows: 
The encroachment area will be charged at a rate of $2.00 per square foot with a minimum annual charge of $100.00. 
This fee is in addition to the business license required for operation within the city. Only new permits shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. No fees shall be charged for encroachments solely for the purpose of beautification, but all other provisions of this section shall apply. 
(c)  In the event that a business is found to be operating in or on public rights-of-way in without a permit as required under this section, application for a permit shall be made at the business license office within 48 hours of written notice for failure to obtain a permit. Where the same owner, occupant, or person responsible has been given notice for the same violation at the same location within the previous 180 days, such requirements of written notice may be waived and legal proceedings commenced immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-486. - Form and conditions of permit. 
The permit required by this chapter shall be issued on a form prepared and deemed suitable by the finance director. In addition to naming the permittee and any other information deemed appropriate by the finance director, the permit shall contain the following conditions: 
(a)  Each permit shall be effective for one year, from January 1 to December 31, subject to annual renewal, unless revoked or suspended prior to expiration. No fees will be refunded. 
(1)  The permit issued shall be personal to the permittee, only, and shall not be transferable in any manner. 
(2)  The permit may be suspended by the finance director or his or her designee when necessary to clear the public property for public safety or for a community or special event authorized by a permit issued by the city. 
(3)  The finance director or his or her designee may require the temporary removal of items within the encroachment area when street, sidewalk, common areas or utility repairs necessitate such action. 
(4)  The permit shall be specifically limited to the area shown on the site plan attached to and made part of the permit. 
(5)  The encroachment area covered by the permit shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times, and the area shall be cleared of all debris on a periodic basis during the day and again at the close of each business day. 
(6)  No advertising is allowed in the encroachment area except for the posting of menu items or prices on approved equipment or objects. 
(7)  No tables and chairs or any other parts of the business shall be attached, chained, or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, other fixture, curb or sidewalk within or near the permitted area. No additional outdoor seating authorized in this article shall be used for calculating seating requirements pertaining to location of, applications for, or issuance of an alcohol license for any establishment or be used as the basis for computing required seating for restaurants and dining rooms or as grounds for claiming exemption from such requirements under the provisions of any city ordinance or state law. 
(8)  The issuance of a permit does not grant or infer vested rights to use of the area by the permittee. The city retains the right to deny the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit for any reason. 
(9)  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and any other objects provided shall be maintained with a clean and attractive appearance and shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times. 
(10)  The city retains the right to suspend the privilege of using glass containers within the encroachment area during major festivals and events and when streets are closed. The use of glass containers will be revoked if an incident jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of customers or the general public. Any violation of state or local laws will also result in a revocation of this privilege. Repeated offenses may result in revocation or denial of the encroachment permit. 
(11)  The permittee may serve alcohol by the drink to customers in the encroachment area only if the permittee is otherwise fully licensed by the state and city to serve alcohol and observes all rules and regulations governing the sales and service of alcohol. The permittee shall not allow any customer to be served alcohol or to take open containers of alcohol of any kind outside of the encroachment area, except inside the permitted establishment itself, under any circumstances, except when allowed by festival or other event permits issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-487. - Denial, revocation or suspension; removal and storage fees; emergencies. 
(a)  Under this chapter, the finance director or his or her designee may deny, revoke, or suspend a permit at any time for any business authorized in the city if it is found that: 
(1)  Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended, revoked or canceled. 
(2)  The permittee does not have insurance in force which is correct and effective in the minimum amount described herein. 
(3)  Changing conditions of pedestrian or vehicular traffic cause congestion necessitating removal of the encroachment. Such decision shall be based upon findings of the building official that the minimum five-foot pedestrian path is insufficient under existing circumstances and represents a danger to the health, safety, or general welfare of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(4)  The permittee has failed to correct violations of this chapter or conditions of his permit upon receipt of the building official's notice of violations delivered in writing to the permittee. The permittee shall have ten days from the date of receipt of such notice to correct such violations. In the event that such violations are not corrected within ten days from the receipt of such notice, the finance director or his or her designee may suspend or revoke the encroachment permit. The permittee may appeal said suspension or revocation by filing such appeal in writing to the city clerk within ten business days. The city clerk shall then set down the matter for a hearing before the Kennesaw License Review Board within 30 days from receipt of the written appeal. In the event that the license review board recommends the permit be suspended or revoked, the permittee of the encroachment permit may file an appeal with the city manager of such recommendation within five business days of the date of the license review board's decision to the city council. If the finance director or his or her designee suspends or revokes the permit as provided above and the permittee of the encroachment permit should fail to appeal such decision, then the decision shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on the first day following the end of the appeal period following the date of the finance director's decision, and the permittee of the encroachment permit shall be deemed to have acquiesced to such decision. 
(5)  The permittee has failed to take positive actions to prohibit violations from recurring. 
(b)  Tables, chairs and other vestiges of the business may be removed by the public works office, and a reasonable fee shall be charged for labor, transportation, and storage; if the permittee fails to remove the items within 36 hours of receipt of the finance director or his or her designee's final notice to do so for any reason provided for under this chapter. 
(c)  Upon denial or revocation, the finance director or his or her designee shall give notice of such action to the applicant or the permittee in writing stating the action which has been taken and the reason thereof. The action shall be effective at 12:01 a.m. on the first day following the end of the appeal period following the date of the finance director's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-488. - Indemnity. 
As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the city, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-489. - Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Any person or entity receiving a permit hereunder agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 22-490. - Liability. 
The city shall not be liable to any permittee or any license holder for any damage, loss, inconvenience, business interruption, demolition, loss of business, loss of property or any other loss as a result of any public safety emergency vehicle responding to an emergency call which must encroach upon the public right-of-way of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 9-19-16) 
Chapter 26 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Cable television franchise agreements for the city are on file in the office of the city clerk where they are available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 80; unified development code, app. A. 
State Law reference— Municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Regulation of basic service rates and charges. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of any cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with the regulation of basic service rates and charges of any cable television system, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The mayor, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as may be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
Editor's note— In the above section, the term "basic rates and charges" derives from the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 which, among other things, provides that the basic service tier rates and the charges for related equipment, installation and services of a cable television system shall be subject to regulation by a franchising authority in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
The term "FCC rate regulations" derives from the "Report and Order, In the Matter of Implementation of Sections of Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992: Rate Regulation," MM Docket 92-266, FCC 93-177 (released May 3, 1993). 
Secs. 26-2—26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROVISIONS FOR CABLE COMMUNICATION FRANCHISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, adopted Dec. 7, 2015, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 26-26—26-65, pertained to provisions for CATV franchise and derived from Code 1986, §§ 9-5-1—9-5-38; and Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 4, 2008. 

Sec. 26-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access channel(s) means those channels on a cable system reserved by a grantee for use by members of the public or the city for the cablecast of noncommercial programming. 
Advertising and home shopping services revenues means the amount of a cable service provider or video service provider's nonsubscriber revenues from advertising disseminated through cable service or video service and home shopping services. The amount of such revenues that are allocable to the city shall be equal to the total amount of the cable service provider or video service provider's revenue received from such advertising and home shopping services multiplied by the ratio of the number of such provider's subscribers located in the city to the total number of such provider's subscribers. Such ratio shall be based on the number of such provider's subscribers as of January 1 of the current year, except that in the first year in which services are provided, such ratio shall be computed as of the earliest practical date. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application to the city for a franchise to operate a cable system under the terms and conditions set forth by the mayor and council. 
Basic service means the simultaneous delivery by the company to television receivers, or any other suitable types of audio-video communication receivers, of all subscribers in the city of all signals of over-the-air television broadcasters required by the FCC to be carried by a cable system as defined in this section. Basic service shall also include grantee channels, city channels except as may be designated for special purposes by the mayor, access channels, public channels and additional channels at the option of the company; or as directed by the mayor and council. 
Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service shall not include any video programming provided by a provider of commercial mobile service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d) or video programming provided as part of and via a service that enable users to access content, information, e-mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
Cable service provider means any person or group of persons: 
(1)  Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
(2)  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
Cable system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, but such term shall not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way as defined in this chapter; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. Sections 201 through 276, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system, other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(c), to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services as that term is defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(12); 
(4)  An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. Section 573; or 
(5)  Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating such electric utility system. 
City means City of Kennesaw, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
City channels means channels on the cable system which are reserved by this article for use by the city. 
Commercial subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who or which is not a residential subscriber. 
Federal Communication Commission or FCC means that agency as presently constituted by the U.S. Congress or any successor agency. 
Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal of an authorization issued by the city, regardless of whether the authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, ordinance, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable service provider or video service provider's network in the public rights-of-way. 
Franchise agreement means a written agreement executed by the city and a grantee, which evidences the franchise granted by the city to that particular grantee. 
Grantee means the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the mayor and council under this article or anyone who succeeds such person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
Grantee channels means the channels on the system which are reserved by this article for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC's cablecasting rules and regulations. 
Gross revenue means all revenues received from subscribers for the provision of cable service or video service, including franchise fees for cable service providers and video service providers, and advertising and home shopping services revenues and shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Gross revenues shall not include: 
(1)  Amounts billed and collected as a line item on the subscriber's bill to recover any taxes, surcharges, or governmental fees that are imposed on or with respect to the services provided or measured by the charges, receipts, or payments therefor; provided, however, that for purposes of this Code section, such tax, surcharge, or governmental fee shall not include any ad valorem taxes, net income taxes, or generally applicable business or occupation taxes not measured exclusively as a percentage of the charges, receipts, or payments for service; 
(2)  Any revenue, such as bad debt, not actually received, even if billed; 
(3)  Any revenue received by any affiliate or any other person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the provider to provide cable service or video programming; 
(4)  Any amounts attributable to refunds, rebates, or discounts; 
(5)  Any revenue from services provided over the network that are associated with or classified as noncable or nonvideo services under federal law, including, without limitation, revenues received from telecommunications services, information services other than cable service or video service, Internet access services, or directory or Internet advertising revenue, including, without limitation, yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisements, and electronic publishing advertising. Where the sale of any such noncable or nonvideo service is bundled with the sale of one or more cable services or video services and sold for a single nonitemized price, the term "gross revenues" shall include only those revenues that are attributable to cable service or video service based on the provider's books and records; such revenues shall be allocated in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principles; 
(6)  Any revenue from late fees not initially booked as revenues, returned check fees, or interest; 
(7)  Any revenue from sales or rental of property, except such property as the subscriber shall be required to buy or rent exclusively from the cable service provider or video service provider to receive cable service or video service; 
(8)  Any revenue received from providing or maintaining inside wiring; 
(9)  Any revenue from sales for resale with respect to which the purchaser shall be required to pay a franchise fee, provided the purchaser certifies in writing that it shall resell the service and pay a franchise fee with respect thereto; or 
(10)  Any amounts attributable to a reimbursement of costs including, but not limited to, the reimbursements by programmers of marketing costs incurred for the promotion or introduction of video programming. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity of any kind. 
Public channels means channels on the cable system which are reserved for carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time and, if necessary, studio facilities, from a grantee for the presentation of programs. 
Public right-of-way means the area in, on, along, over, or under the public roads that are part of the city road system. 
Residential subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
Service area means the geographic territory within the area of the city where a cable service provider or video service provider provides or has proposed to offer cable service or video service pursuant to a franchise. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, way, place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement held by the city for public travel or other use compatible to the construction or operation of a cable system. 
Subscriber means any person or entity lawfully receiving video service from a video service provider or cable service from a cable service provider within the city. 
Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station, as set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(20). 
Video service means the provision of video programming through wireline facilities located at least in part in the city public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This term shall not include any video programming provided by a provider of commercial mobile service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d) or video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables users to access content, information, e-mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
Video service provider means an entity providing video service as defined in this Code section. This term shall not include a cable service provider. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-27. - Grant of authority. 
The mayor and council is hereby authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the streets of the city subject to the conditions and restrictions as provided in this article; and such right, privilege and franchise may be offered for bid as a franchise agreement ordinance, referred to in this article as the agreement, and let to the best bidder after bids have been examined by the mayor and council. The agreement shall contain all standards for performance, engineering and other parameters of public interest and shall be in ordinance form. No person shall operate a cable system or provide cable service or video service in the city without a franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter or obtaining a franchise from the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-28. - Franchise term; renewal. 
All franchises granted by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be for a term of ten years or less. Subject to and in addition to the renewal procedures available to the city and grantee under the Cable Act, the grantee may request a renewal of its franchise at any time during its then current term. The grantee's request shall contain any changes it proposes in the terms of its renewed franchise. The city shall consider the grantee's request, current community needs and interests, and may grant the grantee a renewal of its franchise at that time for a term of ten years or less and upon such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreed upon between the city and grantee and reflected in a written amendment to the grantee's franchise agreement. Any such grant of a renewal to a franchise shall be proceeded by at least one public hearing 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-29. - Application for cable system franchise. 
(a)  To receive an initial franchise, a cable service provider or video service provider shall file a written application with the city at least 45 days prior to offering cable service or video service to subscribers within a specified service area. 
(b)  The city may impose a fee not to exceed $500.00 for a franchise application and a fee not to exceed $250.00 for an amendment to a franchise. 
(c)  The application for a franchise shall consist of an affidavit signed by an officer or general partner of the applicant that contains the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership, or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons, including corporations, having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignment for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment, or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this article. 
(2)  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, and shareholders of such corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all cable system facilities; and the applicant shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the cable system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(8)  An affirmative declaration that the applicant shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including city ordinances and regulations regarding the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public right-of-way that are generally applicable to all users of the public right-of-way and specifically including O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 9, the "Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act"; 
(9)  A description of the applicant's service area. For the purposes of this paragraph, an applicant may, in lieu of or as supplement to a written description, provide a map on eight and one-half by 11-inch paper that is clear and legible and that fairly depicts the service area; 
(10)  The location of the applicant's principal place of business, the name or names of the principal executive officer or officers of the applicant, information concerning payment locations or addresses, and general information concerning equipment returns; 
(11)  Certification that the applicant is authorized to conduct business in the State of Georgia and that the applicant possesses satisfactory financial and technical capability to provide cable service or video service and a description of such capabilities. Such certification shall not be required from an incumbent service provider or any cable service provider or video service provider that has wireline facilities located in the public right-of-way as of January 1, 2008; 
(12)  Such other information as the mayor and council may deem appropriate or necessary that the mayor and council may request. 
(d)  If an application is incomplete, the city shall notify the applicant within ten business days of the receipt of such application and shall provide the applicant with a reasonable period of time in which to provide a complete application. If no such notification is made within ten business days of the receipt of the application, the application shall be deemed complete. Within 90 days of the receipt of a completed application, the city shall conduct a public hearing. The city thereafter shall, except as set forth in subsection (e) of this Code section, vote on the issuance a franchise that contains the following: 
(1)  A nonexclusive grant of authority to provide cable service or video service as requested in the application; 
(2)  A nonexclusive grant of authority to construct, maintain, and operate facilities along, across, or on the public right-of-way in the delivery of cable service or video service, subject to applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including city ordinances and regulations, regarding the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public right-of-way that are generally applicable to all users of the public right-of-way and specifically including O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 9, the "Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act"; and 
(3)  The expiration date of the city franchise, which shall be not more than ten years from the date of issuance, subject to renewal. 
(e)  The city may deny an applicant that it reasonably believes has not yet accessed rights-of-way in the city and does not possess satisfactory financial and technical capability to provide cable service or video service or is not duly authorized to conduct business in the State of Georgia. Upon appeal by the applicant, the mayor and council shall consider whether the objection is well founded and shall make a determination as to whether to grant the franchise notwithstanding the objection or to deny or suspend the application pending the receipt of information sufficient to demonstrate the applicant has satisfactory financial and technical capability. 
(f)  All applications for cable system franchise shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the mayor and council, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
(g)  All applications for cable system franchise shall be considered firm offers to the city, shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-30. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  Each holder of a franchise shall pay to the city, on or before the thirtieth day following the end of each quarter a sum of five percent of its gross revenues for the preceding quarter and, shall not exceed the maximum percentage rate permitted in 47 U.S.C. Section 542(b) of such franchise holder's gross revenues received from the provision of cable service or video service to subscribers located within such franchise holder's service area. 
(b)  Within 30 days after the expiration of a grantee's fiscal quarter, a grantee shall file with the city manager or his designee a financial statement or report showing the quarter's gross revenues. Payment of the current franchise fees shall be made to the city at the time of this statement. 
(c)  If the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic ten-year term, a grantee shall immediately submit to the city a financial statement prepared as required in this section, showing the gross subscriber revenues of grantee for the time elapsed since the last period for which a grantee has paid to the city the required percentage of gross annual subscriber revenues, and a grantee shall pay to the city not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of such revenues and any other sums legally due and owing to the city. 
(d)  If any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, interest on such payments shall apply from such date at the yearly rate of eight percent. 
(e)  The city may, no more than once annually, audit the business records of the franchise holder to the extent necessary to ensure payment in accordance with this Code section. For purposes of this subsection, an audit shall be defined as a comprehensive review of the financial and jurisdictional coding records of the holder of a franchise. Once any audited period of a franchise holder has been the subject of a requested audit, such audited period of such franchise holder shall not again be the subject of any audit. In the event of a dispute concerning the amount of the franchise fee due to the city under this Code section, an action may be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the city seeking to recover any additional amount alleged to be due or by a franchise holder seeking a refund of an alleged overpayment; provided, however, that any such action shall be brought within three years following the end of the quarter to which the disputed amount relates. Such time period may be extended by written agreement between the franchise holder and the city. Each party shall bear the party's own costs incurred in connection with any such examination or dispute. In the event that the city files an action to recover alleged underpayments of franchise fees and a court of competent jurisdiction determines the cable service provider or video service provider has underpaid franchise fees due for any 12-month period by ten percent or more, the cable service provider or video service provider may be required to pay the city its reasonable costs associated with the audit and legal fees along with any franchise fee underpayments; provided, however, late payments shall not apply. 
(f)  Payments of compensation made by a grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state, or the city. 
(g)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee. 
(h)  Any amounts overpaid by the holder of a franchise shall be deducted from future franchise payments. 
(i)  The holder of a franchise may designate that portion of a subscriber's bill attributable to any franchise fee imposed pursuant to this Code section as a separate item on the bill and recover such amount from the subscriber; provided, however, that such separate listing shall be referred to as a "franchise" or a "franchise fee." 
(j)  The city shall not levy any additional tax, license, fee, surcharge or other assessment on a cable service provider or video service provider for with respect to the use of any public right-of-way other than the franchise fee authorized by this chapter. Additionally, the city will not levy any additional tax, license fee, surcharge or other assessment on a cable service provider or video service provider or subscriber that is not generally imposed to a majority of all businesses. The franchise fee shall be offset quarterly by proceeding amount of permit fees, encroachment fees, degradation fee or other fee that could otherwise be assessed on a franchise holder for the holder's occupation or work within the public right-of-way; provided, however that nothing in this section shall restrict the right of the city to impose ad valorem taxes, sales taxes, or other taxes lawfully imposed on a majority of all other businesses within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-31. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of a franchise, the grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the city executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payment of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person occasioned by the operations of a grantee under franchise granted in this article or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned by the operation of the grantee under the franchise granted in this article or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $250,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $500,000.00 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  One million dollars for all other types of liability. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the cable system as defined in the franchise. 
(4)  Such other insurance coverage as is required by the laws of the state. 
(b)  All of the insurance contracts required by this section shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city and they shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the city and a grantee, and a copy of the policy shall be filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-32. - Surety bond. 
(a)  A grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise a faithful performance, license and franchise bond running in favor of the city, written by an approved corporate surety in the penal sum of $50,000.00, conditioned that a grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and surety thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of a grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond required by this section and shall keep such bond in force and effect at all times throughout the term of the franchise, including the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the cable system as defined in the franchise. 
(c)  The bond required by this section shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 30 days after written notice to that effect is given to the city and a grantee. 
(d)  The bond required by this section shall be in a form satisfactory to the city, and a duplicate copy of the bond, along with written evidence of payment of the required premiums, shall be filed with the city during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-33. - Indemnity. 
(a)  The grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend, and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgments for damage. These damages or penalties shall include but shall not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation, or maintenance of the cable system authorized in this article, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in this section. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out of pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-34. - Books and records of grantee. 
(a)  A grantee shall file with the city engineer a true and accurate copy of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the right-of-way. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer and shall be kept continuously up-to-date. 
(b)  A grantee shall continually keep on file with the city a current list of its shareholders holding over three percent of the outstanding stock and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the city shall be made available for inspection and audit by the mayor or his designate within 30 days after any request for such inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of a cable system under the franchise shall be filed with the city and at the local office of a grantee. 
(e)  Within six months of accepting a new franchise, a grantee shall submit to the city manager or his designee a plan summarizing all proposed construction projects required as of that date under the terms of this chapter and the grantee's franchise agreement. The grantee shall continue to provide the city manager designee with progress reports regarding ongoing construction projects in the city every three months until such projects have been activated and subscribers are being serviced. 
(f)  Copies of all material petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the FCC, Securities and Exchange Commission, or other federal or state regulatory agencies having jurisdiction with respect to any matter affecting the grantee's cable system shall be made available to the city upon reasonable notice and request, provided that such documents relate to the grantee's cable system in the city. 
(g)  The holder's franchise agreement will govern the installation of video to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-35. - No charge for city channels and lines. 
No charge shall be made to the city for its use of city channels or for the construction and operation of the coaxial between the city studio and the cable system head-end, and under no circumstances shall the city be obligated to pay to a grantee any fee for service rendered to the city under the terms of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-36. - Conditions of right-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the right-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the right-of-way. The cable system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted city and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not simply because it shall be more convenient, economical or profitable for a grantee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the city engineer, under such conditions as he shall prescribe for the public welfare, a grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the rights-of-way of the city for the conduct of its cable system but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The city shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use such facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the cable system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the city until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of such cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys, or highways within the city where such installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the city engineer and approved by that department in writing. 
(d)  Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the city's right-of-way other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then and in that event, before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for the grantee any of such property in the right-of-way, the nature of such property shall be disclosed to the city engineer for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the right-of-way and shall only be installed under such conditions as he shall prescribe concerning such location or installation. 
(e)  Whenever the city or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the city's right-of-way, it shall be the obligation of a grantee upon notice of such requirement to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the city or state. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of the grantee and grantee shall be solely responsible for obtaining all necessary permits to effectuate the relocation, removal or reinstallation. 
(f)  Whenever, in any place within the city, all the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the city after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, nevertheless, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in such places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. Grantee shall be solely responsible for obtaining all necessary permits to effectuate this provision. 
(g)  A grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of the grantee. 
(h)  In case of the disturbance of any right-of-way caused by a grantee, the grantee shall at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer replace and restore such right-of-way in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Provided, that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, the grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut. A section shall be determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)  A grantee shall maintain, repair, and keep in good condition for a period of one year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or right-of-way disturbed by it or its agents provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or material supplied by such grantee. Grantee shall be solely liable for all defective workmanship or material supplied pursuant to this provision. 
(j)  A grantee shall on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, such disagreement will be resolved by the city engineer. 
(k)  If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the city it shall become necessary in the judgement of the mayor or the chief of the fire department to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by the grantee at its own cost and expense and without charge against the city. This section shall not be interpreted to indemnify the city in the case of gross negligence or willful misconduct. 
(l)  The grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the right-of-way or property involved and in conformance with all city ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-37. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  The grantee shall, within one year from the date that the Federal Communications Commission certifies the grantee's compliance with its rules and regulations governing cable television operations in and for the city, extend energized trunk cable to 20 percent of the city and extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the city within four years thereafter unless additional time is granted by the mayor and council upon request by the grantee for good cause shown. A franchise agreement may set forth terms and conditions for the extensions of energized trunk cable in lieu of the provisions in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-38. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five subscribers within 660 feet of its system, shall extend such system to such subscriber at no cost to the subscriber for system extension other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers. The 660 feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. 
(b)  The city engineer may upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the city order the extension of the system to such subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to the grantee. In such cases, the engineer, in his discretion, may order such extension to any subscriber only upon the reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-39. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant for a cable franchise shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed and a grantee shall be required by the city engineer to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the advances in the state of the art of cable systems design. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-40. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The holder of a franchise shall comply with the customer service standards as set forth in 47 C.F.R. 76.309(c) and as adopted as by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(c)  A grantee shall maintain an office in the city which shall be open during all usual business hours, have necessary listed telephones, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-41. - Supervision by city. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain its cable system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  The cable system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)  The city engineer may from time to time issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system as are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the mayor and council or any agency or official of the city are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official, the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this article or by law in the council or any agency or official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-42. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from public right-of-way. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its cable system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public right-of-way where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the cable system for a continuous period of six months from the date of such occurrence. 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct the cable system as provided in this article. 
(3)  The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided in this article. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the city setting forth one or more of the occurrences enumerated under this section or such other occurrence as may be provided and shall have 90 days from the date upon which such notice is received to remove such properties as required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-43. - Operational reports. 
(a)  Within six months from the acceptance date of the franchise, the grantee shall submit to the city engineer and the mayor an installation plan for the entire city, indicating the date on which the grantee expects the installation of the cable system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the city. 
(b)  The grantee shall furnish the city engineer with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the cable system. Such periodic reports shall be furnished at three-month intervals. The first report shall be made three months after the construction commencement date. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-44. - Off-the-air programming. 
(a)  A grantee shall carry the signals of all television stations licensed to communities within 35 miles of the city pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. 
(b)  A grantee may transmit or distribute the full output of FM radio stations provided that a grantee transmits or distributes all of the FM stations whose broadcasting studios are located within the city or within 35 miles of the limits thereof and complies with all applicable laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-45. - Cablecasting of city and public channels. 
Unless otherwise set forth in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall provide leased access channel capacity in accordance with federal law which may be used by local non-profit organizations, including religious organizations. The company may enter into a separate agreement outlining the terms for use of leased access channel capacity, at no cost to the public and on a nondiscriminatory, first come, first served basis, at least one channel for educational and governmental access use. For the presentation of programming on access channels, a grantee shall make available free time and, if necessary, adequate studio facilities to members of the public at rates filed with the mayor and council and subject to the council's review in accordance with the provisions of section 26-35. Appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished by a grantee. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, such programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law. The council may direct that a grantee discontinue, or not deliver, a program on the public channels which it finds to be essentially promotional or otherwise related primarily to the conduct of a business, trade, or profession; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed as a prohibition of advertiser-supported programming on public channels. As provided under the Cable Act, any unused time on access channels may be used by the grantee in its own discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-46. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-47. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his written request. Such removal shall be at no cost to the subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-48. - Emergency use of facilities. 
(a)  In the event of an emergency or disaster, a grantee shall upon request of the mayor make available its facilities to the city at no cost for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster, and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(b)  A grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the city in times of crisis may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-49. - Compliance with city, state and federal laws; modification and severability. 
(a)  A grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof, and if any state or federal laws or regulations shall require a grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service or shall permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the city, then, as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the mayor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the city or the franchise and the grantee shall be governed by the advice of the mayor. 
(b)  A grantee shall be subject to all city ordinance provisions as set forth in this article and shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission for cable systems. 
(c)  If the mayor and council determines that a material provision of this article is affected by such subsequent action, as provided in this section, the council shall have the right to modify any of the provisions in this article to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this article. 
(d)  If any section, subsection or other portion of this chapter or a franchise agreement granted pursuant to this chapter is held to be invalid by the decision of any court or federal or state authority of competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection, or other portion or provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of the franchise agreement, and such decision shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other portions of this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-50. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting cable system operation shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-51. - Restrictions against assignment. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest, or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the mayor and council. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the council to any assignment, lease, transfer, sublease, or mortgage of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets. 
(c)  Prior approval of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the right of control of a grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control ten percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively, at the date the franchise is granted. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the council shall constitute a violation of this article by the grantee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the cable system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person of such cable system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. Any such mortgage, pledge, or lease shall be made only with the prior approval of the council and shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city under this article or applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-52. - Discriminatory practices prohibited. 
(a)  A holder of a franchise shall not deny access to service to any group of potential residential subscribers because of the income of the residents in the local area in which such group resides. 
(b)  For purposes of determining whether a cable service provider or video service provider has violated subsection (a) of this Code section, cost, density, distance, and technological or commercial limitations shall be taken into account. An alleged violation of subsection (a) of this Code section shall only be considered within the description of the service area set forth in an application or amended application for a franchise. The inability to serve an end user because a holder is prohibited from placing its own facilities in a building or property shall not be found to be a violation of subsection (a) of this Code section. Use of an alternative technology or service arrangement that provides comparable content, service, and functionality shall not be considered a violation of subsection (a) of this Code section. This Code section shall not be construed as authorizing any build-out requirements on a cable service provider or video service provider. 
(c)  Any potential residential subscriber or group of residential subscribers who believes it is being denied access to services in violation of subsection (a) of this Code section may file a complaint with the city, along with a clear statement of the facts and the information upon which it is relying to support the complaint. Upon receipt of any such complaint, the city shall serve a copy of the complaint and supporting materials upon the subject cable service provider or video service provider, which shall have 60 days after receipt of such information to submit a written answer and any other relevant information the provider wishes to submit to the city in response to the complaint. If the city is not satisfied with the response, the city shall compel the cable service provider or video service provider to participate in nonbinding mediation. If the mediation does not resolve the matter to the satisfaction of the city, the city may file a complaint with a court of competent jurisdiction. The city shall not file an action in court without having participated in a mediation of the complaint. If such court finds that the holder of a franchise is in material noncompliance with this Code section, the holder shall have a reasonable period of time, as specified by the court, to cure such noncompliance. The court may also award the city its reasonable costs and attorney's fees in seeking enforcement of subsection (a) of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-53. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all of the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee under this article in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of this article, and, within 30 days following written demand by the city shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  Any provision of this article shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and the council further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise granted under this article. 
(3)  A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or can no longer demonstrate financial responsibility, or all or part of a grantee's facilities should be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by the grantee within 30 days from such sale. 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall not be declared in fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-54. - Complaints and other actions against grantee. 
(a)  Any inquiry, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the mayor and council in regard to the operations of grantee's cable television system, other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section, shall be taken only after 30 days' public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city, and a copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on grantee, and the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at such hearing as may be specified by the mayor and council, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person in authority to whom such response should be addressed, and such other procedures as may be specified by the mayor and council. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint regarding operations of a grantee's cable system shall be submitted to the city manager in writing and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the complainant; 
(2)  The name of the cable system against which the complaint is made; and 
(3)  A complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(d)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint under subsection (c) of this section, the city manager will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the cable system. Within such time as may be prescribed by the city manager, the cable system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the city manager of its refusal or inability to do so. If the cable system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the city manager in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(1) of this section. The city manager will forward a copy of the cable system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the cable system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the city manager, and the city manager will forward a copy of such notice to the complainant. 
(1)  If a cable system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the city manager, a statement must be filed with the city manager setting forth when and how the [complaint] has been satisfied. 
(2)  When a complaint has not been satisfied pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the mayor and council in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the council must be filed within six months from the date of the city manager's statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice or refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the mayor and council must make reference to the date of the complaint filed with the city manager and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the city manager. If no complaint is filed with the mayor and council within the six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-55. - Grantee to have no recourse for damages. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee under this article shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the city nor for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed in this article. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this article and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against the grantee and in favor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-56. - Failure of city to enforce franchise not a waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-57. - Time is of the essence. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-58. - Rights reserved to the city. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city. 
(2)  To determine through the council any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(3)  To grant additional franchises within the city to other persons for the conduct of cable television business under any conditions whatsoever acceptable to the city, notwithstanding the same might be alleged to be more favorable than the rights granted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-59. - Acceptance of franchise, terms. 
This article and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by the grantee and the city and filed with the clerk of the council. Such agreement shall incorporate the grantee's written application to the city for the cable franchise and shall bind the grantee to the provisions of such application. The council may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-60. - Extension of city limit. 
Upon the annexation of any territory to the city, other than through a governmental consolidation process as to which the city makes no agreement, the right and franchise granted by this article shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent the city has authority; and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by a grantee located within, under, or over the streets of the territory so annexed shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-61. - Local office. 
During the term of the franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain within the city a local business office or agent. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if the grantee maintains a local business headquarters office within ten airline miles of the center of the city; provides the city manager's office with the name, address and phone number of a resident of the city who will act as grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters, and at least once a week informs all subscribers by appropriate announcement (e.g., by a slide card) over the cable system's originations cablecasting channel of the name, address and phone number of the grantee's registered agent for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-62. - Sale, repair or installation of telephones and television sets by grantee prohibited. 
Neither a grantee nor any shareholder or employee of a grantee shall engage in the business of selling, repairing, or installing telephones, or television sets within the city during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-63. - Employment regulations. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, creed, color, national origin, disability, religion or age. A grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to their sex, race, creed, color, national origin, disability, religion or age. This requirement shall apply to, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-64. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues, which shall not exceed the maximum percentage rate permitted in 47 U.S.C. Section 542(b), generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued by the State of Georgia or an office or agency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-65. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes the city manager, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 26-66. - Public hearings. 
Any public hearings required under the terms of this chapter shall be held in accordance with the city's existing requirements for public hearings, and such requirements shall be satisfied by the conduct of such hearing at a regularly scheduled and publicly announced meeting or work session of the council; provided, however, that there shall be no absolute requirement that members of the public be allowed to participate in such hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Exh. A, 12-7-15) 
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Deeds for lots. 
The city clerk shall be authorized to take applications for cemetery lots according to the master plan drawn by the city engineer. The mayor or the mayor pro tem shall be authorized to execute deeds to cemetery lots in the city cemetery. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Lot charges. 
The purchase price of cemetery lots shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. City employees currently employed shall receive a discount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Maintenance of lots; location of graves on lot. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of state law, all lot owners shall keep their lots neat and clean at all times and shall not abandon the cemetery lots; and no grave shall be dug closer than one foot from the side line of the grave lot. 
(b)  In no case shall a grave be dug unless a permit for the digging of a grave shall first be obtained from the city clerk. The city clerk shall verify that the proposed location of the grave is a valid location prior to the issuance of said permit. The fee for said burial permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(c)  In no case shall one grave serve as a resting place for more than one body. 
(d)  The violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished pursuant to section 1-11 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-4; Ord. No. 2001-11, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-7-06; Ord. No. 2014-07, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 30-4. - Marking of lot boundaries; encroachments. 
Lot purchasers shall have a city employee designate the corners of the lot purchased clearly prior to burial therein, and no lot owner shall encroach upon another lot. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-5) 
Sec. 30-5. - Management; maintenance. 
(a)  The responsibility for the management, operation and maintenance and general supervision of all municipal cemeteries shall be vested in the superintendent of public works. 
(b)  All existing city cemeteries shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and shall be cleaned at least once a year. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-6) 
Sec. 30-6. - Enclosures. 
Any fencing, curbing, or enclosure around burial plots that is installed by private parties shall require prior approval from the cemetery preservation commission before installation. Ongoing maintenance of said curbing, fencing, or enclosures shall be the perpetual responsibility of the installing parties. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-7; Ord. No. 2001-11, § 2, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1, 3-1-04) 
Sec. 30-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-12, § 2, adopted Mar. 1, 2004, repealed § 30-7 in its entirety. Former § 30-7 pertained to planting of flowers and shrubs and derived from Code 1986, § 5-3-8. 
Sec. 30-8. - Subsequent regulations; nonliability of city. 
(a)  The mayor and council reserve to themselves and their successors in office the right to alter, amend, modify or add to the rules, regulations, conditions, and restrictions set forth in this chapter at any time it is deemed advisable to do so in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials or officers, or their successors in office, or its agents or employees, to any purchasers of any lots in the cemetery, or to any person holding under them, or to the family or relatives of any person buried in the cemetery, or to any person or the family of such person who has erected any monument, marker, or mausoleum therein, by reason of any act, thing, omission, negligence, or otherwise relating to the cemetery. In accepting any conveyance of any burial lot, each purchaser agrees that all provisions of this chapter are valid and that he and his heirs and assigns shall hold such lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter and subject to all amendments to this chapter made by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-15; Ord. No. 2004-12, § 3, 3-1-04) 
Secs. 30-9—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRUST FUND 

Sec. 30-31. - Established. 
The city clerk shall establish a trust fund to be known as the Kennesaw Municipal Cemetery Trust Fund, referred to in this article as the trust fund, for the purposes of the perpetual care and maintenance of the municipal cemetery. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-9) 
Sec. 30-32. - Administration. 
The trust fund shall be administered by the cemetery preservation commission as trustees, subject to the review and approval of an annual budget by the mayor and council. Any unbudgeted expenditures or transactions must have prior approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-10; Ord. No. 2001-11, § 3, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 2016-14, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 30-33. - Duties of administrators. 
The administrators shall be responsible for investing and reinvesting proceeds from the sale of lots in the municipal cemetery so that the income therefrom may be provided for perpetual care and maintenance and for upkeep of the cemetery. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-11) 
Sec. 30-34. - Investment of proceeds from lot sales. 
The funds from the sale of all lots in the municipal cemetery shall be deposited in the trust fund, and those funds shall be placed in an income producing checking account, savings account, certificate, or other AAA-rated securities so as to produce the income necessary for the purposes of the municipal cemetery, provided that all such investments shall be subject to review by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-12; Ord. No. 2016-14, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 30-35. - Annual audit. 
The trust fund shall be audited each year by the auditor for the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-13) 
Sec. 30-36. - Powers of trustees. 
The trustees of the trust fund shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To invest and reinvest any and all monies received in securities and/or property in which, from time to time, it may be lawful to invest trust funds under the laws of the state. 
(2)  To make, execute, and deliver all proper receipts, bills of sale, conveyances, assignments, transfers, proxies, powers of attorney, and agreements as it shall deem best in the management and control of the securities and property constituting such fund. 
(3)  To make or join in any plan or plans of reorganization or of readjustment in respect of any corporation of which any of the shares, bonds, or other securities or obligations at any time constitute part of the principal of the fund, and to accept and hold any property or new securities in exchange for or in place of any securities surrendered in accordance with any such plan in the place of the securities so surrendered. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-14) 
Secs. 30-37—30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 30-51. - Created. 
There is hereby created a cemetery preservation commission for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-5-01) 
Sec. 30-52. - Membership and terms of office. 
The cemetery preservation commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Members of the cemetery preservation commission shall serve staggered four-year terms. Members of the cemetery preservation commission shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and may be removed at their discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 2, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 1, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 2007-28, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 2014-06, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 30-53. - Prerequisites for members. 
The nine members appointed to the cemetery preservation commission shall have demonstrated a special interest in the operation of the city cemetery, and no less than six members shall be persons who have family members buried in the city cemetery and/or who own plots in the city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 3, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 2, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 2007-28, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 2014-06, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 30-54. - Powers. 
The cemetery preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Provide review and oversight to the operation and maintenance of the city cemetery and make recommendations regarding same. 
(2)  Provide guidance and suggestions to the mayor and council relative to ongoing maintenance and improvements for the city cemetery, including preservation, security, development, record-keeping, policies regarding lot sales, landscaping, maintenance, etc. 
(3)  Review the status of records of burial and plot ownership for the city cemetery and recommend improvements to the record-keeping system. 
(4)  Provide guidance and suggestions to the mayor and council relative to ordinances and other regulations required to preserve the city cemetery. 
(5)  Make recommendations for preservation, maintenance, and improvement of other cemeteries in the city that are not under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(6)  Provide recommendations to the planning commission, and mayor and council regarding all zoning and variance applications filed that relate to cemeteries in the city and assist the community development department regarding the enforcement of all regulations relating to cemeteries. 
(7)  Conduct educational programs regarding cemetery preservation as a means of increasing public awareness and support. 
(8)  Assist in legal research, as required, regarding cemetery relocation, maintenance, and security measures as defined by state statute and city ordinances. 
(9)  Establish appropriate and necessary liaisons and contacts with other appropriate boards, commissions, departments, organizations, and public agencies. 
(10)  Other duties as may be assigned by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 4, 2-5-01) 
Sec. 30-55. - Approval of mayor and council for financial obligations. 
The cemetery preservation commission shall not financially obligate the city in any manner without the prior approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 5, 2-5-01) 
Sec. 30-56. - Rules and procedures. 
The cemetery preservation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, officers and their election and duties, provisions for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedure without amendments to this article. A quorum shall consist of a majority of its members. 
The cemetery preservation commission may recommend rules and regulations relating to the operation of the city cemetery. Such recommendations shall become effective after presented and approved by the mayor and a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 6, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 2006-16, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 30-57. - Public access to meetings and records. 
A public record shall be kept of the cemetery preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. Meeting minutes shall be filed with the city clerk within two business days after each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 7, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-14, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 30-58. - Acceptance of donations; establishment of annual budget. 
The cemetery preservation commission shall have the authority to accept donations into a cemetery fund that has been established by the city, in addition to city-appropriated funds if such funds are approved by the mayor and council. The cemetery preservation commission shall recommend an annual budget to the mayor and council for the preservation and maintenance of the city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 8, 2-5-01) 
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, adopted Feb. 16, 2009, amended by striking in its entirety and inserting a replace copy of the former Ch. 34, §§ 34-1, 34-2, 34-26—34-31, and enacted a new Ch. 34 as set out herein. The former Ch. 34 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1986, §§ 4-3-10, 11-1-4; Ord. of June 19, 1989(1), §§ I—VI. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; law enforcement, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full forces and effect. Such ordinances, etc. are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Sec. 34-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large scale loss of life, property damage or destruction or in major disruption of routine community affairs, business or government operations in the city and which the severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state, county, and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare an emergency for the City of Kennesaw. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of emergency, the mayor may request, via the county EMA director, the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city and county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of an emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that the emergency conditions no longer exists, at which time the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city council may, by resolution, end a state of emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency shall automatically activate the city emergency operations plan and shall be authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
(i)  The city manager shall have legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the City of Kennesaw, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
(ii)  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the city manager or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. 
(iii)  No person shall refuse entry of access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: sections 34-5, 34-6 and 34-7. If any of these sections is included in a declaration of emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city council is authorized to cause to be effective and of the subsections of section 34-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The mayor shall have and may exercise for such a period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
(i)  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
(ii)  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
(iii)  To suspend or limit sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable substances; 
(iv)  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
(v)  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city department and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
(vi)  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
(vii)  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
(viii)  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules, regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for minimum deviation from requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
(ix)  To provide welfare benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
(x)  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of emergency, an official "Declaration of Emergency," in substantially the same form as set below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the City of Kennesaw, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the mayor of the City of Kennesaw there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Kennesaw, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW THERFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring said declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the City of Kennesaw Emergency Operations Plan is activated; 
(2)  That the following sections of the Official Code of The City of Kennesaw, Georgia be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 34-5, Overcharging; Section 34-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section 34-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 34-2 (a)(4)c, d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE] 
[SIGNED] 
Mayor of the City of Kennesaw 
(c)  Emergency powers of municipalities. 
(1)  Municipalities. Under the Georgia Emergency Management Act, municipalities within the county are authorized to exercise the same emergency governmental powers with their municipal boundaries as are authorized to the county government. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Sec. 34-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement responsibilities. The law enforcement authorities of the city shall enforce all orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the mayor or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the mayor or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which the violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In addition to the remedies prescribed in the section, the city manager is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Sec. 34-4. - Authority to waive procedure and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor of the City of Kennesaw, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside the city limits of Kennesaw, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city limits, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city council may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder, and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks, provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. A public works contract entered into pursuant of this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city council may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such a nature that immediate action outside of the code is required, such suspension consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city council may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city council or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by zoning regulations, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and city building official. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the city council or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Sec. 34-5. - Overcharging prohibited. 
To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of an emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the City of Kennesaw to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the city. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' cost for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent of greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in the cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed six months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city council. 
(2)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Sec. 34-6. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  Before building, construction, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures within an area in the City of Kennesaw designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the City of Kennesaw without complying with the ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal Employer Identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating the section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Sec. 34-7. - Closed or restricted area and curfews during an emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander, or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between the hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the city emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the City of Kennesaw; 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repairs crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the mayor, city manager and or chief of police. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by the officers of the City of Kennesaw Police Department, along with any other law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during an emergency. Nothing shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Secs. 34-8—34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIREARMS 

Sec. 34-21. - Heads of households to maintain firearms. 
(a)  In order to provide for the emergency management of the city, and further in order to provide for and protect the safety, security and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants, every head of household residing in the city limits is required to maintain a firearm, together with ammunition therefore. 
(b)  Exempt from the effect of this section are those heads of households who suffer a physical or mental disability which would prohibit them from using such a firearm. Further exempt from the effect of this section are those heads of households who are paupers or who conscientiously oppose maintaining firearms as a result of beliefs or religious doctrine, or persons convicted of a felony. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Sec. 34-22. - Use of firearms. 
No person shall fire a gun, pistol or other firearm in the city, except in the defense of person or property, and except peace officers or military forces of this state or the United States, in the discharge of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, Exh. A, 2-16-09) 
Secs. 34-23—34-31. - Reserved. 
Chapter 38 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 58; offenses, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Handling of charges; binding over of defendant. 
(a)  All charges cognizable as violations of state laws shall be handled by a commitment hearing, provided however, that such charges may be adjudicated in the municipal court whenever the court would have jurisdiction over the offense, and the defendant, in writing, waives any right to trial by jury. 
(b)  When a defendant is bound over to the appropriate state court, he may be released under any of the following methods: 
(1)  If the defendant has posted bond to the city, he may be released on the same bond; 
(2)  If the defendant has not posted bond before being bound over, he shall post bond at the county jail book-in and an arraignment notice will then be given to the defendant and the defendant shall be delivered, in person, by the city police to the county authorities. 
(Code 1986, § 11-1-2) 
Secs. 38-2—38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts and magistrate courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

Secs. 38-26—38-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SCHEDULE OF CASH AND PROPERTY BONDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-11. 

Sec. 38-46. - Application; amendment; purpose. 
The following schedule of cash/property bonds and fine amounts sets out the cash bond amounts for the various offenses processed through the city's municipal court. Offenses listed in the code section columns shall constitute offenses against the city and are adopted by reference for the prevention of crime and general welfare of the city's citizens. The schedule may be amended from time to time, provided that no amendment shall be official until adopted by the city council by ordinance. 

 

 

 
Note: The total cash bond includes all surcharges. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(2); Ord. No. 1998-02, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 2004-18, 4-5-04; Ord. of 8-10-04; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 2008-26, § 1, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 2, 11-11-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-14, adopted July 16, 2001, amended § 38-46, application; amendment; purpose, by deleting existing information on bond amounts for speeding and enacting new bond amounts for speeding charts. Said new charts have been added at the discretion of the editor as §§ 38-48 and 38-49, to better fit the format of the Code. 
Sec. 38-47. - Property bonds. 
Property bonds and other non-cash bonds will be double the cash bond listed in section 38-46. A "cash bond" shall be defined for purposes of this section as a bond for which the full amount of the bond is deposited in cash with the clerk of the city court. The cash bond schedule includes a surcharge pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73 and a penalty pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112 and payment to peace officers annuity and benefits fund pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94(2); Ord. No. 2002-23, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 3, 1-3-06) 
Sec. 38-48. - Bond amounts for speeding. 
Kennesaw Municipal Court Bond Amounts for Speeding 
Note: To use this table defendant must have on his/her record a prior speeding conviction. 
Speeding 11—14 MPH Over Limit 

 
Speeding 15—19 MPH Over Limit 

 
Speeding 20-24 MPH Over Limit 

 
Speeding 25+ MPH Over Limit 

 
(Table reflects an increase of $20.00 for each previous moving violation within five years) 
(Add an additional increase of $20.00 if the offense occurred in school zone) 
*LCVAP = Local County Victim Assistance Programs—O.C.G.A. 15-21-131 (Every Case) 
**Comp of Victims—Compensation of Victims—O.C.G.A. 47-17-60 (Every Case) 
POPIDF-A-Peace Officer, Prosecutor, and Indigent Defense Funding Act (15-21-73(a)(1)(A) and (a)(2)(A)) 
POPIDF-B-Peace Officer,  Prosecutor, and Indigent Defense Funding Act (15-21-73(a)(1)(B) and (a)(2)(B)) 
(Ord. No. 2001-14, 7-16-01; Ord. of 8-10-04; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 3, 11-11-09) 
Sec. 38-49. - Bond amounts for first speeding charge. 
Kennesaw Municipal Court Bond Amounts for 1 st Speeding Charge 
Speeding 6—10 MPH Over Limit 

 
Speeding 11—14 MPH Over Limit 

 
Speeding 15—19 MPH Over Limit 

 
Speeding 20—24 MPH Over Limit 

 
Speeding 25+ MPH Over Limit (Maximum $150.00) 

 
*LCVAP = Local County Victim Assistance Programs—O.C.G.A. 15-21-131 (Every Case) 
**Comp of Victims—Compensation of Victims—O.C.G.A. 47-17-60 (Every Case) 
POPIDF-A-Peace Officer, Prosecutor, and Indigent Defense Funding Act (15-21-73(a)(1)(A) and (a)(2)(A)) 
POPIDF-B-Peace Officer,  Prosecutor, and Indigent Defense Funding Act (15-21-73(a)(1)(B) and (a)(2)(B)) 
(Ord. No. 2001-14, 7-16-01; Ord. of 8-10-04; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 4, 11-11-09) 
Chapter 42 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-1. - Authority for county to conduct municipal elections. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45(c), the city does hereby authorize the county to conduct elections held pursuant to the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) and requests the county to perform the following functions: 
(1)  The county shall perform all duties as superintendent of elections as specified under chapter three, title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) with the exception of the qualification of candidates. 
(2)  The city does hereby establish and authorize the payment for such services by the county under subsection (1) of this section from the city treasury. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93, § 3; Ord. No. 2007-14, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 42-2. - Election officials. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution either appoint the county to perform all duties as superintendent of elections pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45(c)(1) or appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-1; Ord. No. 2007-14, 4-2-07) 
State Law reference— Manner of selecting municipal superintendent, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70.1. 
Sec. 42-3. - Voter registration deadline. 
The city hereby elects to use the county registration list for the registration of electors. Persons desiring to vote in city elections shall register with the county registrar no later than 5:00 p.m. on the day 30 days prior to the date of the election in the case of a general election or five days prior to the date of a special election. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-2; Ord. No. 2007-14, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 42-4. - Notice of candidacy; qualifications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by state law, all candidates for municipal office shall file their notice of candidacy and pay the prescribed qualifying fee by the date prescribed in section 42-5 in order to be eligible to have their names placed on the election ballot by the election superintendent in the following manner: 
Each candidate for municipal office or a designee shall file a notice of candidacy in the office of the election superintendent during the city's qualifying period. The city council shall designate the days of the qualifying period, which shall be no less than three days and no more than five days. The days of the qualifying period shall be consecutive days. Qualifying periods shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday; and, in the case of a special election, the municipal qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of the call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. 
(b)  The hours of qualifying each day shall be from 8:30 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. with one hour allowed for the lunch break; provided, however, that should the city have normal business hours which cover a lesser period of time it shall conduct qualifying during its normal business hours. Except in the case of a special election, notice of the opening and closing dates and the hours for candidates to qualify shall be published at least two weeks prior to the opening of the qualifying period. 
(c)  The residency requirements for a candidate for any municipal office, except offices of a judicial nature, shall be 12 months residency within the municipality; provided, however, that municipalities may by charter provide for lesser residency requirements for candidates for municipal office. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-3; Ord. No. 95-15, § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. of 9-2-97; Ord. No. 2007-14, 4-2-07) 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy for office, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132(d)(3). 
Sec. 42-5. - Candidate qualification fee. 
Any citizen who desires to be a candidate for mayor or councilmember shall qualify as required in section 42-4 and pay at that time such qualification fee as shall be established by the mayor and council, which fee shall not exceed three percent of the annual compensation of the office. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-4; Ord. No. 2007-14, 4-2-07) 
Chapter 46 - STORMWATER UTILITY AND ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., adopted Nov. 3, 2014, repealed the former ch. 46 in its entirety and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 46 pertained to environment. Please see Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 58; offenses, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 80; unified development code, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall constitute and be known as "Stormwater Utility and Environmental." 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-2. - Purpose. 
The City of Kennesaw, Georgia (the "city") is authorized by the State Constitution, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I(a) and III(a)(6) thereof and state law, to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the geographic area of the city which services, systems and facilities contribute to the protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, and protection of the natural resources of the city. The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), other amendments and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act, place increased emphasis on the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and making available to its citizens and property owners stormwater management services which address water quality and volume impacts of stormwater runoff. The mayor and council has determined that development in the city to date, and the outlook for continued development at an increasing rate in the future, has created and will continue to create additional needs for stormwater management services, systems and facilities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-3. - Findings. 
The mayor and council make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The city is authorized by the State Constitution, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs II and III(a)(6) thereof and state law to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the city. 
(2)  The management of stormwater and other surface water discharges within the city is a matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of all residents and businesses in the city. 
(3)  Improper management of stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may create environmental damage to the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within and adjacent to the city. 
(4)  A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city and surrounding areas. 
(5)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the operations of sanitary sewer by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. 
(6)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the further degradation of the water quality in area waterbodies which may result in higher levels of treatment requirements imposed on wastewater treatment facilities and increased water treatment cost of potable water supplies. 
(7)  The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) (the "Act"), and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act imposed by regulatory obligations of its national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit require the city to reduce pollution in its stormwater discharge and increase water quality to the maximum extent practicable. 
(8)  Proper management of stormwater is a key element of having clean water with adequate assimilative capacity for treated wastewater discharges and adequate potable drinking water that are essential to support existing and future development in the city. 
(9)  The cost of operating and maintaining the City of Kennesaw stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system. 
(10)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the city hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility and establish rates for stormwater management services. 
(11)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, the city is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the City of Kennesaw Charter to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II and III(a)(6). 
(12)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the city. Development in the city has altered the natural hydrology with some natural elements having been replaced or augmented by man-made facilities. Even areas of the city that remain less densely developed and rural in character with natural stormwater drainage predominating demand services along roads where ditches and culverts have been installed. As a result, stormwater management services systems and facilities needs apply to all areas of the city. 
(13)  The stormwater needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities and regulation of the use therefore renders and/or results in both service and benefit to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city. 
(14)  The service and benefit rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed upon the stormwater management services, systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of properties in proportion to the long-term demands the properties owned impose on the city's stormwater management services, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits to such properties and the owners thereof. 
(15)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater management systems and facilities in the city in concert with the management and regulation of other water resources. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management services, systems and facilities. 
(16)  A stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the city, and the most equitable means to regulate the use of a higher level of stormwater management services, systems and facilities in the city through stormwater service charges, utility fees and other mechanisms as described more fully herein. 
(17)  A schedule of stormwater utility service charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the city. Such service charges may be complemented by other types of charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by mayor and council. 
(18)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site systems, facilities, activities or assets which significantly reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular property on the city's stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities should be taken into account to reduce the service charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or credit, and that such reduction or credit should be conditional upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the city. 
(19)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all service charges for stormwater management services, systems and facilities, together with any other revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems and facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and the city directs that such proceeds of service charges and revenues shall therefore be deposited into the enterprise accounting fund of the City of Kennesaw stormwater utility and shall remain in that fund and be disbursed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-4. - Stormwater utility and stormwater enterprise fund established. 
(a)  The mayor and council of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia hereby establishes a stormwater utility within the public works department to provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, construction and enhancement of the city's stormwater systems and facilities. 
(b)  The city hereby establishes a stormwater enterprise fund. All revenues from the stormwater utility fee shall be only be deposited into the stormwater enterprise fund and used only for purposes of the stormwater management, capital, operating and non-operating costs as approved by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article, which occurs by chance and without planning, thought or intention prior to occurrence. 
Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
BMP (best management practices). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, flood controls, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to a reservoir or perennial stream within a water supply watershed. 
City or the words "the city" means the City of Kennesaw, Georgia or any designated employee thereof. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Confined animal feeding operation means a building or fenced enclosure designed and used for the holding or fattening of animals in preparation for market. 
Conservation easement means a portion of land set aside in its natural state and preserved as open space in perpetuity. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in or involving land disturbance including but not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Credit means a reduction in the amount of a stormwater utility fee charge to the owner of a particular property for the existence and use of privately owned, maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce or mitigate the city's cost of providing stormwater management services for that particular property. 
Development or single development means any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Director means the director of public works or his/her designee. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan or as may be defined from time to time by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and its successors. 
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: storage, conveyance and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater; protection of water quantity and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wild life and fisheries; educational, historical and archeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
Generalized wetland map means a map showing the general locations of wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kennesaw as shown on the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). The GSMM is a technical guidance document governing stormwater management design, construction and long-term maintenance activities in Georgia. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hazardous waste includes those solid and liquid wastes or combinations thereof that may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or which pose a substantial threat to human health when improperly handled. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soil conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the Soil Conservation Service. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the municipal storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and has not been approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Impervious area or impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, swimming pools, awnings and other fabric and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inoperative or junk condition means and includes, but shall not be limited to, any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: (1) Wrecked; (2) Dismantled; (3) Partially dismantled; (4) Inoperative; (5) Abandoned; (6) Discarded; or (7) Does not have a valid license plate attached thereto or is otherwise in bad repair. (Code 1986, § 8-5-171; Ord. No. 2006-17, 8-7-06) 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and as may be amended from time to time. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land-disturbing activity means any operation that involves excavation or filling of land, clearing of vegetation or construction, rebuilding or alteration of an existing structure as defined by the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control ordinance and as may be amended from time to time. 
Large quantity generator of hazardous waste means any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity defined as a "large quantity generator" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-8-60 et seq. and regulated by the State of Georgia under that section. 
Local enforcement authority means the City of Kennesaw, which may include but is not limited to staff from public works, zoning, building department, or code enforcement as applicable. 
Local permitting authority means the City of Kennesaw which may include individuals from public works, zoning, or building departments, or code enforcement as applicable. 
Limited development area means the portion of the water supply watershed not included in the water quality area. 
Master fee schedule means a schedule for fees adopted by mayor and council as may be amended from time to time. 
Natural vegetated area means an undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife; 
Outdoor recreational activities, including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting; 
Education, scientific research and nature trails; 
Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the pervious nature of the land shall be minimized; 
Limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the permissible uses. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site or part thereof. 
Nonconforming use means a land-use activity, building or structure legally established prior to adoption of this article or subsequent amendment to it that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this article. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Non-single family residential property or NSFR means improved property containing multiple dwelling unit residential properties, condominiums, apartments, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, tennis courts, swimming pools, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses, water and wastewater treatment plants, and any other form of property use not otherwise mentioned which has private parking lots and private drives or roads. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and green-space areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Overlay district means a district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land-use category. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on United States Geological Survey (USGS) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale of 1/24,000). 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state or federal government, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution and diminished water quality. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Predevelopment refers to the condition of the site prior to any improvements being made to the site i.e., in its natural state. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Primary permittee means owners, general contractors and operators of a project having day-to-day operational control of a facility or site. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S., excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a reservoir, defined by its normal pool level. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Secondary permittee means individual builders, utility companies and utility contractors within common developments. 
Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the city. 
Setback means the distance that defines the width of a protective buffer, measured from the boundary of the feature of the landscape (e.g., a wetland or stream bank) that the buffer is designed to protect. 
Single family residential or SFR means developed land containing one dwelling structure which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. SFR units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual parcel or parcels of land. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
State waters means, any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and green-space, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Stormwater utility means a stormwater management program that may include all or part of the following: administration, engineering, planning, operations, enforcement, educational and capital programs. 
Stream means any state waters, beginning: 
(1)  At the location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; 
(2)  At a point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and begins where vegetation is rested by normal flow. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. 
User means any person who owns property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads. 
Water quality critical area means the portion of the water supply watershed nearest the public water intake, where the most stringent land-use limitations of this article apply. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Wetland means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the Corps. 
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kennesaw and shown on the generalized wetland map. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-6. - Stormwater enterprise fund and stormwater utility fee rate. 
(a)  A stormwater utility fee is hereby created to fund activities of the stormwater utility. All utility fees received shall be deposited in the stormwater enterprise fund and all stormwater expenses are to be paid from it. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall set and adjust the stormwater utility fee rates which shall be listed in the master fee schedule which shall be available for review from the city clerk. It shall be the policy of the city that utility fees shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demand and impacts imposed on the stormwater utility. Such rates shall be structures so as to be fair and reasonable and bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services. 
(c)  The owner, as identified from public land records of Cobb County, of developed parcels of real property wholly or partially located within the corporate limits of the city shall be responsible and obligated for the payment of any stormwater utility fee assessed against said parcel. 
(d)  Parcels annexed into the city shall be subject to the fee upon the finalization of annexation. 
(e)  The stormwater utility fee for any parcel will remain constant from month to month unless one of the following changes occurs: 
(1)  A physical modification to the parcel that changes its level of imperviousness; 
(2)  A credit for on-site stormwater management is either awarded or revoked; 
(3)  The stormwater utility fee rate is changed by the city council after a public hearing which notice of said hearing shall be duly published in a newspaper (Marietta Daily Journal) of general circulation within the county for two consecutive weeks in such newspaper; or 
(4)  Any other billing adjustment as described in this section [chapter] 46. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-7. - Stormwater utility fee collections. 
(a)  Stormwater utility fee charges shall be assessed effective December 1, 2014. 
(b)  The stormwater utility fee will be collected month to month or as deemed most effective and efficient by mayor and city council. All accounts shall be paid by the due date; a late fee as determined by mayor and council will be assessed for all payments made after that date. A service charge shall be assessed for all dishonored checks or dishonored credit card charges. 
(c)  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each developed property subject to a stormwater utility fee shall be obligated to pay the stormwater utility fee charges and any interest on delinquent stormwater utility fee charge payments. 
(d)  Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby. In no instance shall the unpaid service charge constitute a direct lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-8. - Stormwater utility fee exemptions. 
(a)  The stormwater utility fee shall not be charged to public streets, sidewalks, utilities, or railroad lines. 
(b)  Any property whereby 100 percent of the stormwater runoff is contained or infiltrated on the property and no stormwater runoff is discharged, via overland flow or manmade conveyance to adjacent properties or rights-of-way for all storm events up to and including the 100-year 24-hour storm event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-9. - Stormwater utility fee credits. 
(a)  Persons subject to the stormwater utility fee shall be eligible to receive a stormwater utility fee credit based upon the requirements outlined in the city's stormwater utility credit manual, as such manual may be amended from time to time by approved resolution of mayor and council, which can be accessed on the city's website or at the city public works department. In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the director on forms provided by the director for such purpose and include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the director, he or she shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is accepted to: (a) grant the credit in whole; (b) grant the credit in part; or (c) deny the credit within 30 days thereafter. Credits applied for by the property owner, and granted in whole or in part, shall apply from the first day of the calendar month immediately following the date on which a complete application for the credit has been filed with the director. 
(c)  A property owner shall have to reapply annually for the credit granted unless the stormwater utility credit manual shows otherwise; however, the director may terminate the credit if the director finds grounds therefor. If such credit is terminated, the property owner may appeal such determination pursuant to 46-12 herein, or may, if possible, correct the deficiencies which caused the termination and reapply for the credit. 
(d)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater utility charge is to be conditioned upon continuing compliance with the stormwater utility credit manual as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-10. - Adjustments to stormwater bills. 
(a)  A parcel's stormwater utility rate and/or computed impervious surfaces number may be adjusted by the director to an amount which more properly represents the impervious surfaces on a parcel. This may be done upon presentation by the property owner of factual evidence which, by the director's sole determination, establishes that the impervious area used to determine the parcel's stormwater utility fee was incorrect. 
(b)  The owner of the parcel is responsible for initiating any review of the impervious area computation for a parcel or any other computations involved in determining the stormwater utility fee for that parcel by filing an application for an adjustment of the fee and presenting factual evidence in support of a change in the fee on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-11. - Application for adjustment. 
The director of public works shall make a decision approving or denying the application for an adjustment within 30 days of receipt of a completed application for an adjustment. The director's decision shall be in writing and, if the decision is to deny the application, it shall state the reasons for said denial. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address as shown on the application for an adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-12. - Administrative remedy. 
(a)  An applicant for an adjustment or credit may appeal a denial of said application to the city manager by filing a written appeal at the office of the city manager within ten calendar days of the date of mailing of the decision denying said application. 
(b)  An appeal to the city manager shall be submitted on a form provided by the city and must be accompanied by any documentation or other evidence the appellant wishes the city manager to consider in deciding the appeal. 
(c)  The city manager shall review and make a decision whether to allow or deny the appeal within 30 days of receipt of a completed appeal application. Said decision shall be in writing and, if denied, it shall state the reasons for the denial. 
(d)  The decision of the city manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative action. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may appeal that decision to the Superior Court of Cobb County by Writ of Certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-13. - Responsibility for stormwater utility systems and facilities. 
(a)  The director shall be responsible for operation, maintenance and regulation of city owned stormwater systems and facilities to which the city owns or has rights as established by written agreements to include: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way; 
(2)  On private property within easements granted to and accepted by the city, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater system facilities located thereon; 
(3)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or 
(4)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. 
(b)  Property owners within the city who have on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate such systems in a safe manner, consistent with all applicable city ordinances, state regulations and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-14. - Enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  Any failure of a property owner to pay the required fee shall constitute a violation of this article and subject the property owner to a collection action in the Superior Court of Cobb County. 
(b)  The city shall have the right for its designated officers and employees to enter upon public and private property in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Such inspections shall generally be limited to inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-15—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 46-31. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable, and coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the city's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-32. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director to be a hotspot land use; or, 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-33. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-34. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are cumulative of and in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-35. - Severability. 
The mayor and council hereby declare their intention to be that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be judged, decreed or declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article since the remainder of this article would have been adopted and enacted by the mayor and city council without the inclusion of any such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-36. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, approved and adopted by the city for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-37—46-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 46-50. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this article, the following items shall accompany a permit application in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 46-51; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 46-52; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 46-53, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 46-54, if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 46-55. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-51. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the review by the city of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan, which shall be submitted by the owner or developer in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including without limitation: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
The city greenspace and any relevant resource protection plans available to the city will be consulted by the owner/developer or their representative in the discussion of the concept plan. Resource documents are available through the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-52. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in division 3. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual referenced in section 46-36. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. Guidelines and related design criteria are defined in Section 400, Subsection 409 of the City of Kennesaw Development Standards. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 3 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any the city greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the city or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, and responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation by the city of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 46-53, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 46-53. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-53. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring or involving a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of or successors-in-title to the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be in a form acceptable to and approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by the city, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any subsequent owner or successor-in-title. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors-in-title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 5 of this article. 
The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-54. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
The city requires surety for performance and maintenance obligations related to development or redevelopment of property. These requirements are defined in Section 300, Subsection 301 of the City of Kennesaw Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-55. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 46-50 (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  The city shall inform the applicant in writing during the plan review process, when the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact and the reasons for disapproval in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (c) above and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan, and this certification statement shall be included on all applications; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and, 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-56. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be satisfied in full prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. Fee schedules are set by the mayor and council. Current schedules are available from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-57. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-58—46-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article. 

Sec. 46-70. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-71. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches as described in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-72. - Overbank flooding protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. The peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm events must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-73. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-74. - Structural stormwater controls. 
All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the environmental specialist may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-75. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 46-70. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-76. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the GSMM; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-77. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division's Safe Dam Program provides oversight and applicable resources. Additional requirements by the city are described in Section 400, subsection 418 of the Kennesaw Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-78—46-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 46-90. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. Notification will be within one business day of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-91. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the director is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-92—46-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 46-100. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a semi-annual basis by the owner or responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the director shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, may correct the violation as provided in section 46-103. 
Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-101. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-102. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-103. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property(s), and shall be placed on the ad valorum tax bill(s) for all property(s) within the platted subdivision and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-104—46-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 46-130. - Violation. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent nor be deemed to be in lieu of such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the director determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, the director shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this ordinance without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council of the city by filing a written notice of appeal within ten working days after the issuance of the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, an appeal must be filed within 24 hours of the issuance of the notice of violation). 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-131. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The director may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall become effective immediately and remain in effect until rescinded by the director. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The director or building department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein as determined by the director. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within the time set forth by the director, the city may impose a penalty in the following amounts at a minimum depending on the severity of the violation but not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each day that the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation: 
a.  Two hundred dollars for the second violation of this article in any 12-month period. 
b.  Six hundred dollars for the third violation of this article in any 12-month period. 
c.  One thousand dollars for the fourth and each subsequent violation of this article in any 12-month period. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the director may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 to be determined by the court based on the circumstances of the violation (including the number of violations within the preceding 12-month period) or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-132—46-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-09, adopted June 4, 2018, repealed Art. III, §§ 46-150—46-159, which pertained to soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control and derived from Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., adopted Nov. 3, 2014. 

Secs. 46-150—46-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 46-190—46-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLANDS 

Sec. 46-220. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the City of Kennesaw, Georgia are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; moderate erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In additional, the wise management of forest wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
It is therefore necessary for the City of Kennesaw, Georgia to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities that may adversely affect wetlands. 
(b)  Title and purpose. This article shall be known as the Wetland Protection Ordinance of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. The purpose of this article is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, and aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-221. - Wetland protection district. 
This wetland article consists of (1) the text of the model ordinance; and (2) a map showing the general location of local wetlands. 
(a)  Wetland protection district. This article shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within the jurisdiction of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this article, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter therein and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declare to be a part of this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(1)  Wetland protection district boundaries. The generalized wetland map is a general reference document, and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a Section 404 permit will be required [for proposed activity]. The generalized wetland map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kennesaw and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(2)  Relationship to zoning. The wetland protection district is hereby established. The wetland protection district shall comprise on overlay zone that supplements and is indicated on the City of Kennesaw Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated and made part of this article by reference. When the two ordinances conflict, the more restrictive ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-222. - Local development permits. 
(a)  Permit requirements. No regulated activity shall be permitted within the wetlands protection district without first obtaining a permit from the city. Said permit shall be obtained from the office of the director. 
Should the proposed development activity be located within 50 feet of the established wetlands protection district boundary as determined by the director using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If such a determination is made by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that wetlands are present on the proposed development site for which a regulated development activity is requested, a permit shall not be granted or issued until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and presented to the director. 
(b)  Permit requirements within the wetland district setback. Prior to issuance of any development permit for activity within 25 feet of a wetland, the applicant must include, with the site plans the proposed action, documentation that the following post-development conditions will prevail at the site: 
(1)  The rate of stormwater runoff, volume of stormwater runoff, and peak runoff from the site will not exceed pre-development levels. 
(2)  The amount of the following pollutants carried within runoff from the site will not exceed pre-development conditions: 
a.  Phosphorus; 
b.  Nitrogen; 
c.  Zinc; 
d.  Lead. 
In addition, biological oxygen demand (BOD) and turbidity (TSS) shall not exceed pre-development levels. 
(3)  In addition to other fees assessed, the applicant may be held liable for costs incurred by the city during evaluation of the performance standards. 
(4)  The City of Kennesaw hereby adopts the "hydros" model and/or soil conservation service model procedures proposed in the National Engineering Handbook, which shall be by a certified P. E., published by the United States Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(c)  Permissible uses (uses as of right). The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinances or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fills, drainage, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife, provided they do not affect water of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The continued cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, and an undisturbed vegetated setback/buffer of 25 feet shall be maintained between the agricultural practice and the wetland. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(d)  Temporary emergency permit. A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the city for the following reasons: 
(1)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged. Written approval by the public works department is required prior to the commencement of all work within a wetland. Work conducted shall use best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(2)  Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
(3)  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavation or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of subsection (b)(4). 
(4)  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelter, boathouses, or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(e)  Site plans. Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger with the following information: 
(1)  The map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Evaluations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimension and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 100 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(f)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said construction plan. The construction plan may be amended only with the approval of the city plans review committee. The city plans review committee may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purpose of this article. 
(g)  Enforcement authority. The director is hereby established as the administrator for this article. 
(h)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the building services department and will be reviewed by the plans review committee within 45 days. The review period shall begin upon determination by the code enforcement department that the application submitted is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval or disapproval) by the plan review committee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the city plans review committee. If the review process is not completed within 45 days, the application is considered to be approved. Any changes to plan constitute a separate review and extend the process by an additional 45 days. 
(i)  Appeals. Decisions on permit applications made by the plan review committee may be appealed to the mayor and city council. The appeal must be made within 30 days of the decision rendered by the plans review committee. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. Public announcement of the hearing shall be published in the legal section of the Marietta Daily Journal at least seven days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the mayor and city council may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(j)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date that work ceased. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-223. - Monitoring and enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Kennesaw, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately-owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city deems necessary. 
(1)  All enforcement and monitoring activities conducted by the city that involve entrance to privately-owned land by the city shall be preceded by written notification to the landowner. Said notification shall be issued at least seven days prior to the activities specified in the notification unless an emergency developed, then immediate access will be requested. 
(2)  The director shall have authority to enforce this article, issue permits hereunder, and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(3)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the director in enforcement of this article. 
(4)  The director shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violations of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in section 46-225. 
(b)  The city may require a bond in an amount of $10,000.00 and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the city may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-224. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who commits, takes part in, has been issued a citation, judge-set fines, or assists in any violation of any provision of this article may be fined not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the mayor and council. 
(c)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has been taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land lots to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city. 
(d)  If the director discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the director shall issue written notification of the violation to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(e)  Suspension, revocation. The director may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the application has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The director shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-225. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a special permit shall be reviewable in the Cobb County Superior Court. 
(b)  Alternate actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the city may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City of Kennesaw. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-226. - Amendments. 
These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-227. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a non-profit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-228. - Severability and abrogation. 
All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article. All ordinances and regulations in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-229—46-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 46-240. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare to the maximum extent practicable as required by the state and federal law through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the (municipal) separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, video recording and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-241. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply throughout the corporate limits of the City of Kennesaw. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 1(1.2), 6-7-04) 
Sec. 46-242. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, and other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control and be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-243. - Severability. 
The mayor and council hereby declare their intention to be that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be judged, decreed or declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article since the remainder of this article would have been adopted and enacted by the mayor and city council without the inclusion of any such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-244. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-245—46-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 46-260. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the (municipal) separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, roof drains, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
The city may evaluate and remove any of the above exemptions if it is determined by the city or another authorized enforcement agency that they are causing adverse impacts to any water or water body's physical, chemical or biological properties; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-261. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the public sanitary sewer system upon approval of the public works department or the Cobb County Water Department where applicable. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system constitutes a violation of this article and, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring the identification of such location. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period, not to exceed five working days, within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-262. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of such permit or compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-263. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Delays in allowing the city access to a facility subject to the terms of this ordinance shall constitute and be deemed a violation of the provisions contained herein. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of an order from any court of competent jurisdiction which authorizes the inspection and sampling needed to verify compliance with or to remedy any violation of the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-264. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Rules and Regulations For Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6-05 Emergency Actions, provides procedures to handle any emergency which endangers the waters of the state. This article provides procedures to handle discharges and spills that occur within the city and are in addition to state requirements referenced above. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the (municipal) separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the city 911 center by phone, or facsimile immediately after the discharge of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence. Notifications shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the discharge. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure that there is no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of a release of toxic or other hazardous materials, the Cobb County Fire Department shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of any release or discharge as provided hereinabove is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-265—46-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 46-280. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise stopped and penalized in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 46-284. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-281. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the director by filing a written notice of appeal within ten business days of service of notice of violation upon the alleged violator. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this article shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-282. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal such determination in writing to the director. The notice of appeal must be received by director within ten business days from the date service of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the director shall take place within 30 days from the receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the director shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-283. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If a non-emergency violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five business days of the decision of the director upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-284. - Costs of abatement of the violation. 
Within five business days after abatement of the violation by the city, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest as an appeal to the director objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten business days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within ten business days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-285. - Civil penalties. 
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within five business days, the city may impose a penalty in the following amounts at a minimum but not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each day the violation(s) remain(s) unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation and the expiration of any time period permitted or specified herein for the correction of such violation(s): 
(1)  Two hundred dollars for the second violation of this chapter in any twelve-month period. 
(2)  Six hundred dollars for the third violation of this chapter in any twelve-month period. 
(3)  One thousand dollars for the fourth and each subsequent violation of this chapter in any 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-286. - Criminal penalties. 
For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-287. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement procedures and penalties provided and authorized herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-288. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative and alternative remedies. 
The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-289—46-419. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STREAM BUFFER ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 46-420. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-421. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the mayor and council finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources. 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater. 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation. 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks. 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff. 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams. 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem. 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat. 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat and migratory corridors. 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity. 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(12)  Protection of endangered/threaten species. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of land and water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-422. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence and be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-423. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval pursuant to or exemption from these requirements does not constitute approval pursuant to or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
b.  Existing permitted development and on-going land disturbance activities approved prior to the effective date of this article including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities approved on such properties after the effective date of this article shall be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, or for which a preliminary plat has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat that have been approved by the director. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (2)a., above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. When emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the director immediately upon commencement of the work. Within seven business days thereafter, the person shall submit to the director, a written plan of corrective actions reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. The director will determine a time frame for the corrective actions and grant approval to commence. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and that are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbance activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that disturbed and intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback area established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 46-441. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-424—46-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 46-440. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, from both banks of the stream. 
(2)  An additional area setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-441. - Variance procedures. 
Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the planning review committee finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the mayor and council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance includes and outlines required mitigation measures, as approved by city engineers and the planning review committee to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1) above, the mayor and council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the mayor and council. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. The public notification to be followed shall be in accordance with Appendix A, Unified Development Code. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases of practical difficulty or necessary hardships as follows: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this ordinance, actions of any property owner of a given property have created hardship conditions on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map of the subject property bearing the seal of a Georgia certified professional as described in section 1900.1(d), Appendix A Zoning, Code of Ordinances of the City of Kennesaw that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan of the property that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance on the property. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated on the plat showing both the 50-foot and 75-foot buffer zones; 
d.  A complete variance application documenting unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  The variance application must include at least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
g.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed; 
h.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including those along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance will result in conditions on the property that are at least as protective of natural and historic resources and the environment as those existing before issuance of the variance; 
g.  Whether existing conditions pose safety concerns. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-442. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback. 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
(3)  Any other documentation that the planning review committee may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinances are addressed in the plan approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-443. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon, the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-444. - Inspection. 
The director may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the director in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose shall have the authority to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-445—46-459. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 46-460. - Violations. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not be deemed to be in lieu of such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the director determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, a written notice of violation shall be issued to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner of the site or property or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, an appeal must be filed within 24 hours of the issuance of the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-461. - Penalties. 
In the event that remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the director shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, as determined by the director to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the director may take one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The director may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall become effective immediately and remain in effect until rescinded by the director. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The building department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The director and building department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the director and the building department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein as deemed appropriate by the director, the director may impose a penalty in the following amounts at a minimum depending on the severity of the violation but not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each day that the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation: 
a.  Two hundred dollars for the second violation of this chapter in any twelve-month period. 
b.  Six hundred dollars for the third violation of this chapter in any twelve-month period. 
c.  One thousand dollars for the fourth and any subsequent violation of this chapter in any twelve-month period. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the director may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the city municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 to be determined by the court based on the circumstances of the violation including the number of violations within the preceding 12-month period or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-462. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the director may appeal in writing within seven business days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city manager and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his/her designee within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city manager or his/her designee, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Cobb County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-463—46-479. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OUTDOOR WATER USE 

Sec. 46-480. - Restriction on outdoor water[ing] of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, grass, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. (local time); provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops, feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock (the term "livestock" includes, but is not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits), or for use in the production of poultry (the term "poultry" includes but is not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, ducks, geese, and turkeys); producing plants, trees, fowl, or domesticated animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, as amended; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable City of Kennesaw ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2, as amended, and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 calendar days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-481. - Restriction; enforcement; and penalties. 
(a)  Restriction on use of water. No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  Enforcement. The City of Kennesaw Public Works Department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager of the City of Kennesaw may also authorize other departments as (s)he may be necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court of the City of Kennesaw or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-482. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the City of Kennesaw in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-483. - Effective date. 
This article shall have an effective date of December 20, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-484—46-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 46-500. - Declaration of nuisance conditions. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual or loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-501. - Municipal court jurisdiction; penalty for violation. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances as prescribed in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-502. - Notice to correct; complaint. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with the applicable codes in force in the city which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. Whenever the building official determines that any of the conditions specified in section 46-500 exist on property in the city, they may give notice to the owner or occupant of such property to correct the offensive conditions and may provide a time limit for compliance. If the owner or occupant fails to take corrective action within the time limit specified in the notice, the building official may direct a complaint of nuisance to the municipal court as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Whenever a request is filed with the building official by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the building official may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel or real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure. At the time of filing the complaint, a notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of Cobb County. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notice provided by law. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by building official to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and the parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the Kennesaw Municipal Court at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the hearing. 
(1)  In all cases, complaints issued by the building official pursuant to this section shall be served by conspicuously posting the complaint and summons on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing the complaint. 
(2)  In addition to posting service, a copy of complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
a.  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of Cobb County. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the director of code enforcement or by any law enforcement officer of the city; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the municipal court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
b.  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Article 5, Chapter 4, Title 48. 
c.  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(3)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of Cobb County, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(4)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisement appears in Cobb County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(5)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside Cobb County or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (b)(4) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(6)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(7)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building official in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the building official shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (b)(4) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(8)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to the service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(c)  After such hearing, if the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any other parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing and order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  For purposes of this code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that the costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 39A, Title 43, qualified business contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement or the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the building official may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated or closed or demolished. The building official shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the building official has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The building official and mayor and city council are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, alteration, or repair, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to the grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in section 46-503 and subsection (f) herein shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the building official shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. Chapter 4, Title 48, provided however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after the imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(h)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by this chapter unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county governing authority. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(i)  The mayor and city council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timeable rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(j)  Review of the municipal court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(k)  In addition to the procedures and remedies within this code section, the building official may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by the city, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this code section. 
(l)  Nothing in this code section shall prevent the city from defining or declaring nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(m)  For purposes of this code section, "repair" shall mean altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure in compliance with the applicable codes of the city and the cleaning or removal of any debris, trash, and other materials present accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-503. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the municipal court judge, that it must be immediately abated, the municipal court judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance be abated. The chief of police in such case shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-504. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Sec. 46-505. - Offense; penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-506—46-519. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - JUNK VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 46-520. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inoperative or junk condition means and includes, but shall not be limited to, any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Wrecked. 
(2)  Dismantled. 
(3)  Partially dismantled. 
(4)  Inoperative. 
(5)  Abandoned. 
(6)  Discarded. 
(7)  Does not have a valid license plate attached thereto or is otherwise in bad repair. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-521. - Permitted locations. 
(a)  No automobile, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type, which shall be in an inoperative or junk condition, shall be parked or allowed to stand on any residentially zoned property or other zoned property unless it shall be: 
(1)  In an enclosed building; 
(2)  On the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  On property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning or remodeling of vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinance, set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under other provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, Att., 11-3-14) 
Secs. 46-522—46-539. - Reserved. 
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Firefighting and fire inspection services are provided to the city by Cobb County pursuant to a contract. An official copy of such contract is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 34; subdivisions, ch. 80. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Adoption of codes; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, those certain codes known as the Standard Fire Prevention Code, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., being particularly the 2000 edition thereof, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article, or are in conflict with this Code of Ordinances, of which codes at least one copy of each are filed in the office of the city clerk, where they are available for public inspection, and such codes are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this article, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between the National Fire Codes and the Standard Fire Prevention Code or Life Safety Code, as adopted in this section, the provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code or Life Safety Code shall prevail and be controlling. Any fire safety standard set out by ordinance in this chapter shall control over any of the fire codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section in the event of any conflict. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-1; Ord. No. 2002-54, § 1, 12-16-02) 
Sec. 50-2. - Violations and noncompliance; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the codes adopted by this article or who fails to comply with this article, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in section 1-11. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty as provided in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Plan approval required for certain structures. 
The following list of buildings represent a special class of potential fire hazard and must have the building plans reviewed and approved by the county fire department prior to issuance of a city building permit. This review will be for the purpose of assuring the provision of adequate fire safety features in the design, construction and operation of the proposed building or addition. This section applies to proposed new buildings to be constructed in the city, as well as remodeling projects requiring a permit; provided, that the review of remodeling projects shall be limited to that portion of the structure for which the permit is being obtained. Buildings requiring plan approval shall include: 
(1)  All commercial buildings; 
(2)  Buildings or structures more than three stories in height; 
(3)  Buildings which have a capacity of 75 or more persons on floors other than the first or ground floor; 
(4)  Buildings having a capacity of more than 100 persons; 
(5)  Buildings having a gross area of 22,500 square feet on any one floor; 
(6)  Buildings over two stories in height and used for residence by three or more families; 
(7)  Buildings used or intended for use as hotels, apartments, dormitories, convents, monasteries, churches, schools, colleges, universities, academies, hospitals, sanitariums, insane asylums, orphanages, theatres, public assembly halls, lecture halls, auditoriums, dancehalls, recreation halls, armories, racetracks, stadiums and grandstands, amusement park structures, nursing, convalescent and old age homes, motels, motor hotels, motor courts, mercantile establishments; and 
(8)  All other buildings adjacent to any such building specified in this section, whether occupied or unoccupied. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Use of sprinkler systems in multifamily structures. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies only to multifamily residential structures with a maximum of three stories in height. A story is defined as that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
(b)  System requirements. In structures described in subsection (a) of this section, a combination fire protection sprinkler system shall be allowed. A combination fire protection system, for purposes of this section, means that the sprinkler system and the domestic water system utilize the same (common) service water supply pipe to the premises. Such system shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Any calculations of pipe size shall be based on a 24-hour chart and must be approved by the authority having jurisdiction prior to permitting the sprinkler system. 
(2)  No antifreeze solution or any other additive shall be allowed in any combination sprinkler system. 
(3)  When a dead-end system is used, the sprinkler system shall be isolated from the domestic water system by not less than a dual checkvalve backflow preventer that conforms to ASSE standard 1024, and provides the flow requirements of the system without exceeding the allowable pressure drop of the standard or the system, whichever is less. A union and full-port shutoff valve, acceptable to the city, shall be installed on both sides of the backflow preventer to facilitate removal for test and repair. If sprinkler system pressure exceeds 120 psi a pressure reducing valve must be used. 
Exception: In low pressure areas only, where residual pressure or flow gallons per minute do not meet minimum requirements, one head must flow minimum 18 gallons per minute with a 41 psi residual, and two heads must flow minimum 30 gallons per minute with a 30 psi residual, unless otherwise U.L. listed "A" circulating system may be used. The terminal end of the sprinkler supply shall be tied directly into the supply to a regularly used water closet or other approved fixture. Branch lines shall not exceed 25 feet on any circulating system. The backflow preventer requirement is waived on such systems. 
(4)  When the dual check and shutoff valves are installed outside the building, they shall not be buried in earth, but shall be installed in such manner as meter boxes and protected from freezing, at a location acceptable to the city. The top of the protective housing shall extend one-half inch above the finished landscaping. 
(5)  All shutoffs in the sprinkler system shall be secured with lock and key in the open position. A sign on valves should read "Fire department should be notified when valves are turned off and when turned back on." All shutoffs shall be readily accessible at all times. 
(6)  A supply line to the sprinkler system shall be tapped off the water service line at a point that would be downstream (customer side of meter) of any backflow preventer the water purveyor might subsequently require in the service line to contain the domestic system from the public mains. 
(7)  All sprinkler heads used shall be U.L. listed, fast acting domestic sprinkler heads for either pendant or side wall use. 
(8)  The spacing of pendant heads shall be a maximum of eight feet from any wall unless U.L. listed for greater coverage. 
(9)  The spacing of side wall heads shall be in accordance with U.L. listings. 
(10)  Sprinkler heads are not required in bathrooms, closets, foyers, halls, or attics. All other areas require sprinkler heads, including drive-in garages and basements, finished or unfinished. Exception: Meet hazardous area hourly fire rating for drive-in garages. 
(11)  All mechanical rooms (furnace, water heater) shall have 135 to 165 degree commercial head with maximum three-eighths-inch orifice. 
(12)  Dropped escutcheons shall be used if sprinkler head is obstructed by light fixtures or beams. The builder may use additional heads for areas where obstructions block the spray pattern. 
(13)  When ceiling fans are used, sprinkler heads shall be located so fan escutcheon does not interfere with the pattern. Relocation of head shall still conform to spacing requirements. If sprinkler head location exceeds spacing requirements, additional heads shall be used. 
(14)  All spacing of sprinkler heads, in relation to obstruction, such as fireplaces and heaters, shall be to sprinkler head manufacturers' requirements. 
(15)  A minimum three-fourths-inch flow water meter is required if individual water meters are used. 
(16)  All sprinkler piping in unheated areas shall be protected from freezing. 
(17)  An accepted water flow switch with bell is required. Both shall be accessible for checking and repair. 
(18)  Each system shall have an accessible test drain valve. 
(19)  If the sprinkler system is designed for more than one living unit and separate electric service is used for each unit, the alarm switch with bell shall be on the house electric meter. 
(20)  All condominiums shall have the following wording in the recorded declaration of covenants and a copy of the document shall be provided to the county fire marshal and city building inspector: 
a.  Sprinkler system: In the event that any unit should be equipped with a sprinkler system, nothing shall be hung from the sprinkler heads comprising a part of the system, nor shall any such sprinkler heads be painted, covered, or otherwise changed, tampered with or altered. 
b.  Prior to any alteration, amendment, modification or change thereof, he/they will submit such alteration, amendment, modification or change to the Cobb County fire marshal for his approval and agree to comply with all domestic sprinkler requirements of the fire marshal. 
(21)  The installer shall be a licensed fire protection sprinkler company or a licensed plumber. 
(c)  Exceptions to building code. When a structure is equipped with a sprinkler system meeting the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, or meeting the requirements of NFPA section 13d, the following exceptions to the building code may be allowed: 
(1)  Fire department access may be extended from 50 feet from back of parking area to face of building to a maximum of 125 feet to face of building. 
(2)  Fire wall requirements: 
a.  For buildings up to 8,000 square feet per floor, no fire wall is required. 
b.  For buildings up to 10,000 square feet per floor, a two-hour fire wall to the underside of roof deck is required at the approximate center. 
c.  For buildings over 10,000 square feet per floor, a four-hour fire wall extending up to 36 inches above the roof surface and out flush with the roof overhang is required every 8,000 square feet. 
(3)  Standard one-half-inch gypsum wallboard may be substituted for the five-eighths-inch type X gypsum wallboard relating to one-hour tenant separation walls. 
(4)  Standard one-half-inch gypsum wallboard may be substituted for the five-eighths-inch type X gypsum wallboard and five-eighths-inch plywood may be substituted for three-fourths-inch plywood relating to one-hour floor-ceiling assemblies. 
(5)  Fee simple townhouses may have a one-hour rated party walls in lieu of two-hour rated party walls. 
(6)  Attic smoke stops at 3,000 square feet will be allowed in lieu of smoke stops between every unit. 
(7)  Exit travel may be extended to a maximum of 35 feet in lieu of the existing 20 feet. 
(8)  Tenants may travel by other tenants' doors and windows without those doors and windows being rated. 
(9)  Interior finish shall be class C or better. 
(10)  One-hour rating of walls and doors of hazardous areas will not be required. 
(11)  Unless otherwise specified within this Code, all other requirements of applicable codes of the city shall be complied with. 
(12)  Certification of flow must be acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-4) 
Sec. 50-5. - Amendments pertaining to multifamily housing, three or more units, three stories or less. 
The following provisions apply to all multifamily housing comprising three or more units, and of three stories or less: 
(1)  Water mains and fire hydrants on private property. 
a.  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the plans approved by the county fire marshal. 
b.  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed and approved by the county water and sewer system under water pressure and ready for firefighting before any combustible framing begins. 
(2)  Accessibility for firefighting equipment. 
a.  Reasonable accessibility shall be provided to all buildings for firefighting equipment, including ladder trucks on multiple-story projects. A minimum of ten feet level ground on all sides of the building shall be considered reasonable for rescue ground ladders. Reasonable accessibility for ladder trucks shall be determined by the county fire department. 
b.  Access to the job site shall consist of roads or streets being finished to the extent that curbing and base coat must be applied before combustible construction starts, and shall be maintained throughout construction operations. 
(3)  Partitions for multifamily dwellings. 
a.  Every dwelling unit shall be separated from every other dwelling unit and hallways and breezeways by partitions and floor-ceiling assemblies having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour, and be completely firestopped at each floor and ceiling level. The one-hour walls of the hall, corridor, or breezeway may stop at the ceiling if this ceiling is five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock and a smokestop of one layer of one-half-inch regular sheetrock on the hall side of each hall wall and is continued to the roof deck above. 
1.  Exception no. 1: When the one-half hour floor-ceiling assembly has at least one layer of five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock on the bottom side, resilient channels will not be required. 
2.  Exception no. 2: If the ceiling of the uppermost unit is one layer five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock, the one-hour partition shall be allowed to stop at the ceiling. 
b.  Buildings having only a single row of units shall have smokestops between each unit of not less than one-half-inch gypsum with tape covered with one coat of joint compound installed in a manner to prevent the passage of smoke and gases to other units. 
Exception: Buildings having units back to back, where roof trusses are perpendicular to the tenant separation, will have a smokestop to separate every two units. 
c.  Doors to hallways and breezeways shall have a minimum fire rating of 20 minutes in a 20-minute wood frame with a closer (spring hinge closers will be acceptable only after approval of county fire marshal's office) in buildings from one to three stories. Door openings within 15 feet horizontally of a single exit stair shall have a three-fourths-hour door, with closer, in a steel frame. 
d.  For buildings closer than 20 feet to other buildings, each exterior wall facing the building shall have a minimum fire rating of one hour with no openings. Note: Fee simple townhouses require two-hour separation per Standard Building Code. 
(4)  Fire wall requirements for multifamily dwellings. 
a.  No building shall have more than 6,000 square feet per floor between four-hour fire walls. 
b.  Fire wall definition: Fire walls shall be self-supporting from the foundation, and shall extend through and 36 inches from combustible roofs and flush with outside of roof overhang. Fire walls need not extend through fire resistive roof decks. Fire walls shall be four-hour rated. Certification of block will be required. There shall be no unprotected openings in fire walls. 
(5)  Requirements for early fire detection system and exits in multifamily dwellings. 
a.  An approved single station smoke detector, powered by the house electrical service, shall be installed in every living unit. There shall be additional detectors located in each exit corridor every 30 feet. For the purpose of this subsection, an outside breezeway or balcony is not a corridor. 
b.  Exiting in multifamily dwellings shall be as follows: Every living unit shall have access to at least two separate exits, remote from each other as required by the Life Safety Code. 
1.  Exception no. 1: Any living unit which has an exit directly to the street or yard at ground level or by way of an outside stairway or an enclosed stairway with fire resistance rating of one hour or more serving that apartment only and not communicating with any floor below the level of exit discharge or other area not a part of the apartment served may have a single exit. 
2.  Exception no. 2: Buildings of any height with not more than four living units per floor with a smokeproof tower or outside stair in accordance with the requirements of the Life Safety Code as the exit, immediately accessible to all apartments served thereby, may have a single exit. "Immediately accessible" means a travel distance of 20 feet maximum from the door of an apartment to the door of an open air vestibule or balcony leading to a smokeproof tower. 
3.  Exception no. 3: Any building three stories or less in height with no floor below the level of exit discharge or, in case there is such a floor, with the street floor construction of at least one hour fire resistance, may have a single exit, under the following conditions: 
i.  The stairway is completely enclosed with a partition having a fire resistance rating of at least one hour with self-closing three-fourths-hour fire protection rated doors protecting all openings between the stairway enclosure and the building. 
ii.  The stairway does not serve any floor below the level of exit discharge. 
iii.  All corridors serving as access to exits have at least a one-hour fire resistance rating. 
iv.  There is not more than 20 feet of travel distance to reach an exit from the entrance door of any living unit. 
(6)  Protection of hazardous areas. All hazardous areas shall be separated from other parts of the building by construction having a fire resistance of at least one hour, with three-fourths-hour labeled door, with steel frame and closer; spring hinge closers will be acceptable only after approval of the county fire marshal's office. These areas shall include, but are not limited to, boiler or furnace rooms, general storage and maintenance shops, or parking or storage of motorized vehicles. They do not include furnaces or hot water heaters located within individual units which serve only that unit nor do they include storage rooms for individual units. 
(7)  Control of flame spread. The flame spread on carpet, wall covering, paneling, or wood in multifamily dwellings shall be as follows: 
a.  Vertical exits and corridors and breezeways shall have a class B (26—75) flame spread rating. 
b.  The interior of the units shall be class C flame spread rating (76—200). 
(8)  Control of openings through floors. 
a.  Any opening through floors from one unit to another for piping or plumbing must be sealed with lightweight concrete or other permanently attached noncombustible material. 
b.  Any opening through any floor for any purpose shall be sealed in like manner. 
c.  The double wall furnace vent must be sealed tight at each floor level and at the ceiling level of the top unit. The double wall furnace vent is not required to be enclosed in the attic space; proper clearance must be maintained. 
d.  If a combustion air vent pipe is required for combustion air to the furnace, it shall extend up through the floor-ceiling assembly and into the attic 18 inches above the ceiling with proper firestopping at each floor level. 
e.  Each attic space shall have an attic access provided. This door cannot be in a closet, unless it is a walk-in closet. 
f.  If an opening is made in a smokestop wall, it must be self-closing; screen door type spring is acceptable. 
(9)  Chimney chases. 
a.  Exterior chase. A chimney chase located on an exterior wall will require five-eighths-inch fire-rated gypsum wallboard on the inside of the chase on the house side only, through the top of chimney. An exterior chimney chase will require a firestop at each floor level. 
b.  Interior chase. Chases located on an interior wall must be sealed inside and outside with five-eighths-inch fire-rated gypsum wallboard through the top of the chimney. An interior chase will require a firestop at each floor and one at the ceiling level. This firestop shall be a minimum of one-half-inch plywood with proper metal firestop around each flue. All clearances must comply with both the manufacturer's recommendations and the city building inspector's requirements. 
Exception: Alternative method of protection for exterior and interior chases: 
1.  Exterior chases: The exterior walls of the chase may be wood studs covered with five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock on the inside up 48 inches from the floor. The front wall of the chase on the floor level where a fireplace is located shall have metal studs extending from the floor to the ceiling, covered with one layer of five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock. Firestops will be required at floor, ceiling and attic levels. 
2.  Interior chases: Metal studs shall be installed on all four walls of the chase and shall extend through the roof to the top of the chimney. The metal studs must be covered on the outside with one layer of five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock and be completely sealed from the rest of the building with no combustibles inside the chase. 
3.  If there is no fireplace above, firestopping at floor-ceiling levels may be omitted if there are no combustibles inside the chase. If there is a fireplace on the floor above, the bottom of the floor joist must be covered with five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock with metal firestops installed around the flue. 
(10)  Firebox and fireplace openings. 
a.  The firebox is to be installed on a wooden platform with one-half-inch hearth above the subfloor. 
b.  The woodwork shall not be placed within six inches of a fireplace opening. The woodwork above and projecting more than 1½ inches from a fireplace opening shall not be placed less than 12 inches from the top of a fireplace opening. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-5) 
Secs. 50-6—50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 

Sec. 50-26. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article regarding fire protection in mobile home installations, the term "mobile home" shall be defined as in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(a)) 
Sec. 50-27. - Scope. 
This article covers mobile home parks intended to accommodate mobile homes designed or intended for living quarters. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(b)) 
Sec. 50-28. - Location and subdivision of mobile home parking and of mobile home parks. 
(a)  Approval of mobile home park. The location of each mobile home park and of its entrances and exits shall meet the approval of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Access to public streets. Mobile home parks shall have access to a public street or road by directly abutting thereon or by means of a private hard-surfaced road not less than 20 feet wide. 
(c)  Roadways in mobile home parks. Mobile home parks shall have roads suitable for access by local fire department apparatus, which roads will permit the fire department apparatus to approach within 200 feet of any part of any mobile home. 
(d)  Clearance. Mobile homes shall be so located within the park that a spacing of at least 20 feet is maintained between mobile homes, and from permanent structures or buildings. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(c)) 
Sec. 50-29. - Instructions to park personnel and tenants. 
(a)  Firefighting instruction. The mobile home park operator shall be responsible for the instruction of his staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of fire. 
(b)  Fire safety program for tenants. The rules and regulations concerning fire safety of the mobile home park shall be conspicuously posted. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(d)) 
Sec. 50-30. - Electrical equipment and systems. 
(a)  Approval and installation. All electrical systems and equipment shall be of an approved type and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code insofar as applicable. Any part of the outside distribution system not covered by requirements in the National Electrical Code shall be installed according to the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code, published by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards. 
(b)  Park electrical supply. The electrical supply facilities of the mobile home park shall have adequate capacity to serve the maximum connected load, subject to a demand factor determined by the inspection authority having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Mobile home electrical supply. The mobile home park operator shall provide facilities for electrical supply to each mobile home compatible with provisions of NFPA 501B, Standard for Fire Prevention and Fire Protection in Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers, and NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, with readily accessible means of disconnecting the electrical supply which shall be approved service entrance equipment. Electrical connection and disconnection between electrical supply and the mobile home shall be made only under supervision of the mobile home park operator or the mobile home park operator's authorized agent. 
(d)  Grounding. It is recommended that all mobile homes be provided with electrical supply as required by NFPA standard 501B. Mobile homes not equipped with electrical supply, as required by NFPA standard 501B, shall have a ground connection with clamps or other approved facilities for connection between ground and the body of the mobile home, if of metal. Such ground connection shall be a minimum of no. 8 stranded copper conductor or its equivalent, and shall be connected to a metallic water pipe or other approved grounding in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Gas piping systems shall not be used as the grounding electrode as allowed by paragraph (b) of section 250-82 of the National Electrical Code. The grounding conductor shall be continuous from the metal body of the mobile home to the electric service grounding electrode. Such ground connection shall be made before connecting the electrical supply, and shall be kept in place at all times while the electrical supply is connected. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(e)) 
Sec. 50-31. - Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. 
In parks where liquefied petroleum gases are stored and dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with NFPA 58, Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(f)) 
Sec. 50-32. - Piped gas service. 
(a)  Gas supply. The gas supply for equipment arrangement shall be in accordance with section 2.5 of NFPA 54, Standard for Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping, or with the applicable parts of NFPA 58, Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, whichever standard applies. 
(b)  Gas connection. The gas supply shall be connected to the mobile home only by a qualified installing agency, which shall see that the piping is properly purged and is free from leaks and that appliances are suitable for the gas to be supplied. 
(c)  Gas service disconnection. Adequate arrangements shall be made to assure that gas connections are disconnected before the mobile home is moved. Disconnections shall be made by the park operator or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(g)) 
Sec. 50-33. - Storage and handling of flammable liquids. 
In mobile home parks where gasoline, fuel oil, or other flammable liquids are stored and dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with NFPA 30, Code for Flammable and Combustible Liquids. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(h)) 
Sec. 50-34. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Access to mobile homes for firefighting. Approaches to all mobile homes shall be kept clear for firefighting. Conductors of overhead wiring systems shall have a clearance of not less than 18 feet above park roadways. 
(b)  Fire alarms. Provision shall be made for giving an alarm in case of fire. 
(c)  Fire alarm reporting; commercial telephone facilities. Private telephones shall be used to report and give the alarm of fire. A specific telephone number 422-2121 has been assigned for fire alarm emergency service. A telephone decal with the fire department number will be supplied by the county bureau of fire prevention to the park owner/operator. Sufficient quantities of the decals will be available to ensure that each private telephone within the park has the fire department number displayed. The park owner/operator will be responsible for supervising this program. 
(d)  Tenant instruction. It shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park operator to inform all tenants about means for summoning fire apparatus, police departments, and park employees. 
(e)  Public fire protection. Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be provided, to consist of one or more of the following, so arranged as to permit the operation of a minimum of 2½-inch hose streams on any fire in a mobile home or elsewhere in the mobile home park. Water supply and associated facilities shall be sufficient to provide a delivery of at least 75 gallons per minute at each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, at a flowing pressure of at least 30 pounds per square inch at the highest point in the court. The utilization of available firefighting equipment may be assumed in determining compliance with these minimums: 
(1)  A public water supply system with hydrants located within 500 feet of all mobile home parking sites. 
(2)  A private hydrant system complying with NFPA standard 24, Outside Protection, except that where fire department services are available, no supply of hose shall be required, and hydrants so located that one will be within 500 feet of all mobile home parking sites shall be sufficient. 
(3)  An approved private system with hydrants connected to domestic water supply, so arranged as to provide protection equivalent to subsections 705(a) and (b). No standards are available on such a system as it will have to be designed and approved for the individual mobile home park. 
(4)  An approved suction supply or supplies each of not less than 3,000 gallons suitable for fire department pumper drafting, and so located that each mobile home site will be within 500 feet of a supply point. 
(5)  When fire departments are equipped with tank trucks for water supply, in accordance with NFPA standard 19, Specifications for Motor Fire Apparatus, and such trucks are so located that, in case of fire, they can respond as soon as firefighting personnel, they may be accepted in lieu of a fixed water supply by permission of the fire marshal. 
(f)  Private fire protection. Where no fire department is available, arrangement shall be made for private firefighting facilities adequate for the individual mobile home park, as determined by the fire marshal. 
(g)  Portable fire appliances. Approved facilities shall be provided for fighting fires in ordinary combustible materials (class A), readily accessible to all mobile home occupants, in readily visible locations. Such facilities may consist of class A extinguishers (soda-acid, pump tank, antifreeze), in accordance with NFPA standard 10, Installation, Maintenance and Use of Portable Fire Extinguishers, so located that it will not be necessary to travel more than 100 feet from any mobile home to reach the nearest extinguisher, or may consist of garden hose of a type usable in all weather, permanently attached or in cabinets immediately adjacent to the hose connection, so located that any part of any mobile home can be reached with a garden hose stream. 
(h)  Extinguisher spacing. One or more approved extinguishers of a type suitable for flammable liquid or electrical fires (class B and class C), in accordance with NFPA standard 10, Portable Fire Extinguishers (carbon dioxide or dry chemical), shall be so located that it will not be necessary to travel more than 100 feet to reach the nearest extinguisher. 
(i)  Care of fire appliances. Appropriate arrangements shall be made to prevent freezing of firefighting equipment in any area subject to freezing. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(i)) 
Sec. 50-35. - Rubbish, brush and weed removal. 
(a)  Disposal system; incinerators. The mobile home park operator shall provide an adequate system of collection and safe disposal of rubbish. Incinerators, when provided, shall be in accordance with NFPA 82, Standard on Incinerators. 
(b)  Removal of brush and weeds. The mobile home park operator shall maintain the entire area of the mobile home park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6(j)) 
Chapter 54 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; subdivisions, ch. 80; unified development code, app. A. 
State Law reference— The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; fire safety requirements for historic buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24; historic landmark or district designation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26; certificates of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; certification as rehabilitated historic property for purposes of preferential assessment, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.2; landmark historic property for purposes of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES 

Sec. 54-31. - Design standards. 
The design standards for the city are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Kennesaw City Code of Ordinances. These provisions are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk and the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 2007-04, §§ 2, 3, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 54-32—54-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2, adopted Feb. 5, 2007, deleted §§ 54-32—54-37 in their entirety. Former §§ 54-32—54-37 pertained to historic design review guidelines and derived from Ord. No. 95-19, adopted Aug. 21, 1995; and Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 6, 2003. 
Chapter 58 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; environment, ch. 46; offenses, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day and police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; special policemen, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer for purpose of state traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; fleeing or attempting to elude police officers; impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395; assault under color of office, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-3; extortion generally, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-5; tort liability for false arrest, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-1 et seq.; tort liability for false imprisonment, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-20; tort liability for malicious prosecution, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-40; public officer causing arrest or detention for violation of O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1 not civilly liable, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1(d). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 58-26. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The police department is authorized to adopt the police department general orders manual and implement policy changes upon the approval of the chief of police. The chief of police shall apprise the public safety committee whenever such policy changes are initiated. Any policy which the chief of police determines to be a high liability policy and is being significantly modified should be reviewed by the city attorney prior to adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2006-18, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; courts, ch. 38; environment, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Discharging air rifles or BB guns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any BB gun or air rifle in the city, except on his own property or the property of another with the consent of the owner, or property of his parent or guardian, if a minor, and then only in such a manner that the projectiles will not be propelled onto adjacent or other property, and that harm will not be done to anyone or to anyone's property. 
(b)  Parents and guardians will be held responsible for acts of their children 17 years of age and under. 
(c)  The mayor or chief of police shall have the authority to make special exceptions to this section, as the mayor or chief might deem necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 11-1-5) 
Sec. 62-2. - Loitering or congregating so as to obstruct pedestrian travel. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any persons, and each of them, to gather, loiter, congregate or assemble with others on any of the public streets or sidewalks or other public places within the corporate limits of the city in such a manner or to such an extent as to prevent or interfere with the free and unobstructed passage or travel of pedestrians thereon or thereover, or with the free and unobstructed access of pedestrians to or from private property or buildings or other structures abutting on such streets, sidewalks or other public places. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after having been directed by an officer or member of the police force of the city to move away therefrom, to remain or loiter or idle away his time on the sidewalks or public streets of the city in violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 11-1-6) 
Sec. 62-3. - Refusal to leave premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is requested to leave the premises by the owner or occupant of premises located within the city to refuse to leave such premises. 
(Code 1986, § 11-1-7) 
Sec. 62-4. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Evening curfew. It shall be unlawful for any person 17 years of age or younger to idle, loiter or congregate on or in the public streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. Provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other adult person having legal care and custody of the minor or where the minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business, such as, but not limited to, returning home from work or from school sponsored activities, and directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor. 
(b)  Daytime curfew. It shall be unlawful for any person 17 years of age or younger to idle, loiter, or congregate on or in the public streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day. Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor on an emergency errand or legitimate business, such as, but not limited to traveling directly from home to school or returning directly from school to home, is enrolled in a legitimate home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. 20-2-690 and has written consent from a parent or legal guardian to be outside the home, has graduated from high school, has written proof from school authorities that he/she is excused from school at that particular time or is participating in an approved school activity which requires the minor to be off school property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor 17 years of age or younger to permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate this section. 
(Code 1986, § 11-1-9; Ord. No. 2009-04, Exh. A, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 62-5. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 11-1-3 of the 1986 Code prohibiting the use of public address systems and megaphones is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1999-17, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 62-6. - Cleanliness of premises. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any person having control or management, of property, whether vacant or not, located within the city to permit and allow the growth of grass, rank vegetation, kudzu, underbrush and/or weeds on said property to a height greater than 12 inches above the ground level or permit the accumulation of any brush, garbage, garden trash, rubbish, or noxious material of any kind which tends to be a breeding place for mosquitoes, or tends to be a breeding place or haven for snakes or vermin of any kind or character, or which tends to create a fire hazard and endanger the lives and property of the citizens of the city, or which tends to create a nuisance or other unsightly or unsanitary condition. 
(a)  The following conditions are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and are therefore public nuisances and are prohibited: 
(1)  Any portion of a lot or parcel of land upon which are located brush, weeds, grass or underbrush in excess of 12 inches in height; 
(2)  Any portion of a developed residential zoning lot which is planted in a lawn and the grass is in excess of 12 inches in height; and 
(3)  Any portion of a lot or parcel of land upon which is located an accumulation of garbage, garden trash, debris or rubbish, except as may otherwise be legally permitted by state, county or city law. 
(4)  This shall not apply to any natural or undisturbed buffer area or area involving steep slopes (in excess of 25 percent grade). 
(b)  If it is determined that any of the conditions specified in subsection (a) exist on any property within the city, the city code enforcement officer shall issue a summons to the owner, the tenant, the owner's agent, and/or the property manager to appear before the municipal court. 
(c)  It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain a nuisance and a citation may be issued by the city. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the municipal court judge from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se under the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 62-7. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to promote violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence or of by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(b)  Any person who commits the offense of disorderly conduct shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  A person who recklessly or knowingly commits any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Section 11-1-8 of the 1986 Code on the subject of unlawful acts relating to disorderly conduct is hereby repealed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. 16-11-39 and 16-11-34. 
(Ord. No. 1999-17, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 62-8. - Residence of or loitering by registered sex offender prohibited 1,000 feet from child care facility, church, school, or place where minors congregate; employment of sexually dangerous predator; civil liability or criminal prosecution of entity other than individual required to register. 
(a)  No individual required to register pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 shall reside or loiter within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate. Such distance shall be determined by measuring from the outer boundary of the property on which the individual resides to the outer boundary of the property of the child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate at their closest points. 
(b)  (1)  No individual who is required to register under O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 shall be employed by any child care facility, school, or church or by any business or entity that is located within 1,000 feet of a child care facility, a school, or a church. 
(2)  No individual who is a sexually dangerous predator shall be employed by any business or entity that is located within 1,000 feet of an area where minors congregate. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24 or subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36, it shall be unlawful for any individual required to register pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 to loiter, as prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36, at any child care facility, school, or area where minors congregate. 
(d)  A person residing within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate, does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence prior to the effective date of this section. 
(2)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person is a minor. 
(4)  The child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate within 1,000 feet of the person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the residence. 
(5)  The person has established a permanent or temporary residence for which a lease or other rental contract was executed prior to the enactment of this section only for the duration of the term of that lease or rental contract. 
(e)  Notice to move. 
(1)  Subject to the limitations contained within subsection (d) of this section, upon determining that a sex offender resides in a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate, the Kennesaw City Police or other designated enforcement entity shall provide written notice of the violation to the sex offender. 
(2)  Any sex offender who resides in a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate shall, within 30 days of receipt of written notice of the sex offender's non-compliance with this section, move from said location to a new location, provided that said new location may not be within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate within the city. 
(3)  Each day beyond the 30 days the sex offender continues to reside within 1,000 feet of a child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate shall constitute a separate violation of the terms of this section, subject to the limitations contained within subsection (d) of this section. Each day that a sex offender shall move from one location in the City of Kennesaw to another that is within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, church, school, or area where minors congregate shall also constitute a separate violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(f)  Maximum penalties for violation of this Code section shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or six months imprisonment. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall create, either directly or indirectly, any civil cause of action against or result in criminal prosecution of any person, firm, corporation, partnership, trust, or association other than an individual required to be registered under O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. 
(h)  This section shall remain in force and effect until such time as the Georgia General Assembly shall pass a valid law which preempts or otherwise supersedes this section. 
(i)  If any section, subsection or provision of this section is held invalid, the remainder shall not be affected by such invalidity. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, 2-4-08) 
Sec. 62-9. - Community redevelopment tax incentive program. 
(a)  Purpose. The existence of real property that is maintained in a blighted condition increases the costs to city budgets by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this mayor and council in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations in Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Blighted property," "blighted," or "blight" means any urbanized or developed property that: 
a.  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
1.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structures, or 
2.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation, or 
3.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe that the Governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm, or 
4.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq. or environmental contamination to the extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study, or 
5.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
6.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
b.  Is conducive to ill heath, transmission of disease, infant mortality or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
c.  Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
(2)  "Building official." Person authorized to enforce provisions of the technical construction codes. 
(3)  "Community redevelopment" means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit of human habitation. 
(4)  "Governing authority" means the mayor and council of the City of Kennesaw, a Georgia Municipal Corporation. 
(5)  "Millage" or "millage rate" means the levy, in mills, that is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(6)  "Person." Any natural person, corporation, or unincorporated association. 
(7)  "Public officer" means the city manager or such officer or employee of the City as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this section. 
(8)  "Structure." Anything constructed or erected which has, or the use of which requires, permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, the following: buildings, gazebos, signs, billboards, tennis courts, radio and television antennae and satellite dishes (including supporting towers), swimming pools, light fixtures, walls, fences and steps. 
(c)  Levy of increase ad valorem tax on blighted real property. There is hereby levied on all real property within the city that has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven times millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or other provided by general law (all properties that meet this definition will be subject to this section). 
Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the next tax bill cycle which begins October 1 of every year following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and the finance director and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit buildings and structures. 
(d)  Official identification of property maintained in blighted condition. 
(1)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
a.  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed, 
1.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated by ordinance, or 
2.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels that may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this section for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
b.  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspections shall be made and will supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
c.  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this section, and is subject to increase taxation. 
d.  Said inspection report and supporting documents will be reviewed by the City of Kennesaw Board of Construction Appeals for confirmation and approval of all findings and recommendations by the building official and concurrence that the property identified meets the definition of blighted area as defined under this section. At this point, the Mayor and Council shall be provided written notice that such property has been identified as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
e.  The Public Officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Cobb County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon and parties in interest; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(2)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes and parties in interest shall notify such person and parties in interest of the public officer's determination that the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person and parties in interest of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons and parties in interest notified that the real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request an appeals hearing before the city's board of construction appeals. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for appeal hearing, the public officer shall notify the board of construction appeals and the building official who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(3)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the public officer shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days notice to the person(s) and/or parties in interest requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building official who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. A notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisement appears in Cobb County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(4)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this section. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) or parties in interest requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the board of construction appeals shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the board of construction appeals shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall be served upon the City of Kennesaw Tax Official and the Tax Commissioner of Cobb County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(5)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the board of construction appeals affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Cobb County for a writ of certiorari, within 30 days of issuance of the board of construction appeal's written determination. 
(e)  Remediation or redevelopment to remove designation of blighted condition. 
(1)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property that has been officially designated pursuant to this section as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
a.  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's building official and zoning administrator that addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; and 
b.  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to article 3, section 18-28, unfit buildings and structures, of chapter 18 of the Code of Kennesaw, Georgia, and 
c.  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this section) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(2)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector, who by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this deteation shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the Tax Commissioner of Cobb County. 
(3)  All corrective action plans shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the building official and zoning administrator, and contain the following: 
a.  The corrective action plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for that area. 
b.  The corrective action plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property. 
c.  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements. 
d.  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources that will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; and 
e.  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work. 
(f)  Decreased rate of taxation to be applied after successful remedial action or redevelopment of blighted property. Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.25 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $40,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than two successive years. 
(1)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(g)  Duty of public officer to provide notice to county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the City of Kennesaw Tax Official and Cobb County Tax Commissioner in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street, address and tax map, land lot and tax parcel number, as assigned by the Cobb County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increase or reduced ad valorem taxation under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, 4-7-14) 
Secs. 62-10—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 62-61. - False alarm definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designed and arranged to detect a fire or to signal an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or to signal an attempted robbery at a premises, and with respect to such signal public safety officers are expected to respond. 
False alarm means the activation of a fire, burglary, robbery or other similar alarm by an event other than a fire, burglary, or robbery on the premises. 
Person means the owner or lawful occupant of a residence, or any owner, partner, or manager of a business. 
Public safety officer means a law enforcement officer or a firefighter. 
Response means the dispatch of a public safety officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated indicating that a fire, burglary or robbery is in progress on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1998-01, 2-2-98) 
Sec. 62-62. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate an alarm system, otherwise cause an alarm system to be activated, or operated or maintain an alarm system which is activated at a time when no fire, burglary or robbery is in progress at a premises but public safety officers are nevertheless dispatched to such premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate, otherwise cause to be activated or operate or maintain any alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of an alarm system to any public safety agency. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey a cease and desist order issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Facilities owned or operated by the city on the Cobb County Board of Education are exempt from the prohibitions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1998-01, 2-2-98) 
Sec. 62-63. - Cease and desist orders. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city shall issue a cease and desist order to any person violating subsection 62-62(b). Such order shall direct that the alarm system in question be permanently disconnected immediately upon receipt of such order. 
(b)  The chief of police of the city shall issue a cease and desist order to any person who has violated subsection 62-62(a) six times within any calendar year. Such order shall direct that the alarm system in question be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until it has been inspected and serviced by a properly trained and licensed technician. 
(1)  Such order shall be rescinded upon receipt by the city's chief of police of written proof that such inspection and service has been performed and any malfunction or maladjustment corrected. 
(Ord. No. 1998-01, 2-2-98) 
Sec. 62-64. - Penalties for false alarms. 
(a)  For the first three violations of subsection 62-62(a) at any premises in a calendar year, there shall be no penalty. Any subsequent violation of subsection 62-62(a) at any premises in a calendar year, refer to the forfeiture of collateral schedule "audible alarm," and as amended. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1998-01, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 2016-20, 8-15-16) 
Secs. 62-65—62-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OBSCENITY AND RELATED OFFENSES 

Sec. 62-86. - Obscenity; distribution; definition. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of distributing obscene material when the following occurs: He or she, in connection with a commercial transaction or for pecuniary gain, sells, lends, rents, leases, gives, advertises, publishes, exhibits, or otherwise disseminates to any person any obscene material of any description, knowing the obscene nature thereof, or offers to do so, or possesses such material with the intent to do so, provided that the word "knowing," as used in this section, shall be deemed to be either actual or constructive knowledge of the obscene contents of the subject matter. A person has constructive knowledge of the obscene contents if he or she has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice as to the suspect nature of the material. The character and reputation of the individual charged with offense under this law and the character and reputation of the business establishment involved may be placed in evidence by the defendant on the question of intent to violate this law. Undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and the like shall be deemed obscene notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make the obscenity patent or to disseminate it. 
(b)  Material is obscene if: 
(1)  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; 
(2)  The material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; and 
(3)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined in subsections a. through e. of this subsection: 
a.  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
b.  Acts of masturbation; 
c.  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
d.  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
e.  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
(c)  Any device designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs is obscene material under this Code section. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to include a device primarily intended to prevent pregnancy or the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense under this Code section that selling, lending, renting, leasing, giving, advertising, publishing, exhibiting, or otherwise disseminating the material was done for a bonafide medical, scientific, educational, legislative, judicial or law enforcement purpose(s). 
(e)  A person who commits the offense of distributing obscene material shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Chapter 66 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; environment, ch. 46; offenses, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 80. 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, adopted Aug. 4, 2003, deleted Art. I in its entirety and reenacted a new Art. I, §§ 66-1—66-17 to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 66-1. - Parks and recreation director, powers and duties. 
The parks and recreation director or department personnel thereunder, shall: 
(1)  Establish, conduct and maintain a recreation system for the city in such a way as to employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner; 
(2)  Provide for, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other facilities owned or controlled by the city; 
(3)  Provide and conduct activities on properties under the control of the city, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners; 
(4)  Establish goals, procedures and programs to meet the city's recreational needs. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-2. - Parks—Regulations governing conduct. 
(a)  These rules and regulations are developed to set standards of conduct in the public parks. These rules are designed to ensure the safety and enjoyment of park participants. 
(b)  Enforcement. Any person engaging in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of a public park by citizens or who shall violate any ordinance of the city, park rules or regulations, or law of the state, shall leave the public park upon notification by any authorized park employee or any law enforcement officer of the city, county, or state. The city may suspend the offender's privileges of remaining in the public park and of utilizing recreational facilities and equipment in any and all public parks either for a specified period of time or may banish the offender permanently from all public parks. The offender may appeal to the director of the parks and recreation the suspension of his or her privileges to use the public park or recreational facilities and equipment or banishment. If the offender is dissatisfied with the decision of the director of the parks and recreation department, he or she may appeal the decision to the mayor and city council. Refusal to leave such park when ordered or return to the park within the specified period during which park privileges have been suspended shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. In addition to any punishment assessed under this section, the offender may be charged with violation of any applicable state, federal, or local law, statute, or ordinance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following in a public park or on public property: 
(1)  Create or maintain a nuisance as defined by state law or by the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, or pose a danger or threat to the public. 
(2)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove, any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving, paving material, water line or other public utility or parts or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post, or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility or park property or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(3)  Sell, transport, possess or consume alcoholic beverages, except at an event approved pursuant to section 6-71 or section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(4)  Have in his or her possession any item considered to be a weapon under state law, unless possessor has a valid state issued weapons permit; however, no person shall discharge any firearm on or over any public property or public park, unless: in self-defense; or, under a license or permit issued by a governmental entity; or, as part of a reenactment or recreation of an historical event if such reenactment or recreation has been approved, authorized, or sponsored by the city, the state, or the United States of America or a political subdivision of any of them. 
(5)  Smoking and tobacco products prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to smoke any substance in a city park or city cemetery. It shall further be unlawful for any person to use any form of tobacco product in a city park or city cemetery. As used in this section, the term "tobacco product" means any product made or derived from tobacco that is intended for human use, including any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, and any product that delivers nicotine to the user. This includes, but is not limited to cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, e-cigarettes, cigars, roll-your-own tobacco, smokeless tobacco, or any other tobacco product as defined in section 22-441, of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  This section 66-2 shall not preclude the possession and use of a musket, bayonet, or any other item otherwise considered a weapon if such item is used at or in conjunction with: 
(1)  An historical display approved, authorized, or sponsored by the city, the state, the United States of America, or any political subdivision of any of them; or, 
(2)  A reenactment or recreation of an historical event if such reenactment or recreation has been approved, authorized, or sponsored by the city, the state, the United States of America or any political subdivision of any of them; or, 
(3)  A parade approved, authorized, or sponsored by the city, the state, the United States of America, or any political subdivision of any of them. 
(e)  This section 66-2 shall also not preclude the discharge of a cannon or a firearm of any type that is owned by the city, the state, the United States of America, or any political subdivision of any of them, or that is owned by a current member of a branch of the United States military or the national guard, or that is owned by an historical group and shall not preclude the discharge of any firearm (regardless of the ownership) by any current member of any branch of the United States military or national guard, but only if such cannon or firearm is discharged: 
(1)  As part of an historical display approved, authorized, or sponsored by the city, the state, the United States of America, or a political subdivision of any of them; or, 
(2)  As part of a reenactment or recreation of an historical event and such reenactment or recreation is approved, authorized, or sponsored by, a parade sponsored by the city, state, the United States of America or any political subdivision of any of them, 
(3)  As part of a formal military service approved, authorized, or sponsored by any branch of the military of the United States of America or by the national guard; or, 
(4)  At an event approved, authorized, or sponsored by the city, the state, the United States of America or any political subdivision of any of them and the discharge was previously sanctioned by the governmental entity that approved, authorized or sponsored the event. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 2005-37, 11-21-05; Ord. No. 2007-27, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-18-14; Ord. No. 2014-15, 9-15-14) 
Sec. 66-3. - Hours of operation. 
Parks and park facilities shall open at 7:00 a.m. and shall close at sunset, except that parks containing lighting for night use shall close at 10:00 pm for use by the general public. Only those areas of parks that are illuminated and in use at night shall remain open. Any deviation from these standard hours of operation must be pre-approved by the parks and recreation staff. In any event, all parks shall be closed and no person shall be authorized to be on the premises or property of any city park between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except authorized city employees or persons engaged in activities authorized by the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-4. - Closing of parks. 
All parks shall be opened daily to the public but may be declared closed to the public by the mayor and council at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. In the event of an emergency or conditions not suitable for the public, the parks and recreation director with the approval of the city manager may temporarily close parks. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-5. - Use of areas for golf practice, putting greens, driving ranges. 
No person shall use any park or other area owned and operated by the city for recreation purposes as a field for golf practice, putting green or driving range, except those areas specifically so designated. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-6. - Recreational vehicle operation restricted. 
No person shall operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or nature in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes; provided, that this section shall not apply to vehicles used for maintenance purposes or golf carts being operated on prescribed paths or vehicles using marked roadways, marked driveways, and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-7. - Driving vehicles on roadways; speed of vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon or across any part of any public park of the city except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. This section shall not apply to park employees whose duties require them to drive park maintenance equipment over such park areas. The parks and recreation director shall coordinate with the proper city departments or authorities to assure proper, appropriate and adequate signage is in place to aid the implementation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any road in any city park at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the parks and recreation director to cause signs specifying such limits to be placed at the entrance of each such park and at appropriate places within such parks so as to afford notice to the public of such limit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-8. - Vehicle parking restricted. 
The parking of vehicles shall be permitted in approved parking areas as long as such parking is in accordance with traffic laws, rules and regulations of the parks department. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon any of the drives, roadways, avenues, or parking lots or at any other place within in any city park when such person is not a user of the park or any of its related facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-9. - Animals prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, possess or be in charge of a restrained or unrestrained animal, with the exception of seeing eyes dogs for disabled persons, in prohibited designated areas which are posted in any city park, without first obtaining approval of the parks and recreation director. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, possess or be in charge of an unrestrained animal on walking trails of any city park property or any green space walking trails. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 2005-36, § 1, 11-21-05) 
Cross reference— Chapter 14, Art. II. Dogs, Sec. 14-4, Noisy or offensive animal; Sec. 14-28, Duty to Control. 
Sec. 66-10. - Bicycles, skateboards, scooters, in-line skates—Restriction. 
No person shall ride a bicycle or other non-motorized vehicle, including but not limited to skateboards, scooters or in-line skates in or on any athletic field, sidewalk or spectator area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. To ensure public safety, authorized employees or public safety personnel shall prohibit non- motorized vehicles in other areas of the park when necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-11. - Closing of athletic fields and facilities. 
The director or his/her designee may temporarily close to the public athletic fields and facilities. Closing of such athletic fields and facilities shall be posted and it shall be unlawful for a person to enter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-12. - Group use of parks. 
Any association, group or organization that desires to reserve parks and recreation facilities shall fill out a park facility reservation form and may be required to pay a fee and security deposit. In addition an indemnity bond or general liability insurance may be required to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character. The scheduling of park facilities will be at the sole discretion of the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-13. - Use of picnic areas. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Picnic or lunch in places other than those designated for that purpose. Park employees shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(2)  Leave a picnic area before all fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, paper, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Sec. 66-14. - Merchandising; advertising and signs. 
No person in a public park shall: 
(1)  Offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. 
(2)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a public park or public property. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section 66-14 or section 66-16 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, any person acting under written authority of the mayor and city council or under written authority of the parks and recreation director of the city or his or her designee may take any action which is otherwise prohibited by this section 66-14 or by section 66-16(c)(2) of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(4)  Exceptions to subsections (1) and (2) of this section are included in subsection (3) of this section and in section 66-16 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 66-15. - Youth sports associations. 
Youth sports associations shall: 
(1)  Contract with the city for use of park facilities. 
(2)  Adhere to all rules, regulations and ordinances related to their use of park facilities. 
(3)  Be incorporated, tax-exempt, non-profit associations. 
(4)  Collect and pay nonresident user fees and other association fees due to the city. 
(5)  Coordinate and get approvals from the parks and recreation department when scheduling park facilities for games or practices. 
(6)  Provide and conduct youth sports programs that are in the best interest of the city residents and community as determined by the parks and recreation department. 
(7)  Conduct registration for city residents only at least one day before registration is open to non-residents. 
(8)  Be allowed to erect sponsor signs on ball field fences and sponsor banners as determined by the parks and recreation department. 
(9)  Require all coaches to fill out background check forms and forward to appropriate city officials to be processed. 
(10)  Be allowed to conduct fundraising activity and events upon approval of the parks and recreation director. 
(11)  Gain approval from the parks and recreation director before making any minor improvements, alterations or work of any nature on any ball field, ball field fences or park facility. Major capital improvements, proposed to be funded or made by the sports associations, to facilities shall be approved by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 2007-06, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 66-16. - Parks and recreation facilities, regulations governing use. 
(a)  Group categories. Listed below is the order of priority and category of groups that will be allowed to schedule the use of city recreational facilities or public property on an ongoing basis: 
(1)  Any city organized or sponsored event and/or recreational activity; 
(2)  Any organization that the city has an agreement with for use of facilities or public property; 
(3)  Any organization when it is attempting to organize or has organized a political forum; 
(4)  Civic groups: Civic groups are defined as non-profit organizations/clubs that hold tax-exempt status from the Internal Revenue Service such as 501(c)(3) and which serve the citizens of Kennesaw. 
(5)  Other groups not included in categories (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(b)  Groups which fall within the categories covered by subsections (a)(1), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5) of this section may use facilities upon the payment of fee set forth on the fee schedule approved by the mayor and city council. Groups falling within subsection (a)(2) of this section shall pay a usage fee as set in the agreement each such group has with the city. 
(c)  The scheduling of public parks and recreational facilities will be at the discretion of the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section and that no group, organization, or person shall be denied scheduling of a recreational facility or public park based on the content of what will be discussed at the meeting or the stated positions of the group, organization, or entity. However, no organization, entity, or person shall be allowed to schedule a recreational facility or public property if the use violates any valid law, statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city, the state, the United States of America, or any political subdivision of any of them; or, the use is a commercial purpose and fails to comply with the other requirements of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. Listed below are the general rules and policies applicable to usage of public parks and recreational facilities and equipment. Failure to abide by these rules listed could result in future usage of facilities being suspended. 
(1)  Scheduling of facilities will be coordinated and approved by the parks and recreation department. 
(2)  Except as provided in section 66-14(3) of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, facilities cannot be used for commercial purposes; however, this shall neither preclude any business entity or person from providing funds as a sponsor of a city-sponsored event and receiving advertising space in conjunction with the payment of the sponsorship fee nor preclude the use of the facilities or public property for a city-sponsored event which is approved by the mayor and city council or by the events committee of the city at which vendors are engaging in commercial activities or what would otherwise be considered to be commercial purposes. 
(3)  Facilities used for fundraising purposes must be approved by the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee. 
(4)  Full payment and deposit is due at the time the reservations are made. If facilities are not used during the reserved time for any reason and no prior cancellation was given, no refunds will be made, except as provided on the fee schedule approved by the mayor and city council. 
(5)  A member of the organization must sign any and all documentation required by the director of the parks and recreation department of the city to use or rent a recreational facility or public property including, but not limited to, an affidavit of responsibility and complete a facility reservation form provided by the parks and recreation department. 
(6)  No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed unless approved pursuant to section 6-71 or section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(7)  Animals are not permitted in facilities, with the exception of dog parks, without prior approval of the director of the parks and recreation department; however, seeing eye, hearing, service, or guide dogs shall be permitted without such prior approval. 
(8)  Areas shall be left clean. If it becomes necessary for city employees to do an extensive amount of cleaning, there will be a corresponding deduction as determined by the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee in the cleaning and security deposit. 
(9)  The user must report any damages to the police or parks employee on duty at once. All groups will be held liable for any damages to any city facilities or equipment used by members of their organization. Facility damages could lead to losing privileges to use such facilities. 
(10)  Scheduled use of facilities are subject to change. Prior notice will be given by the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee if at all possible. 
(11)  The city is not responsible for the loss of or damage to any valuables or property used at or left on the premises of any facility or public park which was used by any person or organization. 
(12)  Smoking is prohibited inside recreation facilities. 
(13)  No decorations shall be displayed, installed or permitted which may damage or deface the building. Existing decorations may not be removed. The user of the facility is responsible for removing all of his or her own decorations and trash at the end of the reservation. 
(14)  No facilities can be reserved more than one year in advance. No facility can be reserved again by the same category (a)(4) group until the previous reservation day has passed. 
(15)  When facilities are not in use for scheduled activities, then use of those facilities is available on a first come first served basis. The fees for such use are set forth in the fee schedule approved by the mayor and city council. 
(16)  Facility users will be required to have not less than one adult chaperon for each ten minors present during use of facilities. 
(17)  No facility may be used past 10:00 p.m. without prior written permission from the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee. 
(18)  There will be a cancellation fee as set forth on the fee schedule approved by the mayor and city council. 
(d)  The mayor and city council may by resolution establish fees for the use of any public property and shall provide by appropriate regulations for the use of any public property. Pursuant to any such resolution, the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee shall publish, annually, a list of the recreational facilities and equipment or public property that may be used and the price of using each such recreational facility and equipment or piece of public property. Violation of any regulation established by the mayor and city council and posted on the property or acknowledged by the user shall be deemed a violation of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, and shall subject the offender to the penalty provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia. 
(e)  There is hereby created a cleaning/security deposit for rental of all city facilities. The cleaning/security deposit shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per facility. It is refundable if and only when the facility is left in a clean state, and in the condition in which it was found (chairs put away, etc.). The decision of whether the deposit shall be refunded is solely up to the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee and will not be refunded until the rented facility has been inspected by the director of the parks and recreation department or his or her designee. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia, neither the Smith-Gilbert Gardens nor The Southern Museum of Civil War & Locomotive History shall be considered a recreational facility as that term is used in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 66-17. - Nonresident user fees. 
(a)  Those persons who are not residents of the city, but who elect to participate in sports association programs and other city programs provided by the city's parks and recreation department, shall pay a user fee, as determined by the mayor and council, to limit the amount of expense borne by the city for providing these programs and services to persons who do not pay city taxes. All fees are per person, per registration. 
(1)  Sports participants. Persons who live outside of the city shall pay a non- resident user fee to participate in sports association programs in which he/she is utilizing city owned, controlled or leased property(ies) or services. 
(2)  Recreation classes. Persons who wish to take classes or participate in similar non sporting events organized by the city's parks and recreation department and who live outside of the city shall pay a user fee as set out in the schedule of fees and charges for any such class registration fee. For the purpose of this section, registration fees shall be construed to include any class fee, instruction fee, and/or materials fee. 
Those persons who are not residents of the city but who register for recreation classes and are age 65 years or older are exempt from paying any user fees. These senior citizens are, however, required to pay all standard registration fees. 
(b)  Non resident user fees will not be assessed for following programs: 
(1)  Public service events or classes which are offered as a service to the citizenry, and that do not have any fee or other costs associated with them. 
(2)  Special event workshops, which are classes, offered on a one-day or two-day special program. 
(3)  Definitions concerning which category a specific class falls into will be at the sole discretion of the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, Exh. A, 8-4-03) 
Secs. 66-18—66-49. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-50. - Penalty and enforcement provisions. 
A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2005-36, § 2, 11-21-05) 
Cross reference— Sec. 1-11, general penalty. 
State Law reference— Violations of dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. 4-8-28. 
Chapter 70 - PERSONNEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations pertaining to city employees on such subjects as drug testing, employment policy, employee benefits, holidays and leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals are contained in the City of Kennesaw Employee Personnel Manual, which is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of such manual is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
In addition, the city adopted and updated its retirement plan for city employees on January 20, 1992. An official copy of such retirement plan is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq. 

Sec. 70-1. - Compliance with personnel manual required; penalty. 
(a)  All employees of the city who are regulated by the City of Kennesaw Employee Personnel Manual shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(b)  Any employee violating any of the provisions of the city's employee personnel manual shall be subject to suspension and/or dismissal in addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of such employee personnel manual. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-11; Ord. No. 2014-12, 9-2-14) 
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 80; utilities, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Atc, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program; establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION, DISPOSAL AND LITTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-12, adopted June 21, 2010, amended the former Art. II, §§ 74-26—74-38, 74-106—74-109, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Oct. 3, 1991; Ord. of Jan. 20, 1992, §§ 5-2002—5-2016; Ord. No. 95-5, § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 1995; Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1, adopted June 7, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-28, §§ 2—4, adopted Sept. 6, 2005; Ord. No. 2006-31, adopted Nov. 20, 2006. Formerly, Ord. No. 2005-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2005, combined Arts. II and III into one article to be titled Art. II, Collection, Disposal and Litter. The substantive material from former Art. III is to be retained as it reads herein, excluding § 74-110 which is further amended by this same ordinance. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 74-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical waste means all waste defined as biomedical waste by the Solid Waste Management Act, or by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Division under the authority of that Act. It also includes wastes such as human tissues, organs, and body parts and fluids that are removed during surgery or autopsy, or other medical procedures and specimens of body fluids and their containers. 
Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
Brush means grass cuttings, weeds, hedge trimmings, tree trimmings and tree limbs not to exceed four feet in length and two inches in diameter. 
Bulk waste means items commonly handled in bulk form, including but not limited to household furniture; mattresses; wooden pallets; lumber; trees or tree limbs in excess of four feet in length and greater than three inches in diameter; tree stumps; large auto parts; any domestic and/or commercial large appliance that contains CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas; capacitors containing PCBs, mercury switches, or other hazardous components: Examples include, but are not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ranges (electric or gas) humidifiers, dehumidifiers, hot water heaters, furnaces, and other similar large appliances and other oversized wastes whose large size precludes or complicates handling by normal solid waste collection methods. 
City means City of Kennesaw. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, business, retail, industrial, institutional, public or semi-public establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever. 
Commingled means a combining of non-putrescible source-separated recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to asbestos, asbestos containing waste, wood, brick, metal, concrete wall board, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other non-putrescible wastes. 
Container board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products. 
County means Cobb County. 
Director means the public works director or his/her authorized agent. 
Electronic waste means a computer central processing unit and associated hardware including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax machines, cathode ray tubes, cathode ray tube devices, flat panel displays or similar video display devices with a screen that is greater than four inches measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards including, but not limited to, televisions and cell phones. Also includes VCR's, radios and landline telephones. 
Foam polystyrene packaging means packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria: is designed for serving food or beverages; consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container; and/or consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
Food service establishment means and includes establishments for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. This term includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places manufacturing, wholesaling or retailing sandwiches or salads, soda fountains, institutions, both public and private, food carts, itinerant restaurants, industrial cafeterias, school cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever name called. 
Garbage means household waste generated from normal everyday living including but not limited to food waste, kitchen scraps, metal cans, glass, glass containers, cookware, wax cartons, paper, paper and cardboard boxes, cellophane wrapper, excelsior, and any other small combustible items. This definition shall include both putrescible and non-putrescible matter, organic and inorganic matter and combustible and noncombustible matter. 
Glass, food and beverage containers means clear, green and brown food and beverage bottles and jars, excluding however, blue and flat glass commonly known as "window glass". 
Green waste includes, but is not limited to, all accumulations of grass, shrubbery, weeds or cuttings from any of the foregoing, pine needles and other yard waste incidental to the growth, maintenance or care of lawns, shrubbery, vines gardens and discarded Christmas trees. The term "green waste" shall not be taken to include trees or tree limbs in excess of 48 inches in length and greater than three inches in diameter, tree stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls or other wastes defined in this chapter. 
Hazardous waste see special waste. 
HDPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2. 
LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4. 
Litter means intentionally or unintentionally any discarded or abandoned garbage, junk, waste material, white goods, foam polystyrene packaging, recyclable materials, or dead animals that are not subject to the provisions of OCGA § 4-5-4, as amended. 
Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
Metal food and beverage containers means aluminum, bi-metal and steel food and beverage containers 2½ gallons or less in size, including empty aerosol cans. 
Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
Office paper means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in non-residential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term does not include industrial process waste. 
Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI code #7. 
Paper products means newspaper with inserts, magazines, office paper, junk mail including shredded paper, telephone and paperback books, corrugated cardboard, brown paper grocery bags. 
Pay-as-you-throw means a program that charges residents for waste removal services based on the quantity of material discarded. 
PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1. 
Plastic bottles and jugs means plastic containers imprinted with a (PETE) or (HDPE) on the bottom including food, beverage, health, beauty and cleaning products, bottles 2½ gallons or less in size. 
PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5. 
PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6. 
PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3. 
Public works means the department of city government empowered by the council to direct the refuse collection and disposal activities of the city. 
Recyclable materials include lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS; other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers. 
Resident means owner, lessee, or occupant. 
Residential means single-family, multifamily dwellings of four units or less, and mobile homes whether such mobile homes are registered as vehicles or assessed as real property. 
Rubbish see garbage. 
Solid waste means all waste defined under this Code section, including, but not limited to, the following types of wastes: garbage, rubbish, trash, construction/demolition waste, bulk waste, special waste, green waste and recyclable materials. 
Special waste means any material which meets the EPA designation for a hazardous chemical, hazardous substance, or hazardous waste, or any sharp object improperly containerized prior to disposal including, but not limited to, hazardous solids and liquids, explosives, biomedical waste, household medical waste, pathological wastes, radioactive materials and electronic wastes. 
State means State of Georgia. 
Trash see garbage. 
Weed see green waste. 
White goods means any domestic and/or commercial large appliance that contains CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas, capacitors containing PCBs, mercury switches, or other hazardous components. Examples include, but are not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ranges (both electric and gas) humidifiers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, furnaces, and other similar large appliances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2013-03, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 74-27. - Collection. 
(a)  The public works director shall have the authority to make and modify, as necessary, collection schedules, type of collection containers used, location for collection and such other matters pertaining to the collection, transportation, and disposal of waste and recyclables in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Public works shall collect and remove all residential garbage and recyclables one day per week, except in weeks when holidays occur or in the event of inclement weather. 
(c)  Public works employees shall not enter on to private property to collect garbage, wastes, or recyclables nor shall they accept any money or other items of value for services rendered. 
(d)  Residents may request an additional unscheduled pickup. This service will be provided at such fees or charges as the mayor and council may establish. 
(e)  The city shall charge an extra fee for call-back service to residential and commercial customers whose container was not at the designated pickup location at the required time, or was not accessible by the city's collection vehicle. 
(f)  The public works director shall have the authority to require additional service charges of any residential or commercial establishment that requests and receives additional or special waste collection and disposal services greater than those normally provided by the department. Any such additional charges shall be based upon the cost to the city of providing such additional or special services. 
(g)  It is the responsibility of all new property owners acquiring a residential unit within the city to provide contact and billing information within 30 days of acquiring the property. For those property owners who lease or rent their residential unit(s), the property owner must provide information to the city regarding who is residing at the residential unit. If there is a change in residents, the property owner has 30 days from the date the resident vacated the property to notify the city of the new resident's name and contact information or apply for a temporary suspension of the service fee as provided in section 74-38 if the unit is going to remain unoccupied for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-28. - Container and handling requirements—Residential and commercial. 
(a)  The following practices and procedures shall be followed in order to facilitate the collection of garbage. 
(1)  Every customer shall be provided one standardized container; unauthorized containers will not be serviced. Additional containers may be obtained from the city for an additional fee. The containers are not to be used for any other purpose. 
(2)  The public works director may authorize certain residential units to provide their own approved containers. The residential unit shall provide written justification prior to changing containers. If approved, the residential units must adhere to the same rules and specifications described herein. 
(3)  Each city issued container has an imprinted serial number that is assigned to a specific address (not resident). If the resident moves, the container must remain at the assigned address. 
(4)  Container damage or loss. The customer is responsible for keeping their assigned container secure and in good condition. If the container is stolen or vandalized, the customer must provide a valid police report before the container will be replaced. If a container must be replaced due to negligence, the customer shall be required to pay for a replacement container. 
(b)  Residential use. 
(1)  All garbage, disposable diapers, animal excrement and/or pet litter shall be placed in a securely tied, leak proof plastic bag of sufficient strength to resist tearing under normal handling before it is deposited in the container. 
(2)  All garbage filled plastic bags must be placed inside the authorized container; the container may be filled to capacity as long as the lid can be closed. 
(3)  Unauthorized containers and bags outside the assigned container will not be picked up. The only exception to this provision will be made during the period of December 25 through January 5. 
(4)  Containers shall be placed adjacent to the curb of the resident's property by 7:00 a.m. on the resident's scheduled collection date in such a position as not to obstruct the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or hinder collection. The container shall be securely sealed to control odors, prevent littering, and to keep out rain and animals. 
(5)  If a container is not placed out in time for collection, the resident may request a special pick up for which a fee will be assessed. 
(6)  Containers shall be removed from the curb location no later than the day following the scheduled collection day and stored on the residential premises at a location not generally visible from the street. Containers shall be securely sealed at all times to control odors, prevent littering, and to keep out rain and animals. 
(7)  Any garbage that litters the ground because a container was not securely sealed, overfilled, or overturned shall be the responsibility of the resident. 
(8)  Special wastes including medical and infectious waste, lancets, syringes and hypodermic needles shall be placed in a rigid, leak-proof, puncture resistant container with a secured and taped lid. All special wastes shall also be clearly labeled identifying the contents before being placed in the container. 
(9)  Collectors will not service any container with commingled or bulk waste, construction debris, hazardous materials, green waste or improperly secured special wastes. State law prohibits commingling of household garbage with other types of waste. 
(c)  Commercial garbage. 
(1)  Garbage, waste and recyclables originating in commercial establishments are excluded from municipal garbage service. The owners or their representative agents of such establishments shall have the responsibility of garbage, waste and recyclable removal, provided that such removal shall not be in conflict with the ordinances of the city or any related county or state ordinances. 
(2)  All containers and placement of containers must comply with city, county, and state rules and regulations. 
(3)  The city may, at its discretion, provide collection services to commercial establishments. 
(4)  All requirements outlined in this chapter shall apply to commercial establishments serviced by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-29. - Bulk waste collection. 
(a)  The city will pick up bulk waste, as defined in this chapter, upon request from a residential customer on a case-by-case basis through the public works department. The city shall charge a bulk waste collection fee for this extra service based on the material collected, amount and disposal costs. 
(b)  All bulk waste must be placed curbside, but in no case placed in such a position as to obstruct the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or hinder collection. City workers will not enter onto private property to pick up any materials. 
(1)  Items must be placed adjacent to the curb of the resident's property by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day as not to obstruct the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or hinder collection. 
(2)  No person shall leave outside in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing the door. 
(3)  All white goods shall have a tag signed by an EPA certified technician certifying that all environmentally hazardous materials have been removed. 
(4)  All branches and limbs shall be cut into lengths of four feet or less, and no single piece shall exceed 12 inches in diameter and weigh no more than 50 pounds. 
(5)  The public works director may limit the amount of bulk waste collected at any one location. 
(6)  All commercial tree, landscaping, yard care firms and contractors shall be responsible for collection and disposal of their own debris. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to commingle or mix green waste, garbage or other wastes described in this chapter with bulk waste. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-30. - Green waste collection. 
(a)  The public works director shall establish a schedule for collection of residential green waste. 
(b)  Green waste should be put in paper biodegradable bags or plastic/metal cans with tight fitting lids and placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. of the pick-up day. Bags shall not exceed 50 pounds. Containers shall not be larger than 32-gallon capacity nor weigh more than 50 pounds. 
(c)  In no case shall yard debris be mixed with household garbage or placed in garbage containers. State law prohibits commingling of household garbage and other wastes. 
(d)  There is a limit of 15 bags and/or three containers per regular pick-up for green waste. 
(e)  All branches, limbs and shrubbery shall be cut into lengths of four feet or less, and no single piece shall exceed two inches in diameter and weigh no more than 50 pounds. 
(f)  Branch, limb and shrubbery piles shall be neatly stacked parallel to the street on the resident's property next to the curb, but in no case shall be placed in such a position that obstructs the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or hinders collection. 
(g)  There will be a limit of two piles per resident. Piles shall not exceed ten feet long by six feet wide by four feet tall. If the number of piles exceed the limit, the resident can call public works for a special pick up for which there will be an additional fee. 
(h)  Crews and equipment often leave behind small debris which is the responsibility of the resident to clean up. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-31. - Construction and demolition wastes from private property; building permit. 
(a)  Public works shall not be responsible for collecting, hauling or disposing of construction wastes or demolition wastes originating from private property preliminary to, during, or prior to the construction of new, remodeled, or renovated structures. These materials shall be removed by the owner, lessee, or tenant of the property or the contractor. 
(b)  The city building inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for residential, commercial, or industrial developments until all construction and demolition waste is removed by the owner or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-32. - Special wastes and collection of dead animals. 
(a)  Public works shall not be responsible for the collection or disposal of any dangerous or hazardous material as described in this chapter. 
(b)  No food service or other type commercial establishment shall incorporate grease into any solid waste collection container. All grease shall be stored separately for recycling or disposal and shall be collected by an authorized service provider. 
(c)  No special wastes shall be placed or caused to be placed with garbage, bulk waste or other wastes as defined in this chapter, for collection by public works. 
(d)  The city is not responsible for removal and disposal of dead animals from private property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-33. - Recycling. 
In order to protect the environment by conserving natural resources and preserving rapidly dwindling landfill space as well as minimizing waste disposal costs, the city encourages recycling for all residential and commercial/industrial occupants within the city limits to recycle all recyclable materials and implement reduction activities. 
(1)  Collection and container requirements will be the same as those outlined in sections 74-27 and 74-28 of this chapter. 
(2)  Residential and commercial occupants shall utilize commingled single stream recycling for all materials considered recyclable. 
(3)  Items accepted for city recycling are: 
a.  All glass products, bi-metal containers and metal containers. 
b.  Corrugated paper and other container board. 
c.  Newspaper, office paper, including junk mail and school papers, white, brown and manila envelopes. 
d.  Rigid plastic containers clearly marked with SPI letter and number codes including PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS. 
e.  Metal food, beverage container caps, lids and scrap metal. 
f.  All nonpaper recycled items shall be rinsed clean of all product residue and well drained and free of all debris. All paper recycled items shall be flattened and free of all bindings, wraps or clips. 
(4)  Items not accepted for city recycling collection include the following: 
a.  Electronic waste (E-Waste). 
b.  Foam polystyrene packaging. 
c.  Lead acid batteries. 
d.  Waste oil. 
e.  Waste tires. 
f.  Any items listed herein that are not accepted for recycling collection shall be appropriately disposed of by delivery to any business that collects and/or recycles that type of material. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-34. - Anti-scavenging provision. 
It shall be unlawful for an unauthorized person to scavenge, touch, pilfer or disturb any solid waste materials or recyclables as defined in this section once those materials are placed for collection. Only persons authorized by the city, property owner or authorized agent of the property owner shall collect or handle solid waste or recyclable materials once those materials have been placed appropriately for collection. Each collected item by an unauthorized person in violation of this provision shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in section 74-108. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 2013-03, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 74-35. - Littering. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(b)  Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(c)  Sweeping litter into streets prohibited. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk and/or road right-of-way adjacent to and abutting their private property free of litter. 
(d)  Litter in lakes and streams. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water within the city. 
(e)  Litter on private property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon any private property. The owner shall be responsible for the removal of litter from his/her property and shall not be permitted to allow such litter to accumulate. 
(f)  Distributing handbills. It shall be unlawful and constitute littering for any person to hand out, distribute or leave in any public parking area of the city, or in or on any motor vehicle therein, any advertisement or other document advertising, promoting or offering to sell or rent any product, good, ware, merchandise or services unless such advertisement or other document is personally and directly handed to another individual. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-36. - Disposal of garbage and waste material not generated on property; nuisance. 
(a)  It is a violation of this chapter to transfer garbage or other waste material from the property upon which it was generated to any other property. 
(b)  When garbage or waste material contains identifying matter that depicts the name of a person, there is a presumption that that garbage or waste material belonged to the person identified and was under his or her control at the time it was discarded. "Identifying matter" may include, but is not limited to, envelopes, letterhead or junk mail containing a person's name and address. 
(c)  Any accumulation of garbage, litter or other waste items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance, regardless of whether the city provides municipal garbage collection service for same. Failure of the owner, resident or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of garbage, litter or other waste items after appropriate notice from the mayor and council or their designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this section. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for abatement, removal or injunction thereof in the manner provided under the city's code of ordinances and in a manner provided by law. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided by section 1-11, general provisions, of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-37. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-38. - Required service; fees; security deposit. 
(a)  The city shall service all non-commercial units located in the city for garbage and recyclable collection unless: 
(1)  An exception is made by the public works director at his or her discretion; or 
(2)  The unit is unoccupied for a period of more than 30 days and the resident applies for and is granted a temporary suspension of the service fee. 
(b)  All commercial units that do not have city sanitation service shall obtain the service of a commercial collection provider that is licensed to conduct business in the city. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall establish and amend the fees for all sanitation services as defined in this chapter. 
(d)  The sanitation services account shall be in the name of the property owner of a residential unit, even if the unit is leased. The property owner shall be responsible for paying the required security and container deposit, before obtaining any garbage service. These non-interest bearing deposits shall be refundable when the service is terminated, if there is no delinquent balance and public works verifies the container has not been damaged. 
(e)  All accounts shall be paid by the due date; a late fee will be assessed for all payments made after that date. A service charge shall be assessed for all dishonored checks or dishonored credit card charges. 
(f)  Any account that becomes three months in arrears shall have their service terminated and their security deposit applied to such bill. In order to reinstate the service, the property owner shall pay a reinstatement fee prior to the service being re-established. An additional fee shall be assessed to collect any accumulated garbage. 
(g)  If an account becomes delinquent for more than four months, a lien will be placed against the property. Any further delinquencies may result in the city foreclosing on the property. 
(h)  Administrative remedy—Temporary suspension of service and fee. 
(1)  A resident whose residential unit will be unoccupied for more than 30 consecutive days may make application with the utilities clerk for a temporary suspension of the service and fee. Such application may be made by the resident on a form made available by the utility clerk. The length of suspension of the service and fee shall not exceed six months unless authorized by the public works director. 
(2)  Within 14 days of the decision by the utility clerk, any resident aggrieved by a decision to refuse to suspend may appeal that decision to the public works director for a final administrative hearing and determination. The public works director shall conduct an informal administrative hearing within ten business days of the resident appealing the original decision to not suspend. The resident and the city shall have the right to present sworn testimony and evidence. Upon the final administrative decision of the public works director to approve or deny the suspension under this chapter, such decision being in writing and including a notice of the decision and reasons therefore to the resident, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Cobb County Superior Court by writ of certiorari. There shall be no suspension of the service or fee during the appeal notification period or while an appeal is pending before the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-39. - Fee waiver for active duty military. 
(a)  A property owner on active duty military service in any of the Armed Forces of the United States or their dependent may make application with the utilities clerk for a temporary waiver of the monthly sanitation service fee. Such application may be made by the property owner or dependent on a form made available by the utility clerk. 
(b)  At the time of application, the property owner or dependent must present a valid identification card issued by the armed forces and a copy of the original orders evidencing active duty service. In addition, if a dependent is making application, the dependent shall present a power of attorney to act on behalf of the service member. 
(c)  The waiver shall commence on the billing cycle following approval of the application by the utilities clerk. The waiver shall automatically cease upon the first occurrence of the following: 
(1)  The expiration of the original active duty orders presented with the application; 
(2)  The termination of active duty status; or 
(3)  The expiration of 12 months. 
(d)  The waiver may be renewed upon proper application pursuant to this section. 
(e)  Fee waivers shall not apply retroactively and the city is under no obligation to refund sanitation service fees already received. 
(f)  Within 14 days of the decision by the utility clerk, the property owner or dependent aggrieved by a decision denying the waiver of the sanitation service fee may appeal that decision in writing to the public works director for a final administrative hearing and determination. The public works director shall conduct an informal administrative hearing within ten business days of the receipt of the written request for a hearing. The property owner or dependent and the city shall have the right to present sworn testimony and evidence. Upon the final administrative decision of the public works director to approve or deny the suspension under this chapter, such decision being in writing and including a notice of the decision and reasons therefore to the property owner or dependent, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Cobb County Superior Court by writ of certiorari. There shall be no suspension of the service or fee during the appeal notification period or while an appeal is pending before the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 74-40—74-105. - Reserved. 
Sec. 74-106. - Intent; applicability, etc. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The mandatory provisions of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or stringent or impose higher protective standards for human health safety and well being or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. The mayor and council hereby declare their intention to be that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases or this article be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be judged, decreed or declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article since the remainder of the ordinance would have been adopted and enacted by the mayor and council without the inclusion of any such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-107. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who violates, has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to an enforcement action or such penalties as are outlined in this article, or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(3)  Newspapers or printed materials which are distributed, deposited or placed at no cost to the recipient thereof on public or private property and which, after a reasonable time for retrieval by the intended recipient, are allowed to lay, accumulate or disintegrate on or in such property or curbs and drainage ditches shall constitute litter. Any publisher of such materials must within 48 hours retrieve the same from private or residential properties upon notice from either the owner or inhabitant of any such private property or from the city. Failure to comply with this retrieval requirement shall constitute a violation of this article. Newspapers and printed materials which constitute litter as specified in this subparagraph, on public property or curbs and drainage ditches are a violation of this article and the publisher of such material(s) shall be subject to the penalties enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-108. - Penalties. 
Any person or entity violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction thereof or pleas thereto be punished as prescribed by section 1-11, general provisions, of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 74-109. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-21-10) 
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; cable communications, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 58; offenses, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; unified development code, app. A. 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipalities may permit enclosure of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-21, § 3, adopted Oct. 15, 2018, repealed Art. I, §§ 78-1—78-9, which pertained to streets, sidewalks and other public places in general and derived from Code 1986, § 5-1-1—5-1-6, 5-1-8, 5-1-9; and an ord. adopted Oct. 17, 1994. 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-21, § 3, adopted Oct. 15, 2018, repealed Art. II, §§ 78-31—78-34, which pertained to utility placement requirements and derived from §§ 8-8-1—8-8-4 of an ord. adopted Dec. 5, 1994. 

Secs. 78-31—78-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EVENTS, PARADES AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS[4] 
The City of Kennesaw supports and hosts a large number of diverse events each year that require resources such as traffic control, street closings, event space, security, and trash removal. It is the specific intent of the city in enacting this article to regulate only the time, place and manner of events and not to regulate the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. Therefore, in order to properly plan and manage the number of events, an events list will be developed at the beginning of each year and updated when an event is added. 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., adopted Feb. 15, 2016, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 78-56—78-59, pertained to parades and public gatherings and derived from Code 1986, § 9-6-3(a)—(f). 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 

Sec. 78-56. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish an application and permitting procedure for organizations, groups of persons, and any other entities that seek to use public property, sidewalks, or public roads within the city limits of the City of Kennesaw for the purpose of an event, public gathering, or similar event other than a funeral procession. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Demonstration means to make a public display, picket or demonstration of sentiment for or against a person or cause, including protesting which may include the distribution of leaflets or handbills, the display of signs and any oral communication or speech, which may involve an effort to persuade or influence, including all expressive and symbolic conduct, whether active or passive. 
Event means any march, procession, parade, or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or combination thereof upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the city with an intent of attracting public attention that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets, parks or other public property. 
Public gathering means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, event, assemblage, festival or gathering for a common purpose that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupies any public property or facilities open to the general public. 
Public property means any real property located within the City of Kennesaw in which a legal or equitable interest is held by: 
(1)  The City of Kennesaw or any department, division, board, bureau, commission, or other agency of the executive branch of state government; 
(2)  Any county, municipality, county or independent school district, or other political subdivision of the state or any agency of any such political subdivision; 
(3)  Any public authority or other public corporation which is a body politic of the state or of any county, municipality, or other political subdivision of the state; or 
(4)  Any governmental body or governmental entity of this state not covered by subparagraph (a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-58. - Permit—Required for all events and public gathering. 
(a)  Any group or individual desiring to host any event, excluding a demonstration, that requires use of public property shall first submit an application on a form obtained from the parks department and submitted at least 90 days prior to the event. An application fee will be assessed for each application as outlined in section 78-62. 
(b)  The application will include event or public gathering details; the name and address of the applicant; a map showing the event site; all desired street closures and traffic plan; proof of insurance to be provided 30 days in advance of the event; fee acknowledgement statement; number of expected attendees and a cleanup/recycling plan. In addition, if the applicant is an association of persons in fact or in law, the application shall also contain a description of the entity; the name of said entity, if named; the registered or recognized address of the entity; the name of the person making the application on behalf of the entity; such person(s) relationship to said entity; and some demonstration or recitation of the authority of the person making the application to act on behalf of the entity; 
(c)  Approval or denial of the permit by the events committee will be based on: 
(1)  Number of previously scheduled events; 
(2)  Impact on residents, occupants or business in and surrounding the event area; 
(3)  Impact of the proposed road closure and inconvenience to the general public or persons residing in the area; 
(4)  Availability of required city staff and/or resources; 
(5)  Ability to provide the required certificate of insurance; 
(6)  Compliance with all other agencies requiring permitting; and 
(7)  The completeness and accuracy of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-59. - Demonstrations. 
(a)  The organizer of a demonstration shall give notice of intent to demonstrate to the city manager or his/her designee at least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the demonstration. 
(b)  All other requirements mentioned in this article shall apply to a demonstration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-60. - Same—Street closures requirements. 
The organizer of any event or demonstration will provide a map to the city manager or his/her designee showing the event or demonstration site and a list of all desired streets closures. 
(1)  The list of street closings required in conjunction with an event or demonstration will be reviewed by public works and police department prior to approval. 
(2)  The city manager or his/her designee reserves the right to amend the approved street closure(s) prior to or during the event or demonstration that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or presents a danger to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-61. - Same—Certificate of insurance. 
The event organizer shall provide to the city manager or his/her designee a general liability insurance policy certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00, or an amount as determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be appropriate for the size of the event, which names the City of Kennesaw as an additional insured under the policy. 
(1)  Additional insurance(s) may be required based on the risk level of an event which may include but is not limited to the size and nature of the event, activities planned for the event, the expected attendance, potential for injury, and alcohol availability. 
(2)  An event permit shall not be issued until the required certificate of insurance coverage is received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-62. - Same—Fee requirements. 
It is the policy of the city to recover costs associated with allocating resources to host and/or support events. Fees are based on costs associated with city resources required including but not limited to police, public works (signage, street closings, and trash removal), and event space rental. 
(1)  Each event will be assessed an application fee as determined by the events committee. The fee schedule will be updated and approved by the city manager on an annual basis. Application fees shall be paid at the time of application. 
(2)  Each event will be assessed a fee based on the services requested and/or required as determined by the events committee. The fee schedule will be updated and approved by the city manager on an annual basis. 
(3)  Event support and application fees will be established by the city council and maintained by the city clerk. 
(4)  Events for public schools located within Cobb County will be exempt from event fees. 
(5)  Event support fees shall be paid a minimum of 30 days in advance of the event. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-63. - Same—Trash collection, disposal, water hydrants and cleanup. 
The event organizer shall include plans for collection and disposal of trash, recycle materials and cleanup after the event. The plan should include the number and location of garbage/recycling containers and dumpsters and number/schedule of volunteers/staff assigned to collection and clean up. 
(1)  A refundable event cleanup deposit shall be required 30 days prior to any event held on public property. The deposit amount will be based on the number of participants as shown below. 
•  $500.00 (100 participants or less) 
•  $1,500.00 (101—500 participants) 
•  $2,500.00 (501—1000 participants) 
•  $5,000.00 (1,001 participants or more) 
(2)  The event area, street(s) and surrounding area(s) shall be restored to its original cleanliness within 24 hours of the event. Any banners, signs, streamers, or ribbons placed by the participants must be removed. All trash, food debris and cooking oils shall be properly disposed and spills cleaned. No paint will be allowed on the street or the sidewalk. 
(3)  If the property is clean and no damage is present, the event cleanup deposit will be returned to applicant within 30 days following the event. 
(4)  If the property is found not to be cleaned and/or restored to its original state or if property damage is discovered, additional costs shall be charged in accordance with the restoration costs. If the deposit is not sufficient to cover cleaning and/or restoration costs, the applicant shall be billed for the balance remaining. 
(5)  If any potable water from a fire hydrant is used during an event, the applicant shall provide a copy of the receipt from Cobb County Water prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-64. - Appeal. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the decision by the event committee to deny an application, the applicant may within five calendar days file an appeal of said denial in writing with the city manager. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such appeal, the city manager shall set the matter for hearing before the mayor and city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  The city manager shall cause written notice of the hearing to be served upon the applicant. Such notice shall include the hearing date and time. 
(d)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be binding on all parties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Sec. 78-65. - Violation and penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any organizer or other person to conduct an event including a parade or to assemble on public property as set forth in section 78-56 et seq. without a permit under this article validly issued by the event committee. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, Exh., 2-15-16) 
Secs. 78-66—78-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-21, § 3, adopted Oct. 15, 2018, repealed Art. IV, §§ 78-81—78-93, which pertained to street lights and derived from Ord. No. 95-11, § 1—13, adopted May 1, 1995; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2007. 

Secs. 78-81—78-93. - Reserved. 
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1—82-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1 the city has contracted with the county tax assessor to prepare the city's tax digest, access and collect city ad valorem taxes and invoke remedies permitted for collection of such taxes. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 82-26. - Levied; rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 82-27. - Taxation by city. 
The city shall collect ad valorem taxes by notices of the amount due to all residents and property owners of the city. For purposes of chapter 82 of this Code, the term "finance director" shall mean the finance director and/or his or her designee. 
(1)  Administration. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided, the finance director or his or her designee shall be charged with the duty to administer the imposition, collection and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city in accordance with the administrative procedures hereinafter set forth. Said designee may include, but is not limited to a private vendor to administer the imposition, collection and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city. To the extent this Code section fails to provide a designated procedure, said officer shall act in the manner established, if any, for county tax collectors under applicable state law. 
b.  In determining the fair market value of property within its taxing jurisdiction, the city shall use the fair market value as finally determined for the property for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
c.  Following adoption of its current fiscal year budget, the mayor and council shall, by ordinance, adopt a millage rate upon which property subject to ad valorem tax will be billed. Prior to adoption of said millage rate, the governing body shall publish the notice of proposed ad valorem tax rate as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-32, as may be amended from time to time. Millage rates shall be calculated using 40 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property upon which the tax is levied. 
d.  The finance director or his or her designee shall issue a bill to be sent to all taxpayers at the address last shown on the county tax digest by regular U.S. mail, with adequate postage thereon; provided, however, failure by the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for nonpayment or late payment of the tax. The bill shall state the location or description of the property taxed, 100 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property and its taxable value (40 percent of fair market value), and the amount of tax due thereon. The bill shall also state the due date after which taxes shall be in default. The bill may also contain such additional information as allowed by law or authorized by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Due date; payment; interest on past due taxes. 
a.  All ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable in full within 60 days after notice, unless the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which case it shall be postponed until the first day following which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. All payments must be United States postmarked no later than the due date. Supplemental ad valorem taxes and special assessments shall be due and payable on the date set forth in the ordinance imposing the tax or assessment. 
b.  All taxes and assessments imposed by the city shall be paid in full in legal tender of the United States; except where specifically authorized by law or ordinance of the mayor and council. 
c.  Taxes and special assessments shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one full month. The finance director or city manager may waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on unpaid taxes or assessments whenever or to the extent that he or she reasonably determines that the delay in payment was attributable to the action or inaction of his or her department. 
(3)  Penalties. 
a.  All penalties imposed herein are part of the tax or assessment and are to be collected as such. The proceedings to collect the original tax, the tax constituted from penalties imposed, and the interest shall all be conducted in the same manner. Any provision of law for criminal prosecution shall not operate to relieve any taxpayer of any tax, penalty, or interest imposed herein. 
b.  In any instance in which any person willfully fails to pay, within 120 days of the date when due, any ad valorem tax owed the city, such person shall pay, in the absence of a specific statutory civil penalty for the failure, a penalty of five percent of the amount of tax due and not paid at the time such penalty is assessed, together with interest as specified by law. After 120 days from the imposition of the initial penalty, an additional penalty of five percent of any tax amount remaining due shall be imposed, together with interest as specified by law. If any tax amount remains due after 120 days from the imposition of such additional penalty, a penalty of five percent shall be imposed, together with interest as specified by law. Should any tax amount remain due 120 days after such date, a penalty of five percent shall be imposed, together with interest as specified by law. The aggregate amount of penalties imposed pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed an amount equal to 20 percent of the principal amount of the tax originally due. 
c.  The finance director or city manager may waive, in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due as a penalty under this Code section to the extent said body finds and determines the default giving rise to the penalty was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or disregard of this Code section. 
(4)  Executions on delinquent taxes and assessments. 
a.  As soon as the last day for the payment of taxes and assessments has arrived, the finance director or his or her designee shall notify in writing the taxpayer of the fact that the taxes have not been paid and that, unless paid within 30 days, an execution shall be issued. 
b.  The finance director or his or her designee shall issue executions, for the nonpayment of taxes and assessments at any time after 30 days have elapsed since giving notice as provided in subsection (4)a. of this section. The execution shall identify the defendant in fi. fa., (taxpayer), the year(s) for which delinquent taxes are being executed, and the amount thereof. Executions shall be directed to "all and singular sheriffs and constables of the state" as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-3-3. 
c.  The finance director or his or her designee shall cause all executions issued to be recorded on the general execution docket of the county where the property is located, in the case of real property, and, in the case of personal property, in the county of the taxpayer's residence if a resident of the state, otherwise in the county where any real or personal property of the taxpayer may be found. If the taxpayer is not a resident of the state and has no known real or personal property within the state, the execution shall be recorded in the county in which the act or activity giving rise to tax liability took place. 
d.  All executions issued shall continue to bear interest and penalties at the rates established in this section for past due taxes and assessments. 
e.  The finance director shall exercise his or her best efforts to collect the full amount of taxes and assessments due, together with all interest, penalties, and any costs due thereon, from the defendant in fi. fa. In the event he or she is unable to do so, the finance director shall levy the execution on a sufficient amount of the defendant in fi. fa.'s property, whether real or personal, to satisfy the obligations due at a sale to be held and conducted in accordance with this Code section. 
(5)  Levy of executions; sale of property. 
a.  The finance director is hereby designated as the duly authorized officer of the city for tax sales and delegated the duties set forth herein. The finance director shall be subject to being ruled for money in his or her hands arising from the public sale of any property pursuant to process issued by the municipality. After first paying the city the amount due on the process under which the sale was made, the finance director shall pay any surplus to any lawful claimant holding an interest subordinate to the lien for taxes, else to the defendant in fi. fa. 
b.  In all cases of levying on real property, within five days' written notice of the levy must be given personally, or delivered by certified mail, to the defendant in fi. fa. and to any tenants in possession. If the land is unoccupied, a copy of the notice of levy shall also be conspicuously posted on the land. In the case of personal property, the finance director shall enter the same on the execution and plainly describe the property levied on and the amount of the interest of the defendant in fi. fa. therein. 
c.  Whenever any real property is levied upon for taxes or assessments, it shall be the finance director's duty before proceeding to advertise the property for sale to give 20 days' written notice of the levy to the record owner(s) of the property and the holder of each security deed of record. The 20-day period shall begin to run from the time the notice is personally delivered or, when delivered by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, from the date of mailing. The notice shall contain a description of the land levied upon, the name of the owner of the land, the year or years for which the taxes were assessed, and a statement of the amount of the taxes due, together with accrued costs. The finance director shall keep a copy of the notice on which he shall enter the date the notice was delivered or mailed and how, where, and to whom the notice was delivered. 
d.  When a levy is made upon real or personal property, the property shall be advertised and sold by the finance director in the same manner as provided for executions and judicial sales; provided, however, in addition to such other notice as may be required by law, the defendant in fi. fa. shall be given at least ten days' written notice of such sale by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery as follows: 
1.  In cases of executions issued by a municipal officer for ad valorem taxes, to the property owner's last known address as listed in the records of the municipal officer of the municipality that issued the tax execution; or 
2.  In cases of executions issued by a county officer for ad valorem taxes, the property owner's last known address as listed in the records of the tax commission of the county that issued the tax execution. 
e.  A copy of the notice provided for herein shall also be sent by the same tax officer sending the notice to the property owner to the appropriate tax official of the state, county or municipality which also has issued an execution with respect to such property. In addition, if the United States has a claim or lien on the property subject to being sold and such lien was filed or recorded more than 30 days before the proposed sale, the finance director shall cause written notice of the sale to be given to the secretary of the treasury or his or her delegate not less than 25 days before the sale. Notice may be given either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
f.  In all cases of levying on real property, within five days' written notice of the levy must be given personally, or delivered by certified mail, to the defendant in fi. fa. and to any tenants in possession. If the land is unoccupied, a copy of the notice of levy shall also be conspicuously posted on the land. In the case of personal property, the finance director shall enter the same on the execution and plainly describe the property levied on and the amount of the interest of the defendant in fi. fa. therein. 
The finance director shall publish weekly for four weeks in the official legal organ of the county in which the sale will be conducted an advertisement of the date, place, and hours during which the sale will be conducted, together with a full and complete description of the property to be sold, making known the names of the property owner(s) of record and any person who may be in possession of the property. The notice shall state the property is being sold for collection of taxes due to the city and the year(s) for which taxes have been executed. 
g.  Sales of property under execution shall be made by the finance director at the city council chambers on the first Tuesday in each month between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time or eastern daylight savings time, which is applicable, and at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash; provided, however, should the first Tuesday of the month fall on New Year's Day, Independence Day or other city designated holiday, such sales shall take place on the immediately following Wednesday. The purchaser shall look for himself as to the title and soundness of all property sold under tax executions and neither the finance director conducting the sale, nor the city, make any representations or warranty of title, condition, or fitness for a particular purpose, expressed or implied. 
h.  The finance director shall sell the property to the highest bidder for cash and, upon collection of the sales price, make a deed or bill of sale to the purchaser. Any person who becomes the purchaser of any property sold at the sale, who fails or refuses to comply with the terms of sale when requested by the finance director to do so, shall be liable for the amount of the purchase money. It shall be the option of the finance director either to proceed against the purchaser for the full amount of the purchase money or to resell the property and then proceed against the first purchaser for any deficiency. A tax deed for real property, or bill of sale for personal property, made and delivered as evidence of a sale for taxes conducted pursuant to this Code section shall convey the title as effectually as if the sale were made by the person against whom the process was issued. Sales of personal property shall be final; real property sold by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes or for any special assessments is subject to redemption rights of the defendant in fi. fa. or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property at the time of levy or sale. Recitals in a deed or bill of sale under power of sale for taxes shall be prima facie evidence of the facts recited in the instrument. The finance director shall put the purchaser in possession of the property so sold; provided, however, the purchaser of real property is not entitled to be placed in possession until after the time for redemption has expired. 
i.  Whenever no bids are forthcoming on property sold for taxes after the property has been offered a reasonable time, the finance director may either re-advertise and sell the property at a later date or abandon the property. The finance director shall make a proper notation on the execution whenever property levied upon and exposed for sale has been abandoned due to lack of bids. 
(6)  Bidding by city at tax sales; disposition of property acquired. 
a.  If, during any sale of property for taxes and after the property has been offered a reasonable time, no one present at the sale bids an amount for the property being sold which is as much as the total of the taxes due (including any priority liens for taxes due the state, county and school and other special tax districts of the state) plus the finance director's cost due on the sale, then the city manager, or his or her designee, may purchase the property for the city. If the city purchases property at a sale, the finance director shall make to the city a deed to the property sold and shall deliver the deed to the city manager. The finance director shall put the city in possession of the property so sold. 
b.  Property acquired by the city pursuant to a sale for taxes or assessments may be divested or alienated by the city only by public sale of the property to the highest bidder, however, when the city has not parted with title to the property, the city may quitclaim the property to the owner at the time of the tax sale, or to the owner's administrators, executors, heirs, or assigns, upon full payment of the redemption price provided herein. 
c.  The right of redemption in real property purchased by the city at a tax sale shall be foreclosed in the manner set forth herein. 
(7)  Accounting by finance director; final return or settlement. 
a.  The finance director shall make a prompt accounting for all executions placed in his or her hands for collection or levy and sale. He or she shall pay all amounts due to the city for taxes and assessments, interest, penalties, and costs, and shall file a final written return or settlement showing the amounts so paid, together with disposition of any excess proceeds derived from the sale. If there is any excess after paying taxes, costs, and all expenses of a sale, the finance director shall retain the balance of the funds in his hands until he or she is ordered by the court first acquiring jurisdiction under proper proceedings to pay out the funds, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5, as may be amended from time to time. 
b.  It shall be the duty of the finance director to cause cancellation of executions on the general execution docket of the county upon their final payment or collection. 
(8)  Garnishments by city; reduction of executions to judgment. 
a.  Whenever the finance director can find no property belonging to a defendant in fi. fa. on which to levy any tax execution in his or her hands, he or she shall make an entry to that effect on the execution. The finance director, in the name of the city, may then petition any court of competent jurisdiction to issue a summons of garnishment against any person whom he or she believes to be indebted to the defendant in fi. fa. or who has property, money, or effects in his hands belonging to the defendant in fi. fa. The finance director shall enter upon the execution the names of the persons garnished and the court and file number of the action where the garnishment is filed. All subsequent proceedings shall be the same as provided by law in other cases where judgments have been obtained or execution issued. 
b.  When an execution for taxes remains unsatisfied and an entry of "nulla bona" has been duly entered by the finance director on the execution within the immediately preceding 30-day period and the finance director has reason to believe the defendant in fi. fa. may have or may come into ownership of assets outside the state, the finance director, in the name of the city, may petition the superior court of the county in this state in which the defendant in fi. fa. maintains a known residence, place of business, or agent to receive service, to reduce the execution to judgment. If the defendant in fi. fa. does not maintain a known residence in this state, the action may be brought in the county where the tax obligation arose. This and all subsequent proceedings shall be brought in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 3 of tit. 48, as may be amended from time to time. 
(9)  Redemption rights of defendant in fi. fa.; vesting of title in grantee. 
a.  Whenever real property is sold for taxes or any special assessment, the defendant in fi. fa. or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property may redeem the property from the sale by the payment of the redemption price or the amount required for redemption as fixed by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-42, as may be amended from time to time, at any time within 12 months from the date of sale, and at any time after the sale until the right to redeem is foreclosed by the giving of the notice provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-45, as may be amended from time to time, which code sections by reference are incorporated herein as a part of the code. 
b.  Where notice of foreclosure of the right to redeem real property sold at a tax sale has not been given as required in subsection (1) of this section, title shall ripen by prescription after a period of four years from the date of recording of the deed in the county where the property is situated, provided the defendant in fi. fa. was not laboring under any legal disability at the time of sale. Unless the tax deed indicates a lesser interest was levied upon and sold, a fee simple title to the property shall vest absolutely in the grantee in the deed or in the grantee's heirs or assigns. In the event the defendant in fi. fa. is laboring under any legal disability, the prescriptive term shall begin from the time the disabilities are removed or abated. 
(10)  Costs. 
a.  For issuing executions, the city shall receive an amount equal to any filing fees charged by the clerk of superior court for recording and cancellations of the tax fi. fa. 
b.  Once a levy is made or posted on the property of a defendant in fi. fa., the finance director shall collect all costs, including but not limited to all taxes, interest, penalties, postage, advertising fees, posting fees, attorney fees, title search fees, tax deed preparation, collection fees and all other costs heretofore accrued. 
c.  The costs provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any statutory premiums allowed as a part of the redemption price. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-2; Ord. No. 2006-24, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 2007-19, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 2016-23, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 2017-04, 3-6-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04, adopted March 6, 2017, amended the title of § 82-27 to read as herein set out. Former § 82-27 was titled, "Taxation by city; certain past due collections by county authorized." 
Sec. 82-28. - Tax liens—Authority to place. 
Either the finance director or his or her designee may be authorized by the mayor and council to place a tax lien upon the general execution docket of the superior court of the county against any person who fails to pay city taxes prior to the delinquency date; the due date being determined by the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-3; Ord. No. 2006-24, 9-18-06) 
Sec. 82-29. - Same—Satisfying; interest on past due taxes. 
Either the finance director or his or her designee is authorized to satisfy all tax liens placed upon the general execution docket when and if the delinquent taxes are paid, along with a penalty and interest calculated as set forth in section 82-27 by any party of interest. The finance director or his or her designee shall obtain permission from the mayor and council before foreclosure is filed on any property upon which a tax lien has been placed. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-4; Ord. No. 2006-24, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 2016-23, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 82-30. - Homestead tax exemption. 
Any resident over 65 years of age is exempt from the city ad valorem property tax for the property on which they reside. 
(Ord. No. 1959-120, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 82-31. - Assessed value homestead exemption. 
A homestead exemption from certain city ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the current year assessed value of a homestead exceeds the base year assessed value of such homestead. 
(H.B. No. 1712, §§ 1—4, appd. by electors 11-7-00) 
Secs. 82-32—82-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130; levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 

Sec. 82-51. - Levied. 
In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, there is imposed and levied upon all dealers described in this article within the city an excise tax, to be computed and collected as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-51) 
Sec. 82-52. - Distilled spirits and wine. 
(a)  The tax levied under this article on distilled spirits and wine shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a gallon (liter) for all distilled spirits and/or wine sold or delivered within the city. The excise tax shall be imposed on the retail dealer and collected by wholesalers provided however, that such taxes shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed manufacturer of distilled spirits and wine served or sold by the manufacturer directly to the public as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The tax imposed in this section shall be computable and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer, manufacturer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering distilled spirits or wine to any retail dealer in the city, whether delivered to the retail dealer's place of business in the city, elsewhere for resale in the city or directly to the public, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on that business in the city shall: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments, or deliveries of each class of distilled spirits and/or wine to each retail dealer in the city, as well as sales directly to the public, such records to be preserved for a period of two years and to be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)  Collect from each such retail dealer in the city, as well as sales directly to the public, at the time of delivery of the distilled spirits and/or wine the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold such tax in trust for the city until such amount is remitted to the city as provided under subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(3)  On or before the 20th day of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of each class of distilled spirits and/or wine to or for retail dealers in the city, as well as sales directly to the public, for the month immediately preceding such report. Such report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities of each class of distilled spirits and/or wine delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this section, and such other information as may be called for by the city. Such report shall show the quantities of each class of distilled spirits and/or wine sold directly to the public, the amount collected under the terms of this section, and such other information as may be called for by the city. Such report shall be accompanied by a remittance to the city for all taxes collected or due as shown on such report. There is assessed a ten percent late charge on the gross tax due for failure to remit the excise tax by the 20th of the month. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-52; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 9, 8-21-17) 
State Law reference— Excise tax on package sales of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 82-53. - Malt beverages. 
(a)  The tax levied on malt beverages is imposed on wholesale dealers; provided however, that such taxes shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed brewer for malt beverages served or sold by the brewer directly to the public, and shall be computed on the following basis: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  The method of reporting and payment of malt beverage taxes shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-53; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 10, 8-21-17) 
State Law reference— Malt beverage excise taxes, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 82-54. - Invoices. 
Upon each delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared, showing the classes, quantities and brands of alcoholic beverages delivered together with the price thereof and the tax collected thereon. The original copy of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with each such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice and shall keep it for a period of 24 months. The wholesaler shall keep such invoices for 24 months after the date of such invoices, and during that period such invoices shall be made available for inspection by authorized representatives of the city. If requested by an authorized representative of the city, a copy of such invoices shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-54) 
Sec. 82-55. - Noncompliance by wholesale dealer or distributor. 
If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports provided for in this article, the city shall notify the party in writing, and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of notice, the city may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the city by revoking his permit or license. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-55) 
Sec. 82-56. - Sale of nontax-paid beverage. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell at retail within the limits of the city any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided for in this article have not been paid. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-56) 
Sec. 82-57. - Delivery of nontax-paid beverage. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor, or other person, to deliver any distilled spirits and/or wine to any retail dealer in the city without collecting the taxes provided for in this article at the time of delivery. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-57) 
Sec. 82-58. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes provided for in this article shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and, upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-11, and such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license revoked. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-58) 
Sec. 82-59. - Sales of spirituous liquors by the drink. 
(a)  Imposition and rate of tax. There is hereby imposed and levied upon every sale of spirituous liquor purchased by the drink in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of such drink. 
(b)  Purchaser's receipt; credit or deferred payment. Every licensee for the sale of spirituous liquor by the drink for operation of a place of business in the city shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverage served shall be itemized separately and where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred in a like manner. The licensee shall itemize the charges therefore separately on the charge billing at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(c)  Person liable for collection of tax. Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this division from purchasers of spirituous liquors by the drink sold within his licensed premises. Such licensee or his agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(d)  Determinations, returns and payments. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this section shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(2)  Return; time of filing. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the business license clerk's office in such form as the business license clerk may prescribe for every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax under this section. 
(3)  Contents of return. All returns required by this section shall show the gross receipts from the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink, the amount of tax collected or due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city. 
(4)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return under this section shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the Business License Clerk's Office, 2529 J.O. Stephenson Avenue, Kennesaw, GA 30144. 
(5)  Collection fee. Operators collecting the tax imposed under this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction for submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from the state tax under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. I (O.C.G.A. §48-8-1 et seq.), as amended. 
(e)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make basis of recomputation. If the business license clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax to be paid to the city by any licensee, the clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. Deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the deficiency determination under this section, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall be assessed for each month or fraction thereof from the close of the monthly period in which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(3)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a deficiency determination under this section, the business license clerk may offset overpayments, for a period or periods, against underpayments for another period or periods, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (f). 
(4)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules or regulations. If any part of the deficiency determination under this section has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the amount of such taxes shall be added to the amount of the deficiency. 
(5)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination under this section is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this division or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(6)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this division or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of every month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(7)  Collection of unpaid fees, taxes or penalties. If any person shall fail or neglect to pay any license fee, tax or penalty as required by this division, such fee, tax or penalty is subject to collection in the manner as provided for the collection of taxes, regardless of the provisions of this section for penalties. 
(f)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return as required by this division, the business license clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in or may come into the possession of the city. Upon the basis of this estimate, the business license clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(2)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination of tax due under this section, the business license clerk may offset overpayments for a period or penalties against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed at one percent per month. 
(3)  Interest on amount due. The amount of the determination of tax due under this division, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one full month. The finance director or city manager may waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on unpaid taxes or assessments whenever or to the extent that he or she reasonably determines that the delay in payment was attributable to the action or inaction of his or her department. 
(4)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure to file a return for taxes due under this section is due to fraud or an intent to evade this section or rules and regulations, penalties shall be assessed at 25 percent of the deficiency, which penalty shall be added thereto. 
(5)  Written notice, manner of service. Promptly after making the determination of taxes due under this section, the business license clerk shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(g)  Collection of tax. 
(1)  Notice of delinquency to persons holding credits or property of delinquent; duty of persons so notified. If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him under this section or if a determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the business license clerk may, not later than three years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the city having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owning any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession owned by them or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the business license clerk consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within five days after receipt of the notice advise the clerk of all these credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(2)  Action for tax; time for. Any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required under this section became delinquent or any amount of tax was required to be collected, the business license clerk may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(3)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this section sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces receipts from the business license clerk showing that the city has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. The purchaser of the business may not operate the business until the requirements of this subscription are met. 
(4)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required by this section, he becomes personally liable for a portion of the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the business license clerk shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. 
(h)  Administration of this division. 
(1)  Authority of business license clerk. The business license clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this section. 
(2)  Rules and regulations. The business license clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division or other laws of the city, of the county and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section and the collection of taxes under this section. 
(3)  Records required of licensee, form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in this city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the business license clerk may require. 
(4)  Examination of records; audit. The business license clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city manager may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax imposed by this section, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(5)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this section, the business license clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or class of person's possession or custody information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to any tax. The reports shall be filed with the business license clerk when required by the city manager and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of sales, and such other information as the business license clerk may require. 
(6)  Disclosure of business of licensee; limitations on rule. The business license clerk or any person having an administrative duty under this section shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operation or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this chapter, except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators and assignees, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(i)  Revocation of license. The continuous failure to pay the tax prescribed by this section shall render the dealer or person liable therefor subject to revocation of their alcoholic beverage license in accordance with the procedures set out in section 6-61. 
(Ord. No. 1999-02, 1-4-99; Ord. No. 2016-23, 9-19-16) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by drink, O.C.G.A. 3-4-130. 
Secs. 82-60—82-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 82-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel means and includes the terms motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for rent value. 
Permanent resident means any person occupying a guestroom in a hotel as defined in this section for a period of more than ten consecutive days. 
Trailer camp means a campground or park for the overnight or temporary parking of trailers and other recreational vehicles for which charges are made as rental for the space occupied. No trailer or recreational vehicle may occupy a trailer camp for more than 14 days in any 60-day period. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-31; Ord. No. 1999-06, 6-7-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-82. - Hotel-motel excise tax imposed. 
(a)  The hotel-motel excise tax to be collected under this article is hereby levied pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(5.1) and shall be imposed at a rate of eight percent for all lodging charges actually collected for any room, lodging, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(b)  The hotel-motel excise tax imposed by this section shall also be paid for the occupancy of a rental space in a trailer camp. 
(c)  The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with the dictates of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(5.1). 
(d)  The quarterly periods referenced hereinafter in this article for the filing of returns and the payment of the tax levied herein shall be in any calendar year as follows: 
January 1 — March 31; 
April 1 — June 30; 
July 1 — September 30; 
October 1 — December 31. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-32; Ord. No. 2005-25, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 82-83. - Collection by operator. 
Every operator or owner maintaining a business regulated by this article in the city shall collect the tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupants. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-33) 
Sec. 82-84. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon the following: 
(1)  Any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint; 
(2)  Any charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodations as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(3)  Any fees and charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations which are charged for occupancy after the first ten days of continuous occupancy of a permanent resident; however, any fees and charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations which are charged for the first ten days of continuous occupancy of a permanent resident shall be subject to the tax herein; 
(4)  Any charges made for the use of meeting rooms and other such facilities; 
(5)  To any room, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(6)  Any charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-34; Ord. No. 1999-06, 6-7-99) 
Sec. 82-85. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the business license clerk on a form provided by the clerk. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The business license clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-35; Ord. No. 2017-09, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 82-86. - Determination of tax; returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date. All amounts of taxes levied under this article shall be due and payable to the business license clerk on or before April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31 next succeeding each respective quarterly period set forth in section 82-82. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; contents. On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period, a return for the preceding quarterly period shall be filed with the business license clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax due under this article, and such other information as may be required by the business license clerk. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax due under this article shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (1951 Ga. Laws, page 360), as amended. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-36; Ord. No. 2017-09, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 82-87. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the business license clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city under this article by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination of tax by the business license clerk under subsection (a) of this section shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall be assessed for each month or fraction thereof from the close of the monthly period in which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The business license clerk or his or her designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his or her determination of tax under this section. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his or her address as it appears in the records of the business license clerk. Service by mail of any notice required by this article is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination under this section shall be mailed within three years after the last day of the calendar month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-37; Ord. No. 2017-09, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 82-88. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return as required by this article, the business license clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the business license clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 82-87(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount due. The amount of the determination of tax due under this article shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall be assessed for each month or fraction thereof from the close of the monthly period in which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-38; Ord. No. 2017-09, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 82-89. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of business license clerk. The business license clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators. Every operator renting guestrooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the business license clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The business license clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator liable for the tax imposed by this article, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports, contents. For purposes of the administration of the provisions of this article, the business license clerk may require the filing of reports by any person having possession or custody of information relating to rentals of guestrooms subject to the tax imposed by this article. The reports shall be filed with the business license clerk when required by the clerk, and shall set forth such information as required by the clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-39; Ord. No. 2017-09, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 82-90. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of the article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the business license clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-40; Ord. No. 2017-09, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 82-91. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for delinquent taxes. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected by this article becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the business license clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the business license clerk showing that he has paid such tax or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required in this section, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Refund or credit for overpayments. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalties or interest due under this article has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the business license clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid the amount of tax due, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the business license clerk, the excess amount paid to the city may be refunded or credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-41; Ord. No. 2017-09, 8-21-17) 
Secs. 82-92—82-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELEPHONE COMPANY TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchise or make contract with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5). 

Sec. 82-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recurring local service revenue means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service; 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city; 
(3)  All charges for local private line services, except audio and video program transmission services, where both terminals of the private line are within the city. 
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-24(b), (c)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-112. - Imposed; due date. 
Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. Such occupational license tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-24(a)) 
Secs. 82-113—82-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REDEVELOPMENT POWERS 

Sec. 82-200. - Exercise of redevelopment powers. 
The city is hereby authorized to exercise redevelopment powers under the "Redevelopment Powers Laws" as it may be amended from time to time. 
(H.B. No. 1753, §§ 1—4, appd. by electors 11-7-00) 
ARTICLE VII. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLES EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 82-220. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern from the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and non-monetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage of collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity, which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly, rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-221. - Authority; rules and regulations; records required. 
(a)  Authority. The chief financial officer shall administer and enforce this chapter for the levy and collection of tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The chief financial officer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and the collection of the tax under this chapter. 
(c)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicles concern subject to this chapter shall keep records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the chief financial officer may require. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-222. - Assessment, levy, and collection. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the city, there is assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under article I, chapter 1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this chapter shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the chief financial officer of the city and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this chapter shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-223. - Authorized capital outlay projects. 
The following projects and purposes for which the proceeds of the tax levied by this chapter are to be expended are specified as follows: 
(1)  Promoting tourism for the Southern Museum of Civil War and Locomotive History. 
(2)  Capital outlay project, Southern Museum of Civil War and Locomotive History at 2829 Cherokee Street, Kennesaw, Georgia. (The payment or prepayment of outstanding bonded indebtedness used to finance, refinance or related to the above; or any combination of the above.) 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with subsection (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-224. - No tax imposed. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the State of Georgia and returns it within the State of Georgia; or 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the State of Georgia and returns it outside the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-225. - Collection allowance. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this chapter shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-226. - Payment; interest; late charges. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month following the month of March 2005 the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the chief financial officer for the city, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this chapter for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the chief financial officer the net taxes due for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon on the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of 1½ percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-227. - Records open for inspection. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are required to keep a record of all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by and duly authorized agent of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-228. - Excise tax return and review. 
(a)  If the chief financial officer is not satisfied with the return of returns of the excise tax provided for herein, or the amount of tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the chief financial officer shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due by him. 
(c)  The chief financial officer or his designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the chief financial officer as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-229. - Failure to make a return. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the chief financial officer shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to make the return and shall be based upon such information, which is or may come into the possession of the chief financial officer. Written motion shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 82-228(c). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-330. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-331. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this chapter transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this chapter until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the chief financial officer or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 82-332. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by the Municipal Court for the City of Kennesaw in accordance with the limits established by the City Charter for the City of Kennesaw. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this chapter shall be effective on the first day of March 2005 and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law, or until otherwise terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the Kennesaw City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 2-22-05) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 58; offenses, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; stopping, standing and parking,O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, 8-15-16) 
Sec. 86-2. - Violations; penalties; notices of violation; summonses. 
(a)  Penalty for violation of chapter. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Form of notice to violators. Forms for notifying violators to appear and answer to charges of violating traffic laws and ordinances shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(c)  Failure to obey summons. Any person who violates a notice to appear given by an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation is guilty of the offense of failure to appear, regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally arrested. 
(d)  Duty of police as to illegally parked vehicles; notice. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found stopping, standing or parking in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or other ordinance of the city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form approved by the chief of police, for the driver to answer to the charge against him at the time and place specified in the notice. 
(e)  Notice to owner for failure to comply with notice attached to parked vehicle. If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under this chapter and other traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to the notice affixed to such vehicle as provided for by subsection (d) of this section at the time and place specified, the police department shall send to the owner of such motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a notice informing him that in the event such notice is disregarded a summons of arrest will be issued. 
(f)  Arrest summons, when issued. If any person fails to comply with a notice given to such person or attached to a vehicle pursuant to this section or fails to make appearance pursuant to the terms of such notice directing an appearance in the municipal court, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted, the police department shall forthwith secure and issue a summons for his arrest. 
(g)  Presumption in reference to illegal stopping, standing or parking. 
(1)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(2)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in subsections (d) and (e) of this section has been followed. 
(h)  Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other traffic ordinance of the city shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(i)  Owner liable for stopping, standing or parking violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stop, stand or park in any street in violation of this chapter or any of the ordinances of the city regulating the parking of vehicles. Such person shall be equally liable with the operator for such violation and in addition thereto may have his vehicle impounded, as provided in section 86-31. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-3; Ord. No. 2016-19, 8-15-16) 
Sec. 86-3. - Traffic schedule. 
The city has compiled a traffic schedule which includes a list designating one-way streets, stop intersections, controlled intersections, through streets, yield intersections, no parking areas, limited parking areas, speed limits, no U-turn locations, no passing areas, no turn or restricted turn locations, traffic lanes, or other such specific regulations. The ordinances and resolutions from which such traffic schedule derive are hereby ratified and confirmed, saved from repeal, and continued in effect. Copies thereof are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-6; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 86-4. - Driving on sidewalks, other off-road areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven on any sidewalk, square or other public or private place other than roads, streets, alleys and drives constructed for the use of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-7) 
Sec. 86-5. - Damaging streets. 
No vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to damage the streets in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-8) 
Sec. 86-6. - Heavy vehicles in residential areas. 
In order to preserve the road surfaces of the city residential streets, and in order to improve the traffic conditions within the city limits, no tractor, trailer, bus or truck with a combined weight of 8,500 pounds or more shall be operated or parked upon the residential streets of the city without the express written consent of the city, provided that nothing in this section shall prevent city or county owned vehicles from using city streets for the specific purposes for which they are designed; and, provided further, that this section shall not apply to any vehicle actually engaged in loading or unloading activity where the driver is present and in charge thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-9) 
Sec. 86-7. - Vehicle operation without muffler. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, tractors and trailers, motorcycles, motorbikes or go-carts, without adequate mufflers on the streets and highways of the city or on private property within the city limits. No property owner shall permit any such vehicle on his property. A violation of this section shall constitute a criminal offense, and continued violation of this section shall constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-10) 
Sec. 86-8. - Railroad trains—Speed restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for the engineer, conductor or any other person in charge of any railroad train, car or locomotive to run the same at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-11) 
Sec. 86-9. - Same—Blocking streets. 
It shall be unlawful for the engineer, conductor or any person in charge of any railroad train, car or locomotive to permit the same to stand upon or block any street crossing or sidewalk in the city for more than five minutes. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-12) 
Sec. 86-10. - Chapter not to interfere with rights of owners of real property with reference thereto. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner, and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in this chapter, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-5) 
Sec. 86-11. - Stop sign and traffic signal control installation requests. 
Stop signs at intersections not currently controlled by signage or signal, or only partially controlled by signage, may be considered for installation of multi-directional traffic control by installation of stop signs or traffic signalization under the following procedures: 
A citizen or citizens may petition the mayor and council to consider increased traffic control at a specific intersection. This petition shall be presented in writing, with accurate locations of the street(s) and specific reasons for consideration for the increased traffic control. If mayor and council deem this request valid and additional supporting information is required, mayor and council will direct the city manager in open council session to conduct a warrant study to obtain traffic and accident data. The city public works division will perform appropriate traffic counts. The city police department will provide accident data for a one year period prior to the date of the citizens' written request. The public works division, in conjunction with the Cobb County Department of Transportation, if appropriate, will apply current highway safety design standards as stated in the most current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways as published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, in the evaluation of the requested controls. Compiled data, evaluation results, and recommendations from both the city public works department and the city police department will be returned to the city manager, mayor and council. Actions will then be taken by mayor and council on the citizens' request based on all submitted facts and data. 
(Ord. No. 1998-03, 3-6-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1998-03, adopted Mar. 6, 1998, set out provisions intended to be included as § 78-10. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 86-11. 
Sec. 86-12. - Parking. 
(a)  Parking zones, signs and restrictions. 
(1)  The city manager, subject to the limitations of this chapter, is authorized to designate and maintain appropriate parking zones, no parking zones, parking signs and parking restrictions in conformity with state law and regulations. 
(2)  The city manager shall submit all proposed parking zones, no parking zones, parking signs and parking restrictions to the mayor and council for approval. No proposed parking zones, no parking zones, parking signs and parking restrictions shall become effective until approved by the mayor and council and proper signage has been erected, installed or marked. 
(3)  All current ordinances, resolutions, and authorizations regarding parking zones, no parking zones, parking signs and parking restrictions in effect on the effective date of this Code are hereby ratified and confirmed, saved from repeal, and continued in effect. 
(b)  Parking prohibited. No person shall park a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, on any sidewalk within the city, or in a prohibited zone, or on a yellow curb, or in violation of any sign posted within the city. 
(c)  Owner liable for violation of parking zones, signs and restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stop, stand or park in violation of this section 86-12 regulating the parking of vehicles. Such owner shall be equally liable with the operator for such violation and in addition thereto may have his vehicle impounded, as provided in section 86-31. 
(d)  Presumption in reference to violation of parking zones, signs and restrictions. In any matter charging a violation of this section 86-12, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was parked in violation of this section 86-12, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(e)  Duty of police as to illegally parked vehicles; notice. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found stopping, standing or parking in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this section 86-12 regulating the parking of vehicles, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner or user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form approved by the chief of police, for the owner and/or driver to answer to the charge against him at the time and place specified in the notice. 
(f)  Notice to owner for failure to comply with notice attached to parked vehicle. If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under this section 86-12 regulating the parking of vehicles, does not appear in response to the notice affixed to such vehicle as provided for by subsection (e) of this section at the time and place specified, the police department shall send to the owner of such motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a notice informing him that in the event such notice is disregarded a notice of hearing for contempt of court will be issued. 
(g)  Violations. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section 86-12 shall be through a civil action in the municipal court by the issuance of a citation, which shall either be left with the vehicle or delivered to the person in possession thereof. For purposes of such civil action, it shall be presumed that the owner of said vehicle is in control and possession thereof. In the event any person is found to have violated this paragraph in such civil action, such person shall be subject to a fine of $25.00, if paid within five days and $40.00 if paid after five days; provided, however, that if a person is found to have violated this paragraph twice within 180 days of the first offense, such person shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 if paid within five days, and $75.00 if paid after five days; and the third or later citations, if received within 180 days of the first offense, such person shall be subject to $100.00 if paid within five days and $150.00 if paid after five days. For any new tickets received after the 180-day period, the parking fines set forth herein shall revert to the "First Citation" status after the expiration of 180 days from the first offense set forth herein for any other tickets written. 
(2)  With regard to all parking areas for which a time limitation is established, it shall be deemed a separate violation thereof for each successive time period in which any vehicle is parked therein in excess of such limitation. All fines imposed as punishment for violation of section 86-12 shall be paid upon conviction thereof or after issuance of the ticket(s) as set forth in subsection (g)(1) to the municipal court clerk. Failure to pay such fines within this time period shall subject the person to contempt proceedings. 
(3)  Any vehicle which has accumulated five or more citations for violation of this section 86-12 for which payment has not been made and which is then parked upon the public way or in any public place at any time within the city, may, at the option of any city police officer, be removed and stored until all such lawful citations have been paid and the cost of such impoundment, storage and other charges authorized by this code have been paid. If impoundment is utilized, a charge for such impoundment of $150.00 shall be charged and paid prior to such release. 
a.  Prior to impoundment of such vehicle as provided in subsection (g)(3), written notice shall be mailed or delivered personally to the owner of any vehicle which has accumulated five or more outstanding citations for which payment has not been made. The notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall inform said owner of the date, nature and number of outstanding citations, that such vehicle may be impounded, and that said owner will be provided with an opportunity to contest the validity of the proposed impoundment upon written request to the clerk of the municipal court within ten days of the mailing of the notice described in this subparagraph. Any owner who requests an opportunity to contest the validity of proposed impoundment of his/her vehicle shall be provided a hearing before the municipal court, which hearing shall be scheduled as soon as practicable, and enforcement of the provisions of subsection (g) shall be stayed pending the decision of the municipal court. For purposes of such hearing, the owner of such vehicle shall be presumed to be in possession and control of such vehicle at all times. 
b.  As soon as a vehicle has been removed and stored under subsection (g), the city police officer or civilian parking enforcement officer taking such action shall so notify the chief of police, and the chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall notify, by registered mail, the registered owner of such vehicle within five business days of the impoundment. Said notice shall state the location of such vehicle and the requirements for release as set forth in this subsection (g). 
c.  Any person having custody of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this subsection (g) shall not release it until the individual requesting its release presents satisfactory evidence of his/her right to possession and signs a receipt therefore. In addition, said vehicle shall not be released until all citations have been paid, as well as all other charges provided for in this subsection (g) or until the chief of police, or his duly authorized representative, shall have certified the posting of a bond equal to the total outstanding amounts due on all citations, as well as all other charges provided for in this subsection (g), with respect to such vehicle. 
d.  Whenever any person requests the right to post bond pursuant to this subsection (g), such bond shall be given in cash and receipt given therefore. Such bond money shall be refunded in the amount of the fine which may be levied for each alleged violation of this subsection (g) upon payment of such fine or upon a finding that no violation occurred by the municipal court. Any bond shall be forfeited unless the person posting it appears in municipal court in accordance with his/her summons. 
(h)  Evasion of parking regulations. 
(1)  Markings. Any person who shall attempt to evade or evades the parking ordinances of the city by erasing any marking placed on any portion of any motor vehicle from the purpose of hindering or preventing city authorities from ascertaining the length of time said vehicle has been parking shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(2)  Removal from one parking place to another. Any person who shall remove any vehicle from one public parking place to another for the purpose of hindering or preventing the proper city authorities from enforcing the city's parking ordinance shall likewise be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Application. The parking areas referred to in this section are hereby declared to be all the parking spaces on the streets and parking lots owned, leased or controlled by the City of Kennesaw, the Kennesaw Downtown Development Authority (KDDA), the Kennesaw Development Authority (KDA), and/or the Urban Redevelopment Agency (URA). 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, 8-15-16) 
Sec. 86-13. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  All law enforcement personnel of the city who are certified in the use of speed detection devices are authorized to use such devices, in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations governing use of speed detection devices in Georgia. 
(b)  That the following speed zones are hereby established by the "List of Roadways" list Number 10-2003-01, exhibit A, which is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk, as approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation and the Georgia Department of Public Safety. 
(c)  That the list of roadways as outlined in subsection (b) may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council of the city pursuant to the statutes and regulations governing applications for permits to use speed detection devices in Georgia. A copy of such list of roadways is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2003-33, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 86-14. - Vehicle immobilization devices; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. The city finds that the immobilization (booting) of vehicles by private companies leads to unnecessary anger, conflict, a drain on public safety resources better spent elsewhere, and does not resolve the issue of the improper use of a parking space. The city has determined vehicle immobilization services to be unnecessary and not in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings, ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Vehicle immobilization device, device, or boot shall mean any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(2)  Operator shall mean any person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, operating vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service. 
(3)  Vehicle immobilization service shall mean a person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, offering services anywhere in the city whereby vehicles are immobilized by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(c)  Violation. Immobilization of the vehicle of another by use of a vehicle immobilization device, boot or other similar device is prohibited in the city. 
(d)  Penalties. In addition to the penalties described in section 1-11, any person(s), operator or vehicle immobilization service found to have violated this provision may be prosecuted for trespass to chattel. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, 8-15-16) 
Secs. 86-15—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 86-31. - Procedure. 
(a)  Authority to establish vehicle pounds. The chief of police is hereby authorized to create a vehicle pound to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by police officers. Such pound shall be located at such places as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(b)  When vehicle may be impounded. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police department, by means of towing the vehicle or otherwise, to a vehicle pound. 
(c)  Immediate record of impounding to be made. It shall be the duty of the officer so impounding a vehicle to immediately report the fact of such impounding, together with any other information which will definitely identify the vehicle, to the chief of police, who shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. 
(d)  Impounding fees. Fees for removal, impounding and storage of vehicles shall be as determined by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Release of impounded vehicles; receipt. Any person claiming any impounded vehicle shall produce evidence of his identity and ownership or right of possession to the chief of police and pay to the operator of the pound the fees for removal and storage, for which a receipt shall be given. An order shall then be issued by the chief of police to the operator of a pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver such vehicle to such person. Thereupon the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the operator of the pound who shall take a receipt in duplicate for such impounded vehicle, which receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle; and one copy of such receipt shall become a permanent record of the police department. 
(f)  Protest of fees due. If protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fee, the chief of police may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge the vehicle upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The person making such protest shall be charged with a violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for his appearance and trial before the municipal court. Thereupon, the chief of police shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. 
(2)  If such person is convicted of violating this chapter or other traffic ordinance by the municipal court, in addition to other costs, the municipal court shall assess as costs the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of such vehicle. 
(g)  Disposition of unclaimed vehicle. If any impounded car is not claimed within 60 days from the date it is impounded, the chief of police shall proceed to sell the car as provided by law, and from the proceeds of such sale pay the accrued storage charges and pay the balance, if any, to the city treasurer. 
(h)  Pound records generally. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a permanent record of all vehicles committed to the pound, the names and addresses of the owners of such vehicles, the numbers of their state license tags and the nature and circumstances of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case. 
(i)  Impounding not to preclude other prosecution. The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-4) 
Secs. 86-32—86-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKER AND TOWING SERVICES 

Sec. 86-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the indicated meanings: 
Dismantled vehicle is any vehicle from which factory installed parts have been removed and not replaced with substitute or similar parts and the vehicle is non-operable, or does not meet the minimum motor vehicle equipment required by Chapter 8, Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia, as amended. 
Dismantled vehicle parts are parts from a vehicle which have been removed and have not been reinstalled on a vehicle. 
Junked vehicle shall mean any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck or other vehicle. 
Non-operable shall be a condition in which the vehicle is unable to move under its own power, has one or more flat tires, or does not meet the minimum motor vehicle equipment required by Chapter 8, Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia, as amended. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Private property shall mean any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility including property owned or managed by the City of Kennesaw. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-51. - Determination of service providers. 
(a)  The City of Kennesaw shall from time to time after a request for qualifications, prepare an approved list of one or more companies to tow private and public vehicles as requested by the Kennesaw Police Department and the City of Kennesaw. 
(b)  The method of determining the list of acceptable companies for towing services will be determined by review of the company's response to the city's request for qualifications. Companies meeting the stated qualifications will be placed on an approved list for service provision with the City of Kennesaw. In addition, the city reserves the right to award service in the best interest of the city and to accept or reject any and all RFQ's and to waive technicalities and informalities in the responses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-52. - Indemnity. 
All wrecker companies under agreement with the City of Kennesaw shall indemnify and defend the city, its governing authority (mayor and city council members), officers, agents and employees, against any and all costs, losses, expenses, damages and liabilities, including attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person or damage to property caused by the wrecker company, its officers, agents, or employees, arising out of the fulfillment of the obligations of the company under the agreement with the City of Kennesaw. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-53. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  At all times during term of service to the city the wrecker company shall, at its own expense, maintain in full force and effect general comprehensive liability insurance and garage keeper's liability insurance with an insurance company authorized to operate in the State of Georgia, the policies to be in form satisfactory to the city attorney. The coverage represented by such policies shall be for the protection and indemnification of the city, members of the mayor and city council, and its officers, agents, and employees against liability for loss or damages for bodily injury, death, and property damage occasioned by the activities of the wrecker company arising out of the fulfillment of the obligations of the company while providing services to the City of Kennesaw, and all costs and liabilities. Minimum liability limits under the general comprehensive liability policy shall be $100,000.00 to $300,000.00 liability limits for personal injury or death of any persons, in any once occurrence, and $50,000.00 for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence, and minimum $100,000.00 garage keeper's liability. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-54. - Enforcement of additional regulations. 
The city reserves the right to enforce such additional rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to protect the interest, safety and welfare of the public in relation to the subject matter of this ordinance, provided that any such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-55. - Removal of wrecked or illegally parked vehicles from public streets and highways. 
A vehicle which has been wrecked or illegally parked may be removed by the City of Kennesaw and/or the City of Kennesaw Police Department from public streets and highways under any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The vehicle is obstructing traffic; 
(2)  The vehicle is blocking a private entrance; 
(3)  The vehicle is blocking a fire hydrant; 
(4)  The vehicle has been reported stolen or taken without the consent of the owner; 
(5)  The vehicle has no registration plate; 
(6)  The vehicle has been left on the public highway for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours; 
(7)  The driver of the vehicle is incapacitated by injury or illness; 
(8)  The driver fails to produce proof of minimum insurance and the officer confirms that the vehicle is uninsured; 
(9)  The driver is arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol and no other person is available and/or capable of driving the vehicle; 
(10)  The driver has accumulated five or more parking citations which have not been paid; 
(11)  Any condition which, in the judgment of the investigating officer; presents a traffic hazard or a threat to the public safety; and 
(12)  Any condition otherwise authorized by state law or set forth in other sections of the City of Kennesaw Code of Ordinances. 
(13)  Under the above conditions, the chief of police or any law enforcement officer of the city shall have the authority to take possession of motor vehicles or parts of motor vehicles located on the public streets and highways. The owner and/or driver of the vehicle may request his/her own towing service or the investigating officer may request that the towing service on a currently approved list with the city be authorized to impound the vehicle. If the vehicle is unattended, the vehicle will be towed by the towing service currently under agreement with the city. 
(14)  The driver of each wrecker truck towing away any vehicle from the scene of a wreck shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276, as amended, which includes taking away all parts belonging to the vehicle which is being towed away, or, if they consist of small parts or broken glass, clearing the streets of said small parts or glass, unless the driver is ordered not to do so by the investigating police officer due to circumstances at the scene of the accident. The failure to comply with this state law requirement is grounds for revocation or suspension of towing privileges under contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-56. - Service and equipment standards. 
(a)  The wrecker company shall have available 24 hours per day, seven days per week, 52 weeks per year, equipment suitable for the accomplishment of the towing of vehicles and properties suitable for the safe and secure fenced storage of vehicles and personnel qualified to accomplish the towing and storage services. The wrecker company should be capable of responding to all calls for service made by the Kennesaw Police Department within 15 minutes on at least 90 percent of the calls. 
(b)  The wrecker service (towing, transportation, and/or storage) shall be conducted in such manner as to provide the city with immediate service so as to tow, transport, and store vehicles ordered to be towed, transported, and/or stored by the police department in a safe and secure impoundment area within the boundaries of the City of Kennesaw or within a 25 mile radius outside the city limits until the vehicle is reacquired by its lawful owner. Such impoundment area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than six feet high with a gate which can be securely fastened and locked. The fence shall have barbed wire running at the top, and the impound lot must be lighted and capable of storing 300 vehicles. The impound area shall contain surveillance cameras that will provide 100 percent coverage of the impound area. Monitors shall be located within the towing company's main office and shall be monitored on a 24-hour per day basis. 
(c)  Wrecker companies shall have available equipment suitable for removing disabled vehicles, including but not limited to mini-bikes, motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, construction equipment, loaded and unloaded tractor trailers and buses. At least one wrecker company on the approved list must also have equipment available that is suitable for removing large trucks from railroad tracks. 
(d)  The wrecker company must maintain a valid business license. 
(e)  The wrecker company must maintain registration with the Georgia Public Service Commission and possess all state required permits. 
(f)  Wrecker companies shall have available a sufficient number of vehicles required to maintain the quality and quantity of service set forth in this section. Each vehicle must be annually inspected by the department of public safety and be maintained in accordance with requirements of state law and in a clean and safe condition at all times. At least one wrecker company on the city's approved list must own and maintain at all times the following equipment (or the right to use the same under a written lease agreement for the period covered by the contract): 
(1)  One minimum 20,000 G.V.W., 20-ton lift and winch rating or larger tandem axle wrecker capable of towing loaded cement trucks, garbage trucks, and fire trucks, etc. In the event that companies on the city approved list owning or having access to said equipment is not available when dispatched, City of Kennesaw Police Department reserves the right to dispatch service from an available wrecker company not on the approved list with access to the required equipment. 
(2)  One minimum 19,000 G.V.W., 15-ton lift and winch rating or larger single or tandem axle wrecker capable of towing loaded medium size trucks and tandem axial tractors from the front. 
(3)  Two slide back wreckers. 
(4)  Two wheel lift wreckers. 
(5)  Two recovery wreckers. 
(6)  All tow vehicles must be commercially manufactured and rated by the manufacturer. 
(7)  Each wrecker shall have the following accessories at all times: 
a.  One snatch block per cable rated for the respective winch. 
b.  One scotch block rated for the truck. 
c.  One container for trash. 
d.  One industrial rated push broom. 
e.  One D.O.T. approved fire extinguisher. 
f.  One F.C.C. approved two-way radio capable of communicating with wrecker service dispatch. 
g.  Emergency amber beacons with proper permits. 
h.  A set of white working lights adjusted to the rear of the wrecker. 
i.  Set of tools (metric and standard) two lug wrenches 5/16 through 3/4, lockout tool, and flashlight. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-57. - Drivers. 
Each wrecker driver employed by the wrecker company shall hold and maintain in effect during the term of his employment, a valid driver's license of appropriate class issued by the state, permitting the driver to operate the towing vehicles necessary to accomplish the services contemplated in this article. The City of Kennesaw reserves the right to conduct background checks on all wrecker drivers employed by the wrecker company, including, but not limited to requiring finger printing, criminal back ground check and driver's history. The wrecker company shall cooperate with the City of Kennesaw in providing information to the City of Kennesaw for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-58. - Compensation for services. 
(a)  The wrecker company shall be responsible for the collection of all charges, fees, and rates charged for any of the services contemplated under the provisions of the arrangement with the city directly from the person who owned or had legal possession of the vehicle towed or stored. At no time shall the city be responsible to the wrecker company for any charges for towing or storage unless such charges are approved by the city manager. 
(b)  The wrecker company shall post towing rates reflecting the prices to be charged to the public. Rates shall be posted in open view to the public in the wrecker company's lobby. In addition to towing, the company shall deliver to each owner or representative of every towed vehicle a price sheet reflecting the prices to be charged by the towing company. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-59. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., as amended, the owner of any vehicle seized may redeem the vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale and destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment of the towing and storage charges if such are determined to be the responsibility of the owner at the hearing held thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 86-60. - Due process for non-compliance. 
(a)  The city manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the towing privileges granted herein for noncompliance of the provisions of this chapter. In the event the city manager seeks to suspend or to revoke the towing privilege, the city manager shall give written notification to the towing company of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the towing company at least five days prior to a notice of hearing. The towing company shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  In the event the city manager shall suspend or revoke the towing privileges hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the city manager. Provided, however, that the towing company shall be authorized to continue the towing services until the date of the scheduled hearing. In any hearing conducted by the city manager, the city manager shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of either. 
(c)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the city manager, the towing company may appeal the decision to the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw, by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of decision of the city manager. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and council for the City of Kennesaw within 45 days after the notice of appeal by the towing company. After hearing by the mayor and city council, city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the city manager or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. In the event the towing company does not file an appeal from any decision of the city manager, as provided herein, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2008-16, 4-21-08) 
APPENDIX A - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
CITY OF KENNESAW, GEORGIA 
ORDINANCE NO. 2011-06, 2011 
AN ORDINANCE  TO  ADOPT A UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE; 
AND,  RESTATE AND INCORPORATE THE DEVELOPMENTAL STANDARDS INTO THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE ADOPTED BY THIS ORDINANCE; 
AND,  RESTATE AND INCORPORATE APPENDIX A, ZONING, OF THE CITY OF KENNESAW CITY ORDINANCES INTO THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE ADOPTED BY THIS ORDINANCE; 
AND,  APPROVE ALL AMENDMENTS TO THE KENNESAW CITY ORDINANCES AS SET FORTH IN THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE AS ADOPTED BY THIS ORDINANCE 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KENNESAW, COBB COUNTY, GEORGIA, AS FOLLOWS: 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw are charged with the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Kennesaw; and, 
WHEREAS, the State of Georgia authorizes the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw to exercise their power as they see fit to protect and maintain the safety and welfare of the citizens and the property located in the City of Kennesaw; and, 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council find that consolidation of all certain City Ordinances into a single standalone document entitled the Kennesaw Unified Development Code would be beneficial to the City and the citizens and property owners in the City of Kennesaw; 
WHEREAS, an Ordinance adopting the Unified Development Code is being approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Kennesaw; 
WHEREAS, the Unified Development Code will include the Ordinances referenced below; and, 
NOW THEREFORE, to accomplish the foregoing, the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Kennesaw while in regular session on April 18, 2011, at 6:30 P.M. pursuant to their authority, do adopt the Unified Development Code, which shall include the following: 
Section 1. 
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw adopt a Unified Development Code which shall be comprised of the following Table of Contents and the corresponding sections: 
CITY OF KENNESAW  UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE  TABLE OF CONTENTS 
SECTION 2. 
The following Development Standards whose section numbers and descriptions are stated below are restated and incorporated, as amended, into the Unified Development Code being adopted: 
100 PROCESS/GENERAL PROVISIONS 
100 GENERAL 
101 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS 
102 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS/APPROVALS 
104 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 
105 FEES, REQUIREMENTS, PENALTIES AND APPEALS 
106 IMPACT FEES/DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
107 SITE CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 
108 STRUCTURAL PLAN REVIEW DOCUMENTS 
200 PLATS/RECORD DRAWING 
200 GENERAL 
201 PRELIMINARY PLATS 
202 FINAL PLAT 
203 LOTS 
204 PHASED DEVELOPMENT 
205 DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS 
206 RECORD DRAWINGS 
207 EXEMPTIONS 
300 SECURITIES AND ENFORCEMENT 
300 GENERAL 
301 MAINTENANCE AND PERFORMANCE SECURITIES 
312 ENFORCEMENT 
303 STOP WORK ORDERS 
400 TECHNICAL STANDARDS 
401 STREETS 
402 ACCESS 
403 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
404 SIDEWALKS 
405 DISABLED PERSONS REQUIREMENTS 
406 BUS SHELTERS 
407 STANDARDS FOR LIGHTING 
408 EASEMENTS 
409 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
410 WATER AND SEWER 
411 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
412 FENCES, BUFFERS & BERMS, MAILBOXES, AND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 
413 STRUCTURAL RETAINING WALLS 
414 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
415 TIMBER HARVESTING/CLEARING 
416 TREE PROTECTION AND REPLACEMENT 
417 ZONING 
418 DAMS (WATER IMPOUNDMENT FACILITY) 
419 HISTORIC PROPERTIES 
420 CEMETERIES 
421 SWIMMING POOL REQUIREMENTS 
422 UTILITIES 
423 CONDOMINIUMS 
500 MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS 
500 GENERAL 
501 CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE 
502 PRECAST CONCRETE STRUCTURES 
503 WATER 
504 SANITARY SEWER 
505 STORM DRAINAGE 
506 STREETS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY 
600 STANDARD DETAILS 
700 DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 3. 
The Articles set forth below of Appendix A—Zoning—of the Ordinances of the City of Kennesaw and the sections and subsections included in those Articles are restated and incorporated, as amended by the Unified Development Code as adopted, into that Unified Development Code: 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE 
ARTICLE II. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT 
ARTICLE III. - SHORT TITLE 
ARTICLE IV. - INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 
ARTICLE V. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE VI. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE VIII. - REGULATIONS AND USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT 
ARTICLE IX. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS (GENERAL) 
ARTICLE X. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 
ARTICLE XII. - AMENDMENTS 
ARTICLE XIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE XIV. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE XV. - RESERVED 
ARTICLE XVI. - CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER TRIBUTARY PROTECTION 
ARTICLE XVII. - TREE CONSERVATION AND REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
ARTICLE XVIII. - SOIL EROSION REQUIREMENTS 
ARTICLE XIX. - REQUIREMENTS FOR MAKING A ZONING OR LAND USE PERMIT APPLICATION 
ARTICLE XX. - ZONING STANDARDS 
ARTICLE XXI. - PERMITS 
ARTICLE XXII. - SIGN ORDINANCE 
SECTION 4. 
The amendments to the Sections of the Kennesaw City Code Sections being incorporated into the Unified Development Code are described in Exhibit A to this Ordinance. Exhibit A is hereby incorporated into this Ordinance as though fully set forth here and is approved and adopted by the Mayor and City Council. 
SECTION 5. 
The Mayor and City Council approve and adopt the entire Unified Development Code as set forth in Exhibit B to this Ordinance, which is a CD containing the Unified Development Code. That Exhibit is hereby incorporated into this Ordinance as though fully set forth here. 
SECTION 6. 
Once the Unified Development Code is established, the text of all of Appendix A—Zoning—of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinances shall be replaced with the following text: "See Unified Development Code." 
SECTION 7. 
The Mayor and City Council hereby approve the renumbering of the Sections of the Kennesaw City Ordinances as set forth in Exhibit B to this Ordinance. 
SECTION 8. 
In restating and incorporating the Ordinances, as amended, into the Unified Development Code, the Mayor and City Council hereby: 
A.  Specifically incorporate and ratify all prior hearings and findings related to the passage and purposes of the Ordinances incorporated into the Unified Development Code which are merely renumbered and/or amended in part; and, 
B.  Specifically incorporate and ratify any individual zoning resolutions and zoning previously approved and as amended which are currently in full force and effect; and, 
C.  Specifically incorporate and ratify the currently adopted historical districts, and the current central business district; 
D.  Specifically incorporate and ratify all zoning maps, all zoning districts, all zoning decisions, all variances, and all special land use permits currently in full force and effect. 
SECTION 9. 
All ordinances, parts of ordinances, or regulations in conflict herewith are repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
SECTION 10. 
Should any section of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
SECTION 11. 
This ordinance shall become effective from and after its adoption and execution by the Mayor, pursuant to Section 2.11 of the City Charter of the City of Kennesaw. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Kennesaw City Council on this 18 th day of April, 2011. 
ATTEST: CITY OF KENNESAW: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's unified development code as adopted by the city council with Ord. No. 2011-06 on April 18, 2011. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For complete derivation of Appendix A see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-181 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 22; cable communications, ch. 26; environment, ch. 46; historic preservation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 80; utilities, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art IX, § II, ¶ IV; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-60. 

Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.01.00 - TITLE 
This code shall be known and cited as "The Unified Development Code City of Kennesaw, Georgia" and may be referred to as the "UDC." 
1.02.00 - AUTHORITY 
In pursuance of authority conferred by O.C.G.A. § 36-66 et seq., and Article IX of the Georgia Constitution and the amendments thereto, for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the municipality; lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding inadequate light and air; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; improving the aesthetic appearance of the municipality; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the municipality, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the governing body of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, does hereby ordain, enact and thereby incorporate into the City Code of Kennesaw, Georgia, this article and the following articles and sections. 
1.03.00 - APPLICABILITY 

1.03.01 - Generally 
This UDC shall apply only to the incorporated areas of the City of Kennesaw. No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this UDC. A change of use shall conform to the standards, criteria, requirements, and procedures of this UDC. 
1.03.02 - Exemptions and Exceptions 
The following general conditions or circumstances are exempt from the provisions and requirements of the UDC: 
1.  Buildings or structures that are legally under construction on the date of adoption of the UDC; 
2.  Buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of this UDC, provided that construction commences prior to the expiration of the building permit, and continues until completed; 
3.  Development pursuant to an approved development plan or subdivision plat approved prior to the effective date of this UDC, provided that development commences not later than one (1) year after the effective date of this UDC; or 
4.  The proposed use of property lawfully approved as of the effective date of this UDC. 
5.  All building and construction codes and activity as set forth in Chapter 18 of the City of Kennesaw Municipal Code. 
1.04.00 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
1.  These regulations are enacted to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, sizes of yards, courts, and the use of other open spaces, density and distribution of population, and the use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, and public activities. 
2.  The purpose of these regulations is to: 
a.  Promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or general welfare of the municipality; 
b.  Promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; 
c.  Protect property against blight and depreciation; 
d.  Secure economy in government expenditures; 
e.  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
f.  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
g.  Provide adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; 
h.  Avoid undue concentration of population; 
i.  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
j.  Protect the value of existing properties; and 
k.  Promote the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures throughout the municipality in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
1.05.00 - RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
The City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan is the official development policy and implementation guide for the City to coordinate and direct physical and economic development, related public investment, and, to provide reasonable regulations for the development of private property in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. This UDC is designed to implement all provisions of that Plan for the development and use of land. 
1.06.00 - ADMINISTRATION 
The City Manager is the Chief Administrative Official of the City of Kennesaw. Throughout this UDC, the term "City Manager" is used to indicate the responsibility for specified actions, except where specified actions are reserved or specifically delegated by law to another official. In all instances, "City Manager" means the "City Manager or designee." The City Manager will assign authority to the appropriate staff personnel listed below in this section, to enforce, interpret, administer and implement all sections of the Unified Development Code. 

1.06.01 - Building Official 
Shall be the individual who serves as Director of the Construction and Development Division as designated by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with Section 101.4 of the Standard Building Code, 1991 Ed., and as may be amended from time to time. 
1.06.02 - Public Works Director 
Shall be the individual who serves as Director of Public Works Department who plans and directs the work of the department, supervises the work of personnel involved in street and drainage system, vehicle and equipment maintenance, and solid waste collection and disposal. 
1.06.03 - Planning and Zoning Administrator 
City of Kennesaw staff person authorized to interpret, amend and regulate the Zoning Ordinance, Historic Preservation Design Guidelines, Architectural Standards and to ensure consistent compliance to the adopted Comprehensive Plan, all adopted Master Plans and Studies for the City of Kennesaw and all other duties assigned by the City Manager. 
1.06.04 - Plan Review Committee 
The Kennesaw Development Plan Review committee comprised of representatives of internal departments to interface with outside agencies and private companies involved in the development process. 
•  Building Services 
•  Public Works 
•  City Engineer 
•  Planning and Zoning 
•  Economic Development 
•  Environmental 
The duty of this committee is to provide review and regulatory oversight over all development regulations that involve development activity in the City of Kennesaw. 
1.07.00 - DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE 

1.07.01 - City of Kennesaw Future Land Use Map 
The City of Kennesaw Future Land Use Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
1.07.02 - City of Kennesaw Character Area Map 
The City of Kennesaw Character Area Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and provided in the Comprehensive Plan, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
1.07.03 - City of Kennesaw Zoning Map 
The City of Kennesaw Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
1.07.04 - Building and Construction Codes 
A.  All building and construction codes are listed in Sections 18-15 and Section 18-16 of the City of Kennesaw Municipal Code. 
B.  Availability for Review. (Sec 18-17) 
A copy of each of the technical codes is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available for review upon request. 
1.07.05 - (Reserved) 
1.08.00 - RULES OF INTERPRETATION 

1.08.01 - Generally 
Specific provisions of this UDC shall be followed in lieu of general provisions that may be in conflict with the specific provision. In the interpretation and application of this UDC all standards, provisions, and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the City and shall not be construed to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. Where provisions of this UDC conflict with other regulations, the more stringent restrictions shall be applied. 
1.08.02 - Responsibility for Interpretations 
In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this UDC, the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or his/her designee shall be responsible for interpretation. In the interpretation of this UDC, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be guided by the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan and applicable State law. 
Responsibility for interpretation by the Planning and Zoning Administrator as set forth in this section shall be limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of this UDC, and shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this UDC. Interpretation shall not be construed to override the responsibilities assigned by the Mayor and City Council to any commission, board, or official named in other sections or chapters of this UDC. 
1.08.03 - Rules for Boundary Interpretations 
Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts shall be made in accordance with the following: 
1.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street shall be construed as following the centerline of the street. 
2.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
3.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
4.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the shoreline of a river, stream, lake or other water body shall be construed as following such shoreline. 
1.08.04 - Fire District (Sec. 18-19) 
The entire area of the city shall constitute the fire district of the city. 
1.08.05 - Rules of Construction 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
3.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust and company as well as an individual. 
4.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
5.  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
6.  The word "shall" is mandatory not directory. 
7.  The word "may" is permissive. 
8.  The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
9.  The word "map," "zoning map" or "Kennesaw Zoning Map" shall mean the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia." 
10.  "Or" may be read "and," "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
11.  The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
12.  The term "day" means a calendar day. 
13.  The term "month" means a calendar month. 
14.  The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
15.  The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
1.08.06 - Computation of Time 
When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first or last day shall not be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as provided for in O.C.G.A., Section 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the person shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
1.09.00 - ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall have the meaning herein indicated. The following terms are defined for purposes of this UDC. 

1.09.01 - Acronyms 

 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
1.09.02 - Definitions 
1st Class Stream Boundary: All that land identified as Zone A on the effective "flood insurance rate map" prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and/or all that land as identified on the Chattahoochee Tributary Map within the 1st Class Stream Boundary. Provided, however, a report prepared and sealed by a registered engineer defining the unaltered area of special flood hazard may be substituted in lieu of the above. 
2nd Class Stream Boundary: The stream channel and all that land identified by the soil survey report of Cobb County, Georgia prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service classified as a young alluvium and more specifically as the following type series: Buncombe, Congaree, Chewacla, Wehadkee and/or all that land as identified on the Chattahoochee Tributary Map within the 2nd Class stream boundary. Provided, however, a report prepared and sealed by a registered engineer defining the unaltered area of special flood hazard may be substituted in lieu of the above. 
Abandoned Sign: A sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or un-kept, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. Abandoned signs will be required to meet current sign ordinance regulations for height, square feet, location and material requirements. 
Acceleration/deceleration lane. An additional lane provided along a major thoroughfare running from a private driveway or property entrance for a distance of the greater of 60 percent of the property frontage or 100 feet. 
Accessory Building or Structure: A building or structure subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot or property and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building, provided any such structure or building is built with or after the construction of the principal building. Where an accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building or structure shall be considered part of the principal building. An accessory building shall be located behind the principal building. The use of an accessory structure must be identical and accessory to the use of the principle building. Accessory structures include garages, decks, and fences. 
Accessory Retail Uses: Retail sales and services accessory to the operation of an office building or institutional use, motel, hotel, high-rise apartment development, conducted wholly within the building housing the use to which such activities are accessory, provided that the floor space used or to be used for such secondary uses shall be limited to a total of 25 square feet per dwelling unit in a high-rise apartment development or 25 square feet per room in a hotel or motel, or ten percent of the net floor area in an office building or institutional use, and provided that: 
1.  Every public entrance to such a use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure; 
2.  No show window, advertising, or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure; and 
3.  No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside of the primary use structure. 
However, the requirements of subsections 1. and 2. above shall not apply to restaurants and cafeterias secondary to a hotel or motel and office building or institutional use; these secondary uses may be located in a structure other than the primary use structure. The following secondary uses are permitted: barber shops, beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and distribution stations and other similar personal service establishments; drugstores; bookstores; florists; convenience food stores; gift shops; cafeterias and restaurants; private clubs; laundry facilities for the convenience of residents; newsstands. However, the total net floor space for such secondary building or structure uses shall be limited to 6,000 square feet. 
Accessory Uses: Uses subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building, provided any such use is built with or after the construction of the principal building. Such uses include: garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, greenhouses, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses, playgrounds, and the like. A tower and/or antenna are considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. 
Accidental Discharge: A discharge prohibited by this article, which occurs by chance and without planning, thought or intention prior to occurrence. 
Adaptive Use: Recycling an old building for a use other than that for which it was originally constructed. 
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered New Construction. 
Administrator: A City of Kennesaw city engineer, zoning administrator, City or County Arborists or environmental specialist. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A "substantial business activity" exits where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(2)  At least 25 percent of the wholesale value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(3)  At least 25 percent of the retail value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(4)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of the foregoing items; or 
(5)  The establishment devotes at least 25 percent of its interior business space or, if less than 25 percent, devotes at least 500 square feet of its interior business space to the display, sale, and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in the term "interior business space"); or 
(6)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 1,000 of the foregoing items and limits access to the premises or to the portion of the premises occupied by said items to adults only; or 
(7)  The establishment regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, using "adult," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(8)  Maintains an adult arcade, which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means a commercial establishment or facility which regularly features live dancers, performers or other persons who appear nude. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Adult movie house means any movie theater which on a regular, continuing basis shows films rated "X" by the Motion Picture Coding Association of America or any movie theater which presents for public viewing on a regular, continuing basis so-called "adult films" depicting sexual conduct. 
Agricultural Produce Stand: A structure not greater than 1,000 square feet for the purpose of seasonal sales of products grown or produced on the premises on which it is located. 
Alignment: The arrangement of objects along a straight line. 
Alley or Service Drive: A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property and which may be used for public utility purposes. Frontage on said alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this ordinance related to frontage on a dedicated street. 
Altered or Alteration of Building: Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, columns, girders) except changes as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another; any act or process that changes the exterior architectural appearance of a building. 
Alternative Tower Structure: Structures utilized for antenna-mounting purposes that include, but are not limited to, simulated trees, clock towers, steeples, silos, light poles, electric transmission towers and other such structures that are compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and effectively camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Ancillary Retail Sales (industrial districts): Retail sale of goods and services which is secondary in nature to the primary industrial use of the property in so much that the goods for sale have been produced on-site or are in storage at the site for planned distribution to other areas. The ancillary retail sale of goods shall only be conducted as part of the permitted industrial use and shall not be a freestanding business. 
Animal Shows: Exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven days. 
Animated Illumination or Effects: Illumination or effects with action, motion, moving characters or flashing lights. This may require electrical energy, but shall also include wind actuated devices. Specifically included is any motion picture or video mechanism used in conjunction with any outdoor advertising structure in such a manner as to permit or allow the images to be visible from any public right-of-way. This definition does not include signs which indicate only time and/or temperature, provided that such time and/or temperature signs do not change or alternate messages more than 12 times a minute or electronic message signs as permitted within. 
Antenna: Any exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio, wireless, telecommunications signals or other communications signals. Such definition does not include, for purposes of this ordinance, radar antennas, amateur radio antennas, satellite earth stations, television receiving antennas and direct broadcast satellite dishes. 
Antenna, Array: Any two or more antennas that operate as components of a complete antenna suite for a single wireless communication facility. 
Antenna, Concealed: Any antenna designed and erected on or in a building or alternative structure in such a way that it blends in with the existing façade and/or is located such that it is not readily visible to a person at adjacent street level. 
Apartment: A room or suite of two or more rooms occupied or suitable for occupancy as a dwelling unit for one family in a multiple dwelling or any other building not a single-family dwelling or two-family dwellings. 
Apartment Building: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. 
Appeal: A request for a review of the City of Kennesaw's interpretation of or decision with respect to any provision of an ordinance or code to the applicable appeals body. 
Applicant (as pertaining to storm water management): A person submitting a post-development storm water management application and plan for approval. 
Appropriate: Suitable to or compatible with what exists. Proposed work on historic properties is evaluated for "appropriateness" during the design review process. 
Arcade: A building or part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other children's rides or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained, not including commercial recreation restaurant. 
Architectural Style: Showing the influence of shapes, materials, detailing or other features associated with a particular architectural style. 
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated "AD" or "AH" Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard: Refers to the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This information is available from the FIS publication. 
Ashlar: A dressed or squared stone and the masonry built of such hewn stone. It may be coursed, with continuous horizontal joints or random, with discontinuous joints. 
Assisted Living Facilities: Housing units designed for dependent senior adults that require on-going supportive services including but not limited to medical care, food preparation, daily living and the like. 
Automobile Service Station (gas, filling station): A building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories, and supplies, including installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto; facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication of vehicles are permitted if enclosed in a building. 
Automobile Storage Yard and Wrecker Service: An establishment used for the short-term storage of damaged or confiscated vehicles. 
Automotive Paint and Body Repair Shops: An establishment for restoring auto bodies, painting or refinishing with all activities carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
Automotive Salvage and Wrecking Yards: Any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise. 
Auxiliary Water Supply: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters include, but are not limited to, water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These auxiliary waters may be contaminated, polluted or constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control. 
Awning Sign: A sign, symbol, trademark or other message written on an awning attached to a wall. Awning signs are included in the definition of wall signs. 
Baluster: A turned or rectangular upright supporting a stair handrail or forming part of a balustrade. 
Balustrade: An entire railing system including a top rail and its balusters, and often a bottom rail. 
Banner: A display made of a pliable material displaying a commercial or noncommercial message. 
Bar: Shall be an establishment that does not meet the definition of a restaurant, nightclub, lounge, farm winery or hotel, and serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. The establishment derives 75 percent or more total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. A licensee of a bar shall obtain and keep in force and affect a food service permit. 
Base Flood: Refers to a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year [i.e., the "100-year flood"]. 
Basal Area: The cross-sectional area of a tree trunk at diameter breast-height (DBH) expressed herein in terms of "units" per acre. 
Base Flood Elevation: Refers to the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement: A portion of the building partly underground which has more than one-half of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground; and not deemed a story unless the ceiling is six feet or more above the grade. A basement shall be counted as a story if subdivided or used for dwelling or business purposes. 
Bathhouse and Massage Parlors: An establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Bay: One unit of a building that consists of a series of similar units; commonly defined as the number of vertical divisions within a building façade. 
Bed and Breakfast Establishment: A private owner-occupied single-family residence, with a maximum of five guestrooms rented for a daily fee, which is subordinate to the primary residence. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs): A collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Biomedical Waste Transfer and Disposal Facility: A facility engineered and designed for the collection and/or transfer of biomedical waste products such as used gauze, syringes, needles, bandages, test tubes, surgical wastes from a collector vehicle to a larger transport vehicle to another destination for incineration or disposal. 
Block Out Zone: An area that is measured from the intersecting points of a public right-of-way, street, road, highway, railroad, at any entrance onto or exit from any public road or other location and extending 20 feet along the right-of-way in each direction and closed so as to form a triangle in the corner created by the intersection. 
Board (as pertaining to environmental protection): The State Board of Natural Resources. 
Boardinghouse: A building, house, or portion thereof, where persons reside and meals are provided for not more than 15 persons, who are not members of the operator's family, for compensation. 
Bottle House: Any place of business open to the public or any private club providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, which allows guest, patrons or members to bring in and to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Brace: A diagonal stabilizing member of a building frame. 
Bracket: A projecting support used under cornices, eaves, balconies, or windows to provide structural support. 
Buffer: An area serving as a visual or physical barrier created by the use of planted or natural existing materials alone in combination with berms, decorative fencing or walls. Except for a water quality buffer as defined in the UDC, the following uses are permitted within an undisturbed perimeter buffer (after site plan approval and certificates of occupancy issue): public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos, and fences. 
Buffer Area: An area set aside to give additional setback from adjacent structures or types of land use. 
Buildable Area of Lot: Refers to the area of a lot within the building setback lines within which a principal building or structure may be erected. 
Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building, Accessory: A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. An accessory building shall be located behind the principal building. 
Building, Principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the plot on which same is situated. 
Building Form: The overall shape of a structure. 
Building Height (height of structure or building): The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line for mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge of the gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the curb level if the building is not more than ten feet from the front lot line or from the grade in all other cases. 
Building line means a line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang and the subsurface projection of footings; provided however, that such overhang and footings do not encroach upon the adjacent property or right-of-way. 
Building Mass: The physical size and bulk of a structure. 
Building Official: Person authorized to enforce provisions of the technical construction codes. 
Building Scale: The size of structure as it appears to the pedestrian. 
Building Setback Line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the walls of the building or accessory structure and any right-of-way, or other property line, when measured perpendicularly thereto. Covered porches, fireplace chases, decks, eaves or any building structure, whether enclosed or not, shall be considered as a part of the building and shall not project into the required yard. 
Bunting: A long colored strip of cloth or other pliable material used for festive decorations and containing no commercial or noncommercial message, logo or emblem, and must be attached to the structure. 
Business Announcement Signs: Wall mounted or freestanding signs that announce the future opening and location of a business prior to the issuance of City of Kennesaw Certificate of Occupancy and Business License. 
Business Area: Any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more of such street length is in use for business purposes. 
Caliper: The standard for trunk measurements of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken at six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four-inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four-inch caliper. 
Canopy: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so as to extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings, supported by the building and supports extended to the ground directly under the canopy or cantilevered from the building. 
Canopy Sign: A sign affixed to, imposed upon or painted on any permanent roof-like structure extending over a driveway or vehicle access area. Such signs may be mounted flush or suspended. A flush canopy sign is one that is mounted in such a manner that a continuous face with the canopy is formed. A hanging canopy sign is one suspended from or beneath the canopy. 
Capital: The uppermost part of a column or pilaster. 
Casement: A hinged window frame that opens horizontally like a door. 
Car Wash: A building, or portion thereof, where vehicles are washed with the use of a chain conveyor and blower, automated or mechanized washers or hand-held steam-cleaning device. 
Cellar: A portion of a building partly underground which has less than one-half of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground and not deemed a story. 
Centerline of Street: The line surveyed and monumented by the City of Kennesaw or the Georgia State Highway Department or if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Certificate of Appropriateness: A document evidencing approval by the Historic Preservation Commission of the proposal to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property, area, building, structure, monument, streetscape, square or neighborhood located with a designated historic property zone. 
Certified Local Government (CLG): A program that is a mechanism to formally involve local governments in the national historic preservation program. Most states have procedures that extend CLG status to communities that adopt a preservation ordinance and establish a preservation commission. 
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Character: Those individual qualities of buildings, sites and districts that differentiate and distinguish them from other buildings, sites and districts. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area hereinafter referred to as the "protection area;" is defined and established to be the stream channel and all the land within the 1st Class stream boundary and 2nd Class stream boundary of all 1st Class and 2nd Class flowing tributaries of the Chattahoochee River downstream from Buford Dam and upstream from Peachtree Creek as indicated on the Chattahoochee Tributary Map. 
Chattahoochee Tributary Map: That map entitled "Chattahoochee Tributary Map" adopted January 3, 1984, as amended, by the Mayor and City Council which identifies all 1st Class, and 2nd Class flowing streams within the municipal limits of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, and which may identify any affected land within the 1st Class stream boundary and the 2nd Class stream boundary. 
Check cashing establishments means any business, company, corporation, establishment, organization, private enterprise, shop, or store whose primary service is that of a check casher, as defined by O.C.G.A, as may be amended from time to time. 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD): A measure of oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. 
Chevron: A V-shaped decoration generally used as a continuous frieze or molding that is typical of the Art Deco style. 
Christmas Tree Sales: Retail sales of Christmas trees between Thanksgiving and December 26th. 
Cigar shops, smoke shops and tobacco stores: Any establishment that provides tobacco, cigarette and specialized accessories used for smoking purposes for retail sale. All accessories and products are subject to State and local regulations. 
Circuses and Carnivals: Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure for a maximum of seven days. This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility. Fire Code compliance is required. 
Citizen Advisory Committee: A committee comprised of a diverse cross section of citizens serving as volunteers for the purpose of providing feedback and recommendations on proposals dealing with city policies, land use proposals and initiatives that affect the general public. This committee is structured and will follow all the appropriate rules of conduct for committees and meeting structure including taking of minutes and submittal of findings to the City of Kennesaw Departments, City Manager and Mayor and Council. 
City: City of Kennesaw. 
City Council: Mayor and City Council for the City of Kennesaw. 
City Engineer: The official or consulting engineer to whom the city has delegated the responsibilities normally associated with this title. 
City of Kennesaw or City: Refers to a municipal corporation chartered pursuant to the laws of the State of Georgia, any department, board, or commission of such city, any elected or appointed official, or any employee or designee thereof. 
Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clapboard: A long, narrow board with one edge thicker than the other, overlapped to cover the outer walls of frame structures. 
Classical: Of, or pertaining to, the architecture of ancient Greece and Rome. 
Clinic: A building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients, not containing overnight care facilities. A clinic shall include laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services. 
Closed Function: An event not open to the general public which must have a written, limited guest list prepared at least 48 hours in advance of the date on which the closed function is to occur, and which occurs on property owned and maintained by the city. No pay-at-the-door guest or drop-ins are to be permitted. Alcoholic beverages may be served without charge and consumed at closed functions, but the offer and sale of alcoholic beverages at such functions is prohibited; except that a general admission fee permitting attendance at the closed function may be collected in advance. 
Club or Lodge (noncommercial): Building or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Co-location: The placement of additional antennas or antenna array on an existing or approved tower or alternative structures; or the sharing of a common location by two or more approved providers of wireless communication services. 
Collector street: A street which is designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan and which is intended to collect traffic from residential streets and direct it safely to secondary or major streets. 
Column: A slender upright structure, generally consisting of a cylindrical shaft, a base and a capital; pillar: It is usually a supporting or ornamental member in a building. Also, a vertical support of round section that in classical architecture consists of three parts: base, shaft, and capital. 

Commercial Building Type: A definition based on the composition of a commercial building's primary façade. Most commercial façades are divided into major divisions or elements that are used to define the building type. 
Compatible: Not detracting from surrounding elements, buildings, sites or structures; appropriate given what already exists. 
Component: An individual part of a building, site or district. 
Combiner: A device that allows two or more wireless service providers to share an antenna or an antenna array by combining signals to be transmitted and separating signals being received. 
Commercial Filming, Limited: Commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location six or fewer consecutive days per quarter of a calendar year in residential districts or fewer than 15 days per quarter of a calendar year in nonresidential districts. 
Commercial Indoor Recreation Uses: Indoor recreational uses such as bowling alleys, driving ranges, batting cages, shooting ranges, and the like. 
Commercial Message: Any message that identifies, advertises, directs attention to or promotes a business; or any message that attempts to generate good will for a business; or any message that advertises a good, product, property or service or otherwise proposing a commercial transaction. 
Commercial Outdoor Recreation Uses: Outdoor recreation uses such as baseball and softball batting cages, shooting ranges, miniature golf, putt-putt golf, driving range, and the like. 
Commercial Recreation Restaurant: Any establishment which provides as a principal uses the combination of family-oriented recreation and on-premises dining where neither the recreation nor the on-premises dining is clearly accessory or incidental to the operation of the other with no adult entertainment. For the purpose of this definition, recreation may include but is not limited to: 
1.  Television and motion pictures; 
2.  Sound and sight systems; 
3.  Mechanical and/or electronic operated games; 
4.  Animated mechanical devices and/or rides; and 
5.  Live entertainment. 
Commission (as pertaining to environmental protection): The state soil and water conservation commission. 
Community Fair: A festival or fair conducted wholly within public areas owned by a local government, provided that any activity is conducted at least 200 feet from any property line; any event shall not exceed 21 days. 
Community Retail Uses: Retail commercial stores and services which are assigned to serve several neighborhoods making up a community such as: neighborhood retail uses larger than 6,000 square feet, department stores, discount houses, mini-malls, strip shopping centers, home improvement stores, wholesale outlets, clothing and apparel-marts, indoor flea markets, antique malls, sporting good stores, and the like. 
Component: Any assembly, subassembly, or combination of parts for use as a part of a building, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health and safety. 
Condominium (building): Individual ownership of units in a multifamily structure, together with joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds. 
Confined Animal Feeding Operation: A building or fenced enclosure designed and used for the holding or fattening of animals in preparation for market. 
Conservation Easement: A portion of land set aside in its natural state and preserved as open space in perpetuity. 
Construction Activity: Activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in or involving land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facility: as defined by NFPA 1124, the structure is used primarily for the retail display and sale of consumer fireworks to the public. If the amount is greater than 1,000 (gross) pounds, then the occupancy must meet special sprinkler system and other special requirements for an H-3 occupancy under the 2012 International Fire Code (IFC) and International Building Code (IBC). 
Contemporary: Of the current period; modern. 
Context: The setting in which a historic element or building exists. 
Contiguous: Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or portion thereof, which is common or coterminous. 
Contributing: Contributes to the architectural or historic significance of a historic district. (A "contributing building" in a historic district is one that may be of limited individual significance but nevertheless functions as an important component of the district.) 
Convenience Store: A retail establishment whose primary business is the sale of pre-packaged or unprepared food and grocery items which may sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and other goods commonly associated with the same. 
Convenience Food Store with Self-service Fuel Sales: Any retail establishment offering for sale automotive fuels, pre-packaged food products, beverages, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same. Further, there shall be no automotive repairs done on-site. 
Conviction: Adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of "nolo contendere" or the forfeiture or a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Cooling Water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Copy: Refers to the wording, designs and other advertising display on the surface of a sign. 
Corbel: A projection or one of a series of projections, each stepped progressively farther forward with increasing height; anchored in a wall, story, column, or chimney. 

 
Cornice: The projection at the top of a wall. The top course or molding of a wall when it serves as a crowning member. 
Corridor: All land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Cover: Vegetative or earth materials that provide natural shelter for animal life, or the factors that provide such shelter. 
Critical Root Zone (CRZ): The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a circle centered on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and a quarter the number of inches of the trunk diameter. Example: The CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree is 25 feet. 
Crosswalk: A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use for pedestrian use only and is so designed as to provide access to adjacent streets or lots. 
Cul-de-Sac: A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the plat by a vehicular turnaround. 
Cultural Facility (private): Private building or facility such as art galleries, museums, legitimate theaters (other than motion picture or video), libraries, and other uses similar in character above. 
Customer: Any owner of premises receiving any city utility system service or any end-user thereof, including any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual firm, association or trust and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
Cut (as pertaining to earthwork): A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as excavation. 
Dam: Means any artificial barrier, including appurtenance works, which impounds or diverts water, and which either: 
1.  Is 25 feet or more in height from the natural bed of the stream or watercourse measured at the downstream tow of the barrier, or from the lowest elevation of the outside limit of the barrier if it is not across the stream channel or watercourse, to the maximum water storage elevation; or 
2.  Has an impounding capacity at maximum water storage elevation of 50 acre-feet or more; excepting the following: 
a.  Any artificial barrier which is not in excess of six feet in height, regardless of storage capacity, or which has a storage capacity at maximum water storage elevation not in excess of 15 acre-feet regardless of height; 
b.  Any artificial barrier constructed by the United States Soil Conservation Service, or any other department or agency of the United States Government when such department or agency has designed or approved plans, has supervised construction, maintained the program of inspection, provided however, that this exception shall cease when the supervising federal agency relinquishes authority for the operation or maintenance of such artificial barrier; 
c.  Any artificial barrier licensed by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or for which a license application is pending with the Federal Energy Regulation Commission; or 
d.  Any artificial barrier classified by the state soil and water conservation committee as a dam where improper operation or dam failure would not be expected to result in loss of human life. 
Dam Break Flood Zone: The area within the flood contour elevations subject to flooding as designated by the city engineer based upon information obtained from the U.S. Corp of Engineers or other federal, state, or county agencies, or local hydraulic studies undertaken as a result of any seepage or failure of any dam. 
Day Care Center: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, and licensed or registered by the State of Georgia and licensed by the City of Kennesaw as a group day care home or day care center, wherein are received for pay for group supervision and care, for fewer than 24 hours per day, six or more children under 18 years of age. 
Dead storage: Storage of goods partly not in use and not associated with any principal commercial or manufactory use. 
Dead-end street. A street having only one end open for access to another street, the other end being abruptly terminated with no turnaround. 
Deck: A roofless accessory attached or detached platform without exterior walls, generally constructed of wood, which adjoins a residence. Rails or safety features shall not be deemed to be exterior walls. 
Demolition: Any act or process that destroys a structure in part or in whole. 
Density: 
1.  The overall intensity of land use for the total project. 
2.  Residential density is the number of housing units permitted per acre in the zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of the zoning ordinance or as authorized under conditional zoning by the Mayor and City Council. The maximum residential density per developable acre authorized for R-30, R-20, R-15, R-12, R-10, PUD-R, RA-4, RM-8, RM-12, and FST zoning districts are set forth in Chapter Four of the Unified Development Code. These maximums could be lowered by conditional zoning by the Mayor and City Council. A developable acre shall not include any part or parts of rivers, streams, floodplains and natural lakes which are not the result of manmade dams. The maximum allowable dwelling units per acre shall in no event exceed any of the following: 
a.  The maximum set forth in article VIII of this appendix for such zoning district; 
b.  The maximum dwelling units per acre which can be constructed without violating any other restrictions, limitations, and/or requirements of such zoning district or the maximum authorized under conditional zoning by the Mayor and City Council. 
Density Factor: A unit of measure to prescribe the calculated basal area required for replacement or as existing tree coverage on a site. 
Dentil: A small rectangular block used in a series below the cornice. 
Department (as pertaining to environmental protection): The Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Design Standards: The "design standards" manual provides specific development and rehabilitation standards for all new construction, as well as rehabilitation, reconstruction of historic properties within the Kennesaw Historic District. Also applies to the City-wide Design Standards. 
Designation or Designated: A decision by the Mayor and City Council, wherein a property or district proposed for preservation is located, to designate such property or district as a "historic property" or as a "historic district." 
Designated Recycling Collection Location: Metal or heavy-duty plastic containers, bins or dumpsters designed for short-term holding of pre-bagged recyclable items such as tin, aluminum, glass, and paper (no perishable or food items allowed) for scheduled minimum monthly pickup with no on-premises sorting. The center must be maintained in a safe, clean, neat and sanitary fashion. 
1.  Such location shall be visually screened and maintained; 
2.  Such location shall be within the building setbacks unless otherwise approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee due to topography, safety, internal traffic flow, site distance, or for other site-related circumstances not created by the property owner. 
Detention: The temporary storage of storm water runoff in a storm water management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention Facility: A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of storm water runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer: A person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development: A land development or land development project. 
Development or Single Development: Any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
Development Plan: Any plan as determined by the zoning administrator which shows substantial information and intent to develop the property affected in a specific manner. 
Diameter: Diameter breast-height/DBH: The standard of tree size (for trees existing on a site). The tree trunk is measured at a height of four and a half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and a half feet, measure the trunk at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Directional: Refers to providing instructions for travel to or indicating the location of a place or event, whether by words, arrows or other symbols. 
Director (as pertaining to environmental protection): The director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Distance: The measurement in lineal feet from the closest point of the sign to the nearest property line or to the closest point of another sign, as the case may be. 
Division (as pertaining to environmental protection): The Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Doric Order: A classical order most readily distinguished by its simple, unornamented capitals and tablets with vertical grooving, called triglyphs, set at regular intervals in the frieze. 
Dormer or Dormer Window: A window set upright in a sloping roof. The term is also used to refer to the roofed projection in which this window is set. 
Double-Hung Sash Window: A window with two sashes, one above the other, arranged to slide vertically past each other. 
Drainage Easement: An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge storm water runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drip Line: An imaginary vertical line that extends from the outermost branches of a tree's canopy to the ground. 
Drive-in Establishment: An establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked upon the premises. 
Dwelling: A building designed, arranged or used for permanent living and/or sleeping quarters (excludes mobile home). 
Dwelling, Multifamily: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. 
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building designed or arranged to be occupied by one family only. 
Dwelling, Two-Family (duplex): A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping. 
Easement: A grant by the property owner for the use by the public, a corporation, or persons of a strip of land for specific purposes. 
Eating and drinking establishment: Retail establishments selling food and drink for consumption on the premises, including lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate on-site consumption. 
Eave: The underside of a sloping roof projecting beyond the wall of a building. 
Economically and Technically Feasible and Viable: Refers to the capability of being provided: 
1.  Through technology which has been demonstrated in actual applications (not simply through tests or experiments) to operate in a workable manner; and 
2.  In a manner which has a reasonable likelihood of generating a reasonable profit or other financial benefits, when measured over the term of the lease. 
Electronic Display: Shall mean a message displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma, or other similar type of panels or screens. 
Electronic Sign: A sign in which the message may be changed means a sign whose message may be changed at intervals by computer controller, microprocessor controller or by remote control, and whose message is displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma or other similar type of panels or screens, including devices known as commercial electronic message signs or similar devices. 
Element: An individual defining feature of a building, structure, site or district. 
Elevated Building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Elevation: A mechanically accurate, "head-on" drawing of a face of a building or object, without any allowance for the effect of the laws of perspective. Any measurement on an elevation will be in a fixed proportion, or scale, to the corresponding measurement on the real building. 
Encounter Center or Rap Establishment: Any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration of gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Engaged Column: A column partially built into a wall, not freestanding. 
Entablature: The horizontal part of an architectural order, supported on columns, composed of architrave, frieze, and cornice. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
Escort Bureau, Introduction Services: Any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, profit or other consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusements, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Ex Parte Communication: Some form of communication between one party to a proceeding (e.g., an applicant for a permit) and a public official with some responsibility for making a decision affecting that proceeding occurring outside the formal decision-making process and without the knowledge of the other party to the proceeding. 
Existing Construction: Refers to any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the current moment in time (Definition originated from UDC Chapter 3, "Flood Damage Control"). 
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before on or after June 7, 2004. (Definition originated from UDC Chapter 3, "Flood Damage Control"). 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Refers to the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Explicit media outlet means any commercial establishment which has an inventory of goods that is composed of at least 50 percent of books, pamphlets, magazines, or other printed publications, films or other media which depict sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct. 
Extended Detention: The detention of storm water runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extended Stay Hotel or Motels: Any hotel or motel in which fifty percent or greater of all guest rooms have facilities for both the storage and preparation of food and which are designed or utilized for weekly or monthly occupancy. 
Exterior Architectural Appearance: Architectural character, general composition, and general arrangement of the exterior of the structure; including, but not limited to, the kind, color, and texture of the building material and type and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements. 
Exterior Environmental Features: All those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site including but not limited to walls, fences, signs, light fixtures, steps or appurtenant elements thereof including any improvement, grading or alteration of the land. 
Exterior Environmental Features: All those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site including but not limited to walls, fences, signs, light fixtures, steps or appurtenant elements thereof including any improvement, grading or alteration of the land. 
Extreme Flood Protection: Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Façade: That portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending from grade to top of the parapet, wall, or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
False Front: A front wall which extends beyond the sidewalls of a building to create a more imposing façade. 
Family: One or more related persons by blood, legal adoption, or marriage or not more than three (3) persons not related, occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boardinghouse, rooming house or hotel, as herein defined. Maximum residential occupancy for a residential dwelling unit will be calculated by the number of residents per square foot of floor space as per the currently adopted International Property Maintenance Code. 
Fanlight: A window, often semi-circular, over a door, with radiating muntins suggestive of a fan. 
Farm Winery: A domestic manufacturer of wine in quantities of less than 100,000 gallons of wine per year, that is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. 3-6-21.1, or as may be amended from time to time. Provided a license is issued as required by this chapter, a farm winery is authorized to sell wine by the package, by the drink and operate a wine tasting facility on the premises of the farm winery without additional license requirements, except as is required in the city zoning ordinance. 
Fast food restaurant: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building, in cars, on the premises, or off the premises. 
Fee Simple: The owner is entitled to the entire property with unconditional power of disposition during his life and which descends to his heirs and legal representatives upon his death intestate. 
Fenestration: The arrangement and design of windows in a building. 
Fill (as pertaining to earthwork): A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Final Plat: A finished drawing or drawings of the subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. The finished drawing or drawings may consist of one or more drawings of the subdivision which together form the final plat, all of which must comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flag: A piece of fabric or other flexible material solely containing distinctive colors, patterns, standards, words or emblems used as the symbol of an organization or entity. 
Flashing (as pertains to lighting): Illumination which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. The term "flashing" excludes illuminated signs which indicate only time and/or temperature, provided that such time/temperature signs do not change or alternate messages more than 12 times a minute. 
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown in the current land use plan, or as may be defined from time to time by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and its successors. 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor Area, Gross: The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
Floor Area, Net: The floor area within a building being heated by any equipment or appliance. 
Floor Area Ratio: The ratio of floor area permitted on a zoning lot to the size of the lot:  Floor Area/Lot Area = Floor Area Ratio. 
Foot Candle: A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast on to a given point, measured as one (1) lumen per square foot. 
Footprint: The horizontal area as seen in plan, measured from the outside of all exterior walls and supporting columns. It includes residences, garages, covered carports, and accessory structures, but not trellises, patios, and areas of porch, deck, and balcony less than 30 inches from finished grade. 
Fraternity or Sorority House: A dwelling maintained exclusively for members affiliated with an academic or professional college or university or other recognized institution of higher learning. 
Freestanding Sign: A self-contained sign which is wholly independent of any building or other structure, including a portable display sign; but not including any off-premises outdoor advertising sign, any canopy sign, any residential subdivision/development sign, any sign for a nonresidential use in a residential zone. 

 
Functions (as pertaining to wetlands): The beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: storage, conveyance and attenuation of floodwater and storm water; protection of water quantity and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wild life and fisheries; educational, historical and archeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
Gable: The portion, above eave level, of an end wall of a building with a pitched or gambrel roof. In the case of a pitched roof this takes the form of a triangle. The term is also used sometimes to refer to the whole end wall. 
Garage: A structure or any portion thereof in which one or more automobiles are housed or kept, not including exhibition or showrooms, or storage of cars for sale. 
Garbage (as pertaining to Utilities): The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Generalized Wetland Map: A map showing the general locations of wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kennesaw as shown on the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map. 
Golf Course: A tract of land [of] not less than 115 acres dedicated for playing the game of golf which is open to the private club's membership and their guests and special events. The par shall not be less than 68 the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association (USGA). Further, the golf course shall not measure less than 5,550 yards as governed by the USGA. 
Grade: An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grading Permit: A permit issued on-site by the site inspection staff to allow the commencement of any clearing, grubbing and/or grading. This building permit is issued only after a land disturbance permit has been issued and all erosion control and tree protection measures have been installed in accordance with the approved plan. 
Green Infrastructure: Is an approach to wet weather management that is cost-effective, sustainable, and environmentally friendly. Green Infrastructure management approaches and technologies infiltrate, evapotranspire, capture and reuse stormwater to maintain or restore natural hydrologies. 
Green Space or Open Space: Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Grocery Store: A retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
Ground Based Monument Sign: A self-contained sign permanently attached to the ground which is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The sign must be a solid structure. No open spaces which allow a direct line of sight from one side of the sign to the other are permissible in the area located beneath the widest part of the sign face where the message is located in a direct vertical plane to the ground. By way of example and without limitation the sign cannot be attached to, resting upon, or supported by any pillars, columns, pylons which allow for open spaces or direct line of sight from one side of the sign to the other beneath the widest area of the sign face in a direct vertical plane to the ground. Ground based monument signs do not include any off-premises outdoor advertising sign, any canopy sign, any wall sign, any sign designated under Chapter 5 or temporary signs. 
Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Group Home: A dwelling unit, operated by an affiliate of a national, regional, state or county organization with a philanthropic mission, shared by four or fewer persons, excluding resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities, under a structured and scheduled plan that must be provided to the city of Kennesaw, for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential under the direction and guidance of a designated managing caregiver, designated as such by the affiliate organization, who must be a resident of the group home and available by telephone on a 24-hour basis in case of complaints. A copy of the home rules shall be provided to the City of Kennesaw as well as (if applicable) evidence of active enforcement under the Georgia Association of Recovery Residence standards. The schedule of activities may be verified via periodic inspection by community development staff. The term "group home" shall not include a halfway house, a treatment center for alcoholism or drug abuse, a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, a home for the detention and/or rehabilitation of juveniles adjudged delinquent or unruly and placed in the custody of the state, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. The term "group home" shall also not allow the use of a dwelling as an apartment or duplex. A group home shall not allow use of the dwelling as a home for individuals on parole, probation, or convicted and released from incarceration, for any crimes including child molestation, aggravated child molestation, or child sexual abuse, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-4 or individuals required to register as sex offenders pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. A group home may include a home for the disabled. As used in this subsection, the term "disabled" shall mean: 
(1)  Having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  Having a record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such impairment. 
However, "disabled" shall not include persons who currently use illegal controlled substances, persons who have been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of controlled substances, sex offenders, and juvenile offenders or persons with or without disabilities who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others. 
Growing Season: A period of no less than 12 months during which there are at least three contiguous months of dormancy followed by a spring leafing. 
Growler Establishment: A business establishment for the sale of and/or refilling of malt beverages, craft beers or hard cider in unbroken original containers or sealed growlers for consumption at a location other than the licensed premises. 
Grubbing: The removal of understory vegetation from the site, provided that no trees greater than six inches in diameter as measured at the base shall be removed. 
Halfway House: Any dwelling used as a residence by individuals on parole, probation, or serving a criminal sentence on condition of house arrest, for the purpose of rehabilitation of the individual while transitioning back into the community. 
1.  Halfway Houses shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, private or public school, religious assembly, school bus stop, public or private playground and parks or swimming pools, or other areas where minors congregate as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12(a)(3). 
2.  Halfway Houses are not allowed in any residential zoning districts (including any Planned Unit Development and Central Business District). Halfway houses are not allowed in mixed use districts (including UVC and PVC). 
Hardwood Tree: Any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Hazardous Waste: Solid and liquid wastes or combinations thereof that may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or which pose a substantial threat to human health when improperly handled. 
Header: The end of a brick, sometimes glazed. 
Health Department: Refers to the county health department. 
Heavy Manufacturing Establishment: Manufacturing establishments, other than those classified as light manufacturing, including those involving the conversion of raw materials into usable finished products, provided that manufacturing that will generate liquid waste from the manufacturing process or air pollutants shall comply with anti-pollution standards by the state or county. 
Height: The measure in linear feet from the highest point on an object to the unaltered elevation of the ground at the base of the object or directly beneath the object. At the election of the permit holder, the height of a sign may be measured from the highest point on the sign to the level of the nearest road from which the sign is intended to be viewed. When referring to a tower or other structure, a distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
High Style: A completely authentic or academically correct interpretation of an architectural style; a "textbook" example of one particular style and not a composition of several different styles. 
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic: Refers to a property or resource that must be at least 50 years old to be considered "historic". Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces, graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered "historic" nor eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. However, such properties will qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or if they fall within the following categories: 
1.  A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or 
2.  A building or structure removed from its original location but which is primarily significant for architectural value, or which is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; or 
3.  A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with his or her productive life; or 
4.  A cemetery which derives its primary significance from graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; or 
5.  A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other buildings or structure with the same association has survived; or 
6.  A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own exceptional significance; or 
7.  A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it's of exceptional importance. 
Historic Building: A building, such as a house, barn, religious assembly, hotel, or similar construction, is created principally to shelter any form of human activity. "Building" may also be used to refer to a historically and functionally related unit, such as courthouse and jail or a house and barn. (Examples: houses, barns, stables, sheds, garages, courthouses, city hall, social halls, commercial buildings, libraries, factories, mills, train depots, stationary mobile homes, hotels, theatres, schools, stores, and religious assemblies). 
Historic District: A zoning district which possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. (college campuses, central business districts, residential areas, commercial areas, large forts, industrial complexes, civic centers, rural villages, canal systems, collections of habitation and limited activity sites, irrigation systems, large farms, ranches, estate, or plantations, transportation networks, and large landscaped parks). 
Historic Landmark or Property (ies) or historical landmark or property (ies): Any site (including significant trees or other plant life located thereon), building, or structure or particular historic or aesthetic significance to the city, the state or the nation. Landmarks include sites, buildings, or structures where cultural, political, spiritual, economic, social or artistic history of the community, state or nation is reflected or exemplified or which are identified with historic personages or with important events in local, state or national history, or which embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural specimen, inherently valuable for a representation of a period, style or method of construction, or a notable work of construction, or a notable work of a master designer or architect whose individual genius influenced his age, or as determined by the Historic Preservation Commission or Museum and Agency Director. 
Historic Object: A term ("object") used to distinguish buildings and structures from those constructions that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Although it may be, by nature or design, movable, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment. (Sculpture, monuments, boundary markers, statuary, and fountains). 
Historic Preservation: Identification, evaluation, recordation, documentation, curation, acquisition, protection, management, rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, maintenance, and reconstruction, or any combination of the foregoing activities. 
Historic Preservation Jurisdiction: All properties within but not limited to the properties, buildings or sites or districts as designated by the City of Kennesaw and/or further designated on the historic register of the city, state or nation. 
Historic Restoration: Requires that the re-creation duplicate the appearance at some previous point in time as closely as current scholarship allows. 
Historic Significance: The importance of a property to history, architecture, archeology, engineering, or culture of a community, state, or the nation. It is achieved through association with events, activities or patterns; association with important persons; distinctive physical characteristics of design, construction, or form; potential to yield important information. 
Historic Site: Refers to the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure (habitation sites, funerary sites, rock shelters, village sites, hunting and fishing sites, ceremonial sites, pertroglyphs, rock carvings, gardens, grounds, battlefields, ruins of historic buildings and structures, campsites, trails, areas of land, cemeteries, designed landscapes, and natural features, such as springs and rock formations, and land areas having cultural significance). 
Historic Structure: Refers to any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or that has been determined eligible for individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places as determined by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States, for significance at the local, state or national level. 
2.  Determined to be a contributing building, site, structure, or object in a historic district listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a contributing building, site, structure, or object in a historic district that has been determined eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places as determined by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States for significance at the local, state, or national level. 
3.  Listed on the Georgia Register of Historic Places either individually or as a contributing element in a historic district. The Georgia Register of Historic Places uses the same criteria and documentation procedures as the National Register of Historic Places. Properties listed in the National Register are automatically listed in the Georgia Register. Conversely, properties in the Georgia Register are not included in the National Register unless they are separately nominated. The Georgia Register is the state designation referenced by state laws and regulations regarding state grants, property tax abatements, the Georgia Environmental Policy Act, the State-owned Historic Properties Act, and other state preservation and environmental programs. 
4.  Listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places either individually or as contributing element in a historic district. The City of Kennesaw uses the same criteria and documentation procedures as the National Register of Historic Places. 
Historic or Scenic Views: Geographic areas in the City of Kennesaw which have been formally designated on the National Historic Register; have been included in any nature preserve or scenic preservation efforts; have been identified in the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan; or have sufficient historic or scenic merit as determined by the Mayor and Council or by the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission. A scenic view may be from a stationary viewpoint or be seen as one travels along a roadway or path. 
Holding Tank Waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
Home Occupations: Occupying a portion of residence for non-residential uses. A Land Use permit approval is required. 
Hookah: A water pipe of Middle Eastern origin used to smoke tobacco and fruit flavorings. The apparatus utilizes a glass base with a hose and grommet assembly. 
Hookah Bars: Similar in use to traditional bar serving alcohol. The hookah bar sells flavored tobacco that is smoked in hookahs. Subject to State and local laws regulating bar operations and smoking and tobacco use. 
Hospital: A building or portion thereof designed or used for therapeutic treatment of bed patients who are physically or mentally ill. 
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging for at least 15 guests, and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Hotspot: An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in storm water. 
Housing Official: The building official or his or her authorized representative. 
Human Excreta: The bowel and kidney discharges of human beings. 
Hydric Soils: Soils that form as a result of saturated soil conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the Soil Conservation Service. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG): A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group "A" soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Hydrophytic Vegetation: Macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependant on saturated soil conditions. 
Illicit Discharge: Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in Chapter 3. 
Illegal Connection: Refers to either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the (municipal) separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and has not been approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Impervious Cover or Surface: A manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, and patios. 
Includes: Denotes a partial definition. 
Indirect Discharge: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the system. 
Indoor Entertainment Hall: A publicly or privately owned commercial establishment that: 
1.  Provides professional, live musical entertainment or concerts, performed on site indoors, at least three nights a week on average over the course of a calendar year; 
2.  Regularly serves prepared food, with a full service kitchen, consisting of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments; 
3.  Is prepared to serve food every hour it is open; 
4.  Derives at least 25 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional, or operational activities; 
5.  Does not ever provide sexually related adult entertainment; 
6.  Has at least 40,000 square feet of enclosed heated space; 
7.  Has an occupant capacity of at least 3,500; 
8.  Is located on a major thoroughfare; 
9.  Does not provide the sale of alcohol on Sundays, unless such establishment qualifies for Sunday sales under state law and the provisions of this chapter of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinances; and 
10.  Does not allow the admission of persons under the age of 21 during hours when alcohol is served, except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-90 hereunder. Indoor entertainment halls shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages through concession sales. 
Industrial Activity: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b) (14). 
Industrial Fluids System: Any system containing a fluid or solution, which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted, in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system or pollutional hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; process waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system, which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffin's, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes; or contaminated natural waters emanating from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems. 
Industrial Storm Water Permit: A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial storm water discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Industrial User: A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Industrial Waste Surcharge: The charge made in excess of the sewer service charge for all wastewater over and above normal wastewater. 
Industrial Wastes: The wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Industrialized Building: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Infill: New construction within a historic district generally situated on the site of a demolished structure but possibly on a site never previously developed. 
Infill Development: The construction of a building on a vacant parcel located in a predominantly built up area. 
Infiltration: The process of percolating storm water runoff into the subsoil. 
Inflatable Advertising Devices: Refers to air or gas filled signs and figures used for advertising purposes. The term "inflatable advertising devices" excludes latex and similar balloons of less than two feet in diameter. 
In-home Day Care: Child care provided within single-family districts subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Maximum of six children for whom compensation is received; 
2.  For [the] purpose of this section only, children who are related by direct blood kin or adoption to the child care provider shall not be included in the calculation of the six children limitation; 
3.  The child care shall not create a nuisance to immediately adjacent property owners; 
4.  Off-street parking must be provided for child care pick-up and drop-off; and 
5.  No employees. 
Inoperative or Junk Condition: means and includes, but shall not be limited to, any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Wrecked. 
(2)  Dismantled. 
(3)  Partially dismantled. 
(4)  Inoperative. 
(5)  Abandoned. 
(6)  Discarded. 
(7)  Does not have a valid license plate attached thereto or is otherwise in bad repair. 
(Code 1986, § 8-5-171; Ord. No. 2006-17, 8-7-06) 
Inspection and Maintenance Agreement: A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of storm water management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Installation: The assembly of an industrialized building on-site and the process of affixing the industrialized building, component, or system to land, a foundation, footings, or an existing building. 
Interference (as pertaining to water and sewerage treatment): The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contribute to a violation of any requirement of the county's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria, including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Interior Sign: A sign intended to be placed in and viewed from the interior of a building. 
Interpretive Restoration: Less scholarly than a historic restoration, it involves keeping all of the original architectural features intact and reconstructing missing elements as faithfully as budget allows. 
Interstate Highway: Refers to any road of the state highway system which is a portion of the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways, as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated by the state department of transportation and approved by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to 23 USC 103, or any limited access highway as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated by the state department of transportation and approved by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the provisions of 23 USC 103. Includes Interstate 75. 
Ionic Order: A classical order distinguished by a capital with spiral scrolls, called volutes. 
Jurisdictional Wetland: A wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
Keystone: The central voussoir of an arch shaped in a wedge form. 
Kitchenette: An area for preparation of foods limited to a refrigerator, sink, stovetop unit, microwave unit or portable oven and shall not include a built-in oven. 
Knee Brace: A non-structural diagonal member used as exterior ornamentation, extending from the façade to the eave of a building. 
Lake: A body of water one acre or more in surface area, created either by a manmade or natural dam or other means of water impoundment. 
Land Development: Any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land Development Activities: Refers to those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land Development Project: Refers to a discrete land development undertaking. 
Land Disturbance: Means any land change intentionally brought about by any person as a result of activities which include, but are not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land-Disturbing Activity: Scraping, plowing, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, or filling of land or placement of any structure or impervious surface, dam, obstruction, or deposit, except that grubbing or ordinary landscape maintenance shall not be considered as a land disturbing activity. 
Land Use Permit: A time limited privilege permit for allowing compatible business uses in residentially zoned property. 
Landfill (private): A disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of the operating day. 
Landmark: A building, structure, object or site worthy of preservation, designated as historic for its historic, archaeological, architectural or aesthetic value. 
Large Quantity Generator of Hazardous Waste: Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity defined as a "large quantity generator" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-8-60 et seq. and regulated by the State of Georgia under that section. 
Legal Lot of Record: A lot which meets the legal requirements set forth for the applicable zoning district. 
Light (architectural): A section of window, the pane or glass. 
Light Automotive Repair Establishment: An indoor repair establishment (no outside storage) for performing light auto and small truck repair (under one ton) such as oil changes, lubrication, transmission, belts, hoses, inspections, brakes, and the like. 
Light Manufacturing Establishment: An establishment for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of material, goods or products; however, the manufacturing and production of any product which emits noxious noise, odor or fumes, bulk storage of flammable materials for resale, and other heavy manufacturing uses listed herein, shall not be permitted. 
Limited Development Area: The portion of the water supply watershed not included in the water quality area. 
Limited Home Occupations: Those occupations which are customarily performed in a small area of a residence due to the low intensity nature of such uses subject to the following requirements: 
1.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, including but not limited to any type of identifying signs. 
2.  No article, product, or service used or sold in connection with such activity shall be other than those found on the premises. 
3.  No mechanical equipment shall be used for such occupation except such equipment as is customary for purely household and hobby purposes. 
4.  Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed in such occupation. 
5.  No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for the operation. 
6.  No materials, equipment, or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises except that one business vehicle (with a manufacturer's towing and/or carrying capacity rating of less than one and one-half tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the limited home occupation. 
7.  The limited home occupation shall not create a nuisance. 
Limited Retail Uses: Commonly found specialized low scale and/or low intensity retail uses (square footages not to exceed 5,000 square feet unless noted below) that offer basic services and frequently purchased goods to the immediate surrounding residential areas such as: antique shop, bakery, barber and beauty shops, beverage shop, bookstore (but not including adult bookstore), bridal shop, camera shop, china and pottery store, clothing store, craft and hobby shop, delicatessen, dog grooming shop, draperies and interior decorating supplies, drug store or hardware store with no permanent outside display (provided that the gross floor area does not exceed 10,000 square feet total), dry goods store, florist, furniture store, gifts and stationery store, jewelry store, manicurist shop, meat market/butcher shop, millinery store, mimeograph and letter shop, music store, novelty shop, pedicurist shop, shoe repair shop, shoe store, market or grocery store (provided that the gross floor area does not exceed 35,000 square feet), and tailor shop. 

 
Livestock, Nondomestic and Wild Animals, and Poultry: Animals, nondomestic and wild animals, and species of the aviary family which are or may be raised for the purpose of providing food, transportation, or being resold or bred (excluding only dogs, cats, rabbits, fish, pet mice, hamsters, gerbils, parrots and parakeets): 
1.  Shall only be permitted on a lot containing not less than two acres; 
2.  All buildings used for animals shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line; 
3.  All animals shall be maintained at least 25 feet from any residential property line; 
4.  There shall be not less than 5,000 square feet of fenced lot area not covered by the principal structure for each animal, unless the property is a bona fide farm. 
Local Issuing Authority (pertaining environmental permitting): The City of Kennesaw Environmental Specialist or a designated and qualified representative of either the City of Kennesaw or the environmental specialist, who shall be responsible for administering this article and has been certified by the director of environmental protection division of the department of natural resources, pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Local Governing Authority: The Mayor and Council of the City of Kennesaw. 
Local Permitting Authority: Refers to the City of Kennesaw to include without limitation, individuals from public works, zoning, or building departments, environmental specialist or code enforcement as applicable. 
Lot: Contiguous parcels of land legally platted and recorded as a legal lot of record, in single or common ownership, and not divided by a public street. Also, a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land and identified by a tract number, lot number or symbol of an approved subdivision plat properly recorded, and which is or may in the future be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot, corner: A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. When the frontage of one street exceeds the frontage of the other, the one with the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. 
Lot, double frontage: Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets. 
Lot Coverage: The percentage of a lot which may be covered with permitted or accessory buildings or structures, excluding walks, drives, and other similar uses, and recreational facilities which are accessory to a permitted use. 
Lot Depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot Frontage: The distance for which the front property line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court of Cobb County; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the same office as of the effective date of this ordinance. 
Lot Width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
Lounge: A separate room, in which alcoholic beverages are sold, connected with a part of an adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel as defined in this section with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 50. A lounge, as defined in this section, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant, shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefore. 
Low Impact Development: Is an approach to land development (or re-development) that works with nature to manage stormwater as close to its source as possible. LID employs principles such as preserving and recreating natural landscape features, minimizing effective imperviousness to create functional and appealing site drainage that treat stormwater as a resource rather than a waste product. 
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Major Street: An existing or proposed street or highway designated as a major street on the official zoning map of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
Maintenance: Routine care for a building, structure or site that does not involve design alterations. 
Major Thoroughfare: A street which is designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan and which is intended to provide swift movement of traffic through the community. 
Manufacture: The process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming, or assembling a product from raw, unfinished, or semi-finished materials. 
Manufactured Home: A single-family dwelling unit that is constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards of 1974 and bears an insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), or one, if constructed in conformity with the Georgia State Standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
Massage Therapy: The application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
Master Plan: A comprehensive plan for the city approved by the planning commission which may consist of the major thoroughfare plan, general land use plan, street and road classification plan and other maps, data and descriptive matter for the physical development of the city of any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto as recommended by the planning commission. 
Material Change in Appearance: A change that will affect the exterior environmental feature or the exterior architectural appearance of a historic property including, but not limited to, any one or more of the following: 
1.  A reconstruction or alteration affecting any exterior architectural appearance of a historical property; 
2.  Excavation or significant land disturbance of a historic property; 
3.  The erection, demolition, restoration or removal of any building or other structure; 
4.  The construction or alteration of any exterior environmental features including but not limited to: driveways, walkways, parking lots, fences, accessory buildings, accessory structures, lighting fixtures, and permanent yard signs; 
5.  The removal of exterior environmental features including trees ten inches in diameter or circumference of 32 inches measured at a point 54 inches above the ground. 
Maximum Residential Occupancy: Maximum occupancy for a residential dwelling unit will be calculated by the number of residents per square foot of floor space as per adopted the currently adopted International Property Maintenance Code 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Microcell: A wireless communication facility comprising an antenna extending no more than four feet above the structure to which it is attached, and with an area no larger than 576 square inches (e.g. 3" × 1 1/2" panel antenna or 2" diameter parabolic antenna) as viewed from any one point. 
Mining: A process involving the removal or extraction of dirt, sand, soil, rock, gravel, minerals, petroleum, natural gas, or other natural resources. 
Minor: Generally, a person less than 18 years of age; for the purposes of Adult Entertainment ordinances, any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Mobile Food Vending Unit: Any motorized vehicle, designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is peddled, vended, sold for sale or given away. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, factory-built home designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Removal of the wheels and the placement on a foundation does not change its classification. A travel trailer is not a mobile home. 
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use. 
Modillion: A small curved and ornamented bracket used to support the upper part of the cornice. 
Modular Building: A factory-manufactured single-family dwelling which is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of "industrialized building." 
Modular Home: A factory-fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes. 
Motel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made primarily direct from an exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby. 
Mothballing: The process of stabilizing and securing a historic building against further deterioration due to weather and/or vandalism. 
Motor Vehicle: An automotive vehicle not operated on rails for use on highways. 
Mullion: A vertical member separating and often supporting windows, doors, or panels in a series. 
Muntin: A secondary framing member to hold panes within a window, window wall, or glazed door. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Pretreatment Standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit: A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. (33 U.S.C. 1342). ( The "Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) 
Natural Outlet: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Natural Vegetated Area: An undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
1.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife; 
2.  Outdoor recreational activities, including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting; 
3.  Education, scientific research and nature trails; 
4.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the pervious nature of the land shall be minimized; 
5.  Limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the permissible uses. 
Neglect: The failure to care for a property in such a manner as to prevent its deterioration. Neglect is often not intentional, but may lead to very serious deterioration of materials and even structural systems. 
Neighborhood Activity Center: The purpose of the neighborhood activity center (MAC) category is to provide for areas that serve neighborhood residents and businesses. Typical land uses for these areas include small offices, limited retail, and grocery stores. 
Neighborhood Retail Uses: Commonly found low scale and low intensity retail uses (square footages not to exceed 6,000 square feet unless noted below) that offer basic services and frequently purchased goods to the immediate surrounding residential areas such as but not limited to: auto parts store, antique shop, appliance store (home use), bakery, barber and beauty shops, beverage shop, bookstore (but not including adult bookstore), bridal shop, camera shop, china and pottery store, clothing store, dance studio, delicatessen, dog grooming shop, draperies and interior decorating supplies, drug store or hardware store (provided that the gross floor area does not exceed 20,000 square feet total), dry goods store, florist, furniture store, gifts and stationery store, jewelry store, manicurist shop, meat market/butcher shop, millinery store, mimeograph and letter shop, music store, novelty shop, paint store, pedicurist shop, shoe repair shop, shoe store, sporting goods store, supermarket or grocery (provided that the gross floor area does not exceed 70,000 square feet), tailor shop, toy store, variety shop, and video stores. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New Construction: Refers to any structure for which the "start of construction" will commence after a specified date in time including any subsequent improvements to the structure after a specified date in time. (Definition originated from UDC Chapter 3, "Flood Damage Control.") Also, the construction of a new element, building, structure or landscape component; new construction involves the introduction of designs not original to the building, structure or site. 
New Development: A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 7, 2004. (Definition originated from UDC Chapter 3, "Flood Damage Control.") 
Nightclub: An establishment having a seating capacity of at least 100 people with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view, deriving its primary income from the sales of alcoholic beverages, and providing to its patrons a band and/or other professional live entertainment performed onsite, including, but not limited to, music, comedy, readings, dancing or acting. All nightclubs shall be equipped with air conditioning and shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from the requirement of maintaining a kitchen in connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and spirituous liquors shall be incidental thereto. 
Nonautomotive Repair Uses: Commonly found low intensity repair shops such as, but not limited to, jewelry, camera, home appliance, televisions, and video cassette recorders. 
Nonprofit Riding Stable: A building for the shelter and feeding of domestic animals, especially horses. 
Noncommercial Message: A copy that does not contain a commercial message and specifically included in the definition of noncommercial message is copy whereby the public is to be informed regarding a political event or candidate or issue. 
Nonconforming Sign: Any lawfully erected sign which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, fails to comply with the requirements of this article, including by reason of annexation into the city. 
Nonconforming Use: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of the ordinance or amendment thereto which does not conform after the passage of this ordinance or amendment thereto with the regulation of the district in which it is situated. A use merely contemplated for the future but unrealized of the effective date of an amendment to this UDC does not constitute a nonconforming use. Existing improvements which did not meet required parking and loading regulation, height regulations, area regulations, and residential floor regulations at the time they were constructed in the district in which they are located are not nonconforming uses as defined above. 
Noncontributing: Does not contribute to the architectural or historic significance of a historic district. (Some noncontributing resources are not yet fifty years of age, and therefore do not meet the age requirement for contributing resources. Other noncontributing resources may be historic but have lost their architectural integrity due to extensive changes or alterations.) 
Nonpoint Source Pollution: A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, storm water runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural Storm Water Management Practice or Nonstructural Practice: Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the storm water management plan that provides for or enhances storm water quantity and/or quality control or other storm water management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and green space areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Non-Storm Water Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. See Chapter 6.08.02 for exceptions. 
Non-Supportive Facilities: Individual housing units designed for independent senior adults that do not include or provide any type of supportive services such as transportation, medical care, food preparation and the like. See also Supportive Facilities and Senior Citizen Housing. 
Normal Maintenance and Repair: Activities related to the reasonable and customary upkeep of structures or property including painting and cleaning. However, normal maintenance or repair conclusively does not include any structural alteration, any modification that requires a building permit or any alteration that costs in excess of 50 percent of the value of the sign prior to such maintenance and repair, as established in the initial sign permit application. The city shall consider updated evidence of value by means of qualified appraisal subsequent to the initial application. 
Normal Wastewater: Wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids and BOD is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorus is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 18 mg/l; and total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
Novelty store: Any establishment that provides unique products for sale not previously defined in this chapter or under any retail use definition. This definition and use does not involve any uses defined under the Sexually Oriented Business ordinance or cigar shop, smoke shop and tobacco store definitions adopted in the code of ordinances. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Nursery or Kindergarten School: Any building used routinely for the daytime care or education of preschool age children and including all normal accessory and play areas. 
Nursing Home: A home for aged or ill persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
Off-premises Outdoor Advertising Sign: Means a sign with a commercial message which identifies, advertises or promotes a product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing not sold, offered or conducted on the lot where the sign is located or which may be sold, offered or conducted only incidentally, if at all, on the premises where this sign is located. This shall include those signs commonly referred to as a billboard. For purposes of this UDC, "off-premises outdoor advertising sign:" shall not include any sign not requiring a permit or any sign requiring a temporary permit under this UDC. Changing the sign face on an off-premises outdoor advertising sign from a commercial message to a noncommercial message will not change the grandfathered or non-conforming status of the sign under this UDC. 
Off-site Facility: A storm water management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
Office Park: Two or more buildings which are clustered together in which professional services are primarily engaged. 
Office Service and Supply Establishments: Wholesale and retail commercial establishments that sell, service and supply small office equipment and supplies such as, but not limited to, stores that offer sales of copiers, facsimile machines, typewriters, ribbons, transcribers, dictation equipment, tape, staplers, and other general office equipment. 
On-site Facility: A storm water management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
On-premises Sign: Means a sign which identifies advertises or promotes a product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing which is the principal product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing sold, offered or conducted on the premises where the sign is located. "On-premises sign" shall be classified for the purposes of this section as canopy, freestanding, wall, residential subdivision/development signs and signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones. For purposes of this section, "on-premises sign" shall not include any sign not requiring a permit or any sign requiring a temporary permit under this section. 
Open Space: Any front, side or rear yards, courts, usable open space provided about a building in order to meet the requirements of this Code. 
Open Space, Landscaped: That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, parking, access and service areas, that is designed to enhance privacy and the amenity of the development by providing landscaping features, screening and buffering for the benefit of the occupants or those in neighboring areas, or a general appearance of openness. Landscaped open space may include, but need not be limited to, grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls and fences, sidewalks/walkways, ornamental objects such as fountains, statues and other similar natural and manmade objects, wood areas, and watercourses, any or all of which are designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within the development. 
Order: A definite arrangement of column, capital, and entablature, each having its own set of rules and ornamental features. The five classical orders are Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, and Composite. 
Other Consumer Goods and Services: Businesses which cater to consumers such as awning shops and sales, burglar alarm systems, clothing (secondhand), exhibition house, furniture, home furnishings, equipment, and appliances (secondhand), glass, mirror, lawn mower and small motor, trading stamp redemption center, and the like. 
Other Service Establishment: Businesses or locations catering to specialty services such as auction house or store, cabinet maker, caterer, delivery and express service, driving school (private), fur repair and storage, gunsmith shop, locksmith shop, safe and vault repair, scientific instrument repair, taxidermist, tool sharpener, and the like. 
Overbank Flood Protection: Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Overlay District: A district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land-use category. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Package Store: A business establishment whose primary business activity is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
Pain Management Clinic: Means an entity or business which fulfills all of the following criteria: 1) A privately owned clinic, business, or office; 2) That is not affiliated with any facility for the treatment of the terminally ill; or any facility for the treatment of drug addiction; or any hospice; or any hospital and; 3) Which employs one or more physicians who are primarily engaged in the treatment of pain by prescribing Pain Medications; and, 4) Which fills or dispenses those Pain Medications either at the same or a different location. 
Palladian Window: A window of large size, characteristic of neoclassical styles, divided by columns or piers, resembling pilasters, into three lights, the middle of which is taller and wider than the others, and is round-headed. 
Par 3 Golf Course: A tract of land not less than 40 acres dedicated for playing an 18 hole game of golf which is open to the general public or private club use. The par shall not be less than 27 for nine holes or 54 for 18 holes from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association (USGA). Further, the golf course shall not measure less than 1,750 or greater than 3,500 yards, respectively. 
Parapet: A low wall or railing often used around a balcony or along the edge of a roof. 
Parcel: Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by any county, city or federal government or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for recreation and enjoyment to the general public. 
Parking for Vehicles: Shall mean to provide a location for on-site parking for automobiles, trucks, and recreational vehicles (with a manufacturer's towing and/or carrying capacity rating of less than 1 1/2 tons). This restriction shall not apply to vehicles parked on religious assembly property which are operated exclusively for religious assembly use. 
Parking Space: An area which has for its exclusive purpose the parking of a vehicle which complies with the adopted design standards. 
Pawn or Pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale upon default. 
Pawn Stores/Shops: Any establishment which offers in the regular course of business "a pawn transaction" as defined in O.C.G.A. 44-12-139 as it exists or as it may be amended. 
Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufactured or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this ordinance. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. "Pawn shop" does not include banks, savings and loan institutions, credit unions, or other banking organizations regulated by state or federal law. 
Payday loan establishment means any establishment whose business includes the making of deferred deposit transactions, commonly referred to as "payday loans." 
Pediment: The triangular gable end of the roof above the horizontal cornice. 
Perennial Stream: A stream that flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on United States Geological Survey (USGS) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale of 1/24,000). 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Person: Any natural person, corporation, or unincorporated association. 
Person in Charge: The person or persons possessed of a freehold of an improvement or improvement parcel or a lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person directly or indirectly in control of an improvement or improvement parcel. 
Personal Property Sales: Sales of personal property under a permit from the city, such as estate sales, yard sales, bakery sales, garage sales, bazaars, and the like; three weekends per calendar year, not to exceed three days per sale. 
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pilaster: A flat-faced representation of a column projecting from a wall. 
Planning and Zoning Administrator: City of Kennesaw staff person authorized to interpret, amend and regulate the Zoning Ordinance, Historic Preservation Design Guidelines, Architectural Standards, ensure consistent compliance to the adopted Comprehensive Plan, all adopted Master Plans and Studies for the City of Kennesaw and all other duties assigned by the City Manager. 
Plan Review Committee: The Kennesaw Development Plan Review Committee comprised of representatives of internal departments as well as interface with outside agencies and private companies involved in the development process. 
•  Building Services 
•  Public Works 
•  City Engineer 
•  Planning and Zoning 
•  Economic Development 
•  Environmental 
The duty of this committee is to provide review and regulatory oversight over all development regulations that involve development activity in the City of Kennesaw. 
Planned Development: A tract of land developed initially under single ownership or control; the development of which is unique and of a substantially different character than that of surrounding areas. Such development shall be based on a plan which allows for flexibility of design not available under normal zoning district requirements. 
Planning Commission: The City of Kennesaw Planning Commission. 
Plat: A map indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of land, intended to be filed for record. 
Pollutant: Anything, which causes or contributes to pollution and diminished water or air quality. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. Any dredge, spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution or pollutants: The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water or air. The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Pond: A body of standing water less than one acre in surface area, created either by a natural dam, or other means of water impoundment. 
Porch: A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a building that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural purposes. 
Portable Display Sign: Means any sign not permanently affixed to the ground, including signs mounted or designed to be mounted on a trailer-type frame or portable wood or metal frame. Portable display signs are included in the definition of freestanding signs. 
Portico: A porch or covered walk consisting of a low-pitched roof supported on classical columns and finished in front with an entablature and a pediment. 
Porte Cochere: A large covered entrance porch through which vehicles can pass. 
Post-development: The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development: The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the city. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Preliminary Plat: A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability, but is not in final form for recording and the details are not completely computed. 
Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Premises [of Sexually Oriented Business] means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
Preservation: The process of taking steps to sustain the form, details and integrity of a property essentially as it presently exists. Preservation may involve the elimination of deterioration and structural damage, but does not involve reconstruction to any significant degree. 
Pressed Metal: Thin sheets of metal molded into decorative designs and used to cover interior walls and ceilings and on the exterior of some 20th century commercial structures. 
Pretreatment or Treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Projecting Sign means a sign securely fastened to the building surface by metal supports which suspend the sign over the public sidewalk. 
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Primary Highway: Means any road of the state highway system which is a portion of connected main highways, as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated by the State Department of Transportation and approved by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to 23 USC 103. 
Primary Permittee: Owners, general contractors and operators of a project having day-to-day operational control of a facility or site. 
Principal Use: The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure. 
Private Club: A nonprofit association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city, which has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued under this chapter, having at least 75 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which injures to the benefit of any shareholders or members, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use to its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guest; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guest beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meetings or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private Community Center: A place, structure, area, or other private or non-publicly owned facility used for and providing fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. 
Private Party Function: An event held by an organizer, private party where alcoholic beverages are provided. The licensee must submit to and have the private party function approved by the supervisor of the city's business license office provided such function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public. In the event the private party function is not approved by the business license supervisor the licensee may appeal said decision to the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and City Council shall have authority to approve the private party function provided the function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public. 
Private Residence: A house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, a boardinghouse or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application for license, or any residence that shall be a nonconforming use in a commercial zone. 
Pro Shop: An ancillary structure or area provided for sale or supply of equipment associated with the primary permitted or accessory use. 
Professional Office: Structure wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations including but not limited to law, doctor, optician, audiologist, accounting, tax preparation, real estate, stock broker, architect, engineer, manufacturer representative, professional counselor, dentist, investigative services, photographer, insurance, contractor, land surveyor, telephone sales, political campaign, veterinarian, travel bureau, chiropractors office. 
Prohibited Sign: Means any sign, other than a non-conforming sign, not conforming to the Chapter. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Projecting Sign: Means a sign securely fastened to the building surface by metal supports which suspend the sign over the public sidewalk. 
Pub: Means any premises at which a retailer licensed pursuant to this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages derives between 50 percent and 75 percent of its total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. A licensee of a pub shall obtain and keep in force and affect a food service permit. 
Public Service Information: Means time, temperature, notice of public meetings, special events, road/traffic directional signs, etc. 
Public Park: Any public lands owned or controlled and operated by this city, any county of this state, any municipality of the state, the state, the United States of America or any property owned or managed by a nonprofit organization, in and upon which facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW): A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the county or the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. 
Qualified Personnel (pertaining to environmental protection): Any person who meets or exceeds the educational and training requirements of specified by O.C.G.A. 12-7-19. (Soil Erosion and Control certification) 
Quasi Judicial: The action, discretion, etc., of public administrative officers or bodies, who are required to investigate facts, or ascertain the existence of facts, hold hearings, and draw conclusions from them, as a basis for their official action, and to exercise discretion of a judicial nature. 
Quoins: Heavy blocks, generally of stone or wood, cut in emulation of stone and used at the corners of buildings to reinforce and ornament walls. 
Real Estate Marketing Sign: A temporary real estate sign located at the entrance to a subdivision/real estate development that shows the name of the project or development, name and phone number of real estate agent or agency that is handling the listing or sales, price range and hours of sales, and not to exceed 16 square feet in area. 
Rear of the Principal Building: Shall be that point where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings or annexes which are not parallel to the main portion of the building. 
Reconstruction: The process of reproducing the exact form of a component, building, structure or site that existed at some time in the past. 
Recreational Vehicle: Refers to a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently tow able by light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Recycling (architectural): The process of restoring, rehabilitating, renovating, remodeling, or adapting an old building so that it can be used by another generation. 
Recycling Center: A center or location designed for sorting or collection of recyclables from designated recycling collection locations and other private entity sources. 
Redevelopment: A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate storm water runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional Activity Center: The purpose of the regional activity center (RAC) category is to provide for areas that can support a high intensity of development. Typical land uses in these areas include high-rise office buildings and regional malls. 
Regional Shopping Center: A group of commercial enterprises offering a range of commercial goods and services in an aggregate of 500,000 square feet or more of net floor area which: 
1.  Are designed as a single commercial group, whether or not located on the same lot; 
2.  Are under one-common ownership or management, or having one common arrangement for the maintenance of the grounds; 
3.  Are connected by party walls, partitions, covered canopies or other structural members to form one continuous structure; 
4.  Share a common parking area; and 
5.  Otherwise present the appearance of one continuous commercial area. 
Regional Storm Water Management: Facility or regional facility referring to storm water management facilities designed to control storm water runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Regulatory Flood: The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood. The regulatory flood is defined as the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year assuming the drainage basin is fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. Only structural storm water control facilities that can be shown on the plans will remain on the final plat copies and are large enough to be included in the hydrograph routings shall be considered when determining the flood peak. 
Regulatory Flood Elevation: The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The regulatory flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the regulatory flood. 
Rehabilitation: The process of returning a building to a state of utility while retaining those elements essential to its architectural, historical and/or aesthetic significance. 
Religious Assembly: A site or facility maintained by a bona fide religious group for the primary purposes of religious worship. Religious assemblies include but are not limited to churches, mosques, synagogues and temples. 
Remodeling: Changing the appearance and style of a structure by removing or covering over original details and substituting new materials and forms. 
Renovation: The process of making a structure usable again where there is a greater proportion of new materials and elements introduced into the building. 
Repair: Any minor change to a property that is not construction, removal, demolition or alteration and that does not change exterior architectural appearance. 
Replacement Tree: A new tree planted on a site to meet minimum site density factor requirements (regardless of whether trees existed prior to any development). 
Reservoir Boundary: The edge of a reservoir, defined by its normal pool level. 
Residence means a house, apartment, boardinghouse or rooming house, duplex, or other multifamily housing, for human dwelling, or any property zoned therefore. 
Residential Street: A street which is designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan and which is used for local circulation in residential areas providing access to abutting property. 
Rest Home: A health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuous nursing care for compensation. 
Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, such place seating a minimum of 50 or more people, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. A restaurant shall maintain a full-service kitchen which consists of, at a minimum, a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed and a refrigerator. A restaurant serves meals every hour that they are open and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits, beer and/or wine to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. In order to be classified as a restaurant under this chapter, the licensee must derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales, over any 12-month period of time, from the sale of prepared meals or food. In the case of an audit, the relevant time period shall be the 12 months immediately preceding the commencement of the audit. If the restaurant being audited has been in operation as a restaurant for less than 12 months, the audit period shall be the period of time the entity has operated as a restaurant, and the restaurant must derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales for that audit period from the sale of prepared meals or food. If the restaurant previously operated as another type of business, e.g., a bar as that term is defined in this section, total annual gross food and beverage sales for the time period it has been operated as a restaurant shall be the only data relevant to the audit and the data for the period it operates as another type of business shall not be examined during the audit. 
Restoration: The process of returning a building to its appearance at an earlier time (though not necessarily to its original appearance). Restoration involves the removal of later additions and the replacement of missing components and details. 
Retail Activities (limited): See limited retail uses. 
Retail Sales, Outdoor: Retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a legally established retail business which has a direct relationship to the existing businesses. 
Retaining Wall: A wall or similar structure devise used at a grade change to hold the soil on the up-hillside from slumping, sliding, or falling. 
Right-of-Way: The real property owned and controlled by a governmental agency for maintaining public infrastructure, including streets, sidewalks, pathways, mass transit rail lines, drainage ditches and structures, shoulders, traffic control devices, and vegetative buffers. The width of the right-of-way outside the pavement of any given street or road can be determined by the City Public Works department. 
Riparian: Belonging to or relating to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond, or impoundment. 
Riser: The vertical part of a step or stair. 
Road Classifications: All roads in Kennesaw and the width of such rights-of-way shall be as follows: 
1.  Arterial — 100-foot right-of-way width. 
2.  Major collector — 80-foot right-of-way width. 
3.  Minor collector — 60-foot right-of-way width. 
4.  Local — 40-foot right-of-way width. 
Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Roof: The top covering of a building. Following are some types: 
1.  Gable roof has a pitched roof with ridge and vertical ends. 
2.  Hip roof has sloped ends instead of vertical ends. 
3.  Shed roof (lean-to) has one slope only and is built against a higher wall. 
4.  Jerkin-head (clipped gable or hipped gable) is similar to gable but with the end clipped back. 
5.  Gambrel roof is a variation of a gable roof, each side of which has a shallower slope above a steeper one. 
Roof Sign: A sign erected, constructed or maintained above the roof of any building. The sign or copy area shall not extend beyond the pitch boundaries or extremities of the roof line. The sign shall be mounted flush as depicted in the illustrations in the UDC sign section. Square footage is to be calculated the same as wall signage. Permit applications shall be accompanied by a site plan which shall be stamped by a registered engineer or architect as to dimensions, above requirements and structural integrity. 
Rooming House: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 15 persons. A building which has accommodations for more than 14 persons shall be defined as a hotel under the terms of this ordinance. 
Runoff: Storm water runoff. 
Sanitary Water Closet: Any flush toilet properly connected with the city sanitary sewer system, or a septic tank of approved construction and condition. 
Sash: A window frame that opens by sliding up or down. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges and universities of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, or as may be amended from time to time, including any public or private location that teaches the Georgia Pre-kindergarten Program and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not include residences where home study programs are located. 
Secondary Permittee: Individual builders, utility companies and utility contractors within common developments. 
Secondary Street: A street which is designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan and which is intended to provide easy and convenient traffic movement within the community. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Self-Service Storage Facility (SSSF): Fully enclosed facility containing independent bays, which are leased to individuals exclusively for dead storage of goods or personal property. 
Semi-Permanent Directional Signs (SPDS): Signs which convey directions to a specific place under construction or to specific real estate for sale or to a noncommercial event, and are not intended to be permanent but rather are intended to provide direction to a place or event for a limited period of time. 
Senior Citizen: Citizens that are 55 years of age or older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as amended from time to time. 
Senior Citizen Housing or Senior Housing: Residential units that are part of a Senior Living development that may be rented or owned by the resident for occupancy. Residential units may be Supportive or Non-supportive. 
Senior Living: Site location, site planning and architectural design that provides a safe, functional live, work, and play environment for residents 55 years of age or older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as amended from time to time. 
Separate Storm Sewer System (Municipal): Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying storm water, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural storm water controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Septic Tank: An underground cavity with watertight walls into which flows the effluent of sanitary water closets and from which effluent does not come to the surface of the ground. 
Service Station: Any building, structure or land use for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil, accessories and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
Setback: The distance that defines the width of a protective buffer, measured from the boundary of the feature of the landscape (e.g., a wetland or stream bank) that the buffer is designed to protect. 
Setting: The immediate physical environment of a building, structure, site or district. 
Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is female, breast, which, to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex. 
Sexual device means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall this definition be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to their premises by reason of age. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theater, an explicit media outlet, or a sexual device shop. 
Shelter (homeless): Charitable, nonprofit, short-term housing and/or room and board accommodations for poor, transient, or needy individuals which must meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Adequate showers and restroom facilities must be provided at the location to meet the needs of the overnight guests; 
2.  Beds must be provided for all overnight guests excluding staff and volunteer workers; 
3.  No shelter shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to the nearest single-family residence; 
4.  Guests of the shelter shall be required to leave the shelter premises no later than 7:00 a.m.; 
5.  All premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary fashion; 
6.  Adequate provisions for transporting and parking guests shall be submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee. 
Shopping Center: A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property and related in its location, size and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. 
Side Lights: A vertical line of small glass panes flanking a doorway. 
Sign: Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, banner, string of lights or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, vehicle or land in view of the general public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
Sign, Business: Any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise which directs attention to goods, commodities, products, services or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
Significant: Possessing importance to a particular building, structure, site or district; essential to maintaining the full integrity of a particular building, structure, site or district. 
Silviculture: A branch of forestry which deals with the establishment, development, care and reproduction of stands of timber. 
Single Housekeeping unit: Means that the occupants of a dwelling unit have established ties and familiarity with each other, jointly use common areas, interact with each other, share meals, household activities, lease agreement or ownership of the property, expenses and responsibilities; membership in the single housekeeping unit is fairly stable as opposed to transient, and members have some control over who becomes a member of the single housekeeping unit. 
Site: A plot of land intended or suitable for development; also the ground or area on which a building has been built. 
Slope: A degree of deviation of surface from the horizontal usually expressed in percent or degree. 
Soffit: The underside of a structural part, as of a beam, arch, etc. 
Soffit Sign means a sign which hangs or is suspended beneath the cover of a walkway or beneath a support extending from a building. 
Softwood Tree: Any coniferous (cone bearing) tree. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Cobb Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Special Exception Use: A use that, owing to some special characteristics attendant to its operation or installation, is permitted in a district subject to approval of the Mayor and City Council, and subject to special requirements, different from those usual requirements for the district in which the special exception use may be located. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relations, or excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism or zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
Specimen Tree: Any tree that qualifies for special consideration for conservation, due to its size, type, condition, or historical value, according to criteria set forth in this ordinance. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Staff: Personnel to include, but not limited to, the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Building Official, and Director of Public Works. 
Start of Construction: Refers to the date a permit was issued to begin a construction project, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State General Permit (pertaining to environmental permits): The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits issued for the control of storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Storefront: The street level façade of a commercial building, usually having display windows. 
Storm Water or Storm Water Runoff: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage resulting from any form of natural precipitation and consisting entirely of water from such precipitation. 
Storm Water Better Site Design: Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural storm water management. Storm water better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and green space, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for storm water management. 
Storm Water Management: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of storm water runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Storm Water Management Facility: Any infrastructure that controls or conveys storm water runoff. 
Storm Water Management Measure: Any storm water management facility or nonstructural storm water practice. 
Storm Water Management Plan: A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Storm Water Management System: The entire set of structural and nonstructural storm water management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the storm water runoff from a site. 
Storm Water Retrofit: A storm water management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no storm water management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the storm water management requirements of the site. 
Storm Water Runoff: The flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over six feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining exterior walls of such story, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes. 
Stream: Any state waters, beginning: 
(1)  At the location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; or 
(2)  At a point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or, 
(3)  Where evidence indicates a drainage area of less than 25 acres that the environmental specialist has verified its existence through field study. 
Stream Bank: The sloping land that contains the stream channel and begins where vegetation is rested by normal flow. 
Stream Channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Streamer: Strips of fabric or other flexible material combined together and used as a wind activated device. 
Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Streetscape: All physical elements that may be viewed along a street. 
Street Fairs: Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, or similar, temporary activities not requiring the use of roofed structures. 
Structural Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any structural change in roof, or dimension of the rooms therein. 
Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment- producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural Storm Water Control: A structural storm water management facility or device that controls storm water runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected which has, or the use of which requires, permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, the following: buildings, gazebos, signs, billboards, tennis courts, radio and television antennae and satellite dishes (including supporting towers), swimming pools, light fixtures, walls, fences and steps. 
Subdivider: A person providing or developing land so as to constitute subdivision. 
Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or a new street or a change in an existing street, and includes existing subdivisions, and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; however, the term does not include combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the local issuing authority. 
Substantial Damage: Refers to damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: Refers to any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a continuous, uninterrupted five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or building code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the building official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Refers to repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Supportive Facilities: Individual housing units designed for independent senior adults that include or provide supportive services such as transportation, medical care, food preparation and the like. See also Non-Supportive Facilities and Senior Citizen Housing. 
Suspended Solids: The total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and referred to as non-filterable residue. 
Swap Meets, Nonrecurring: Retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or secondhand merchandise for maximum period of 48 hours, conducted by a single sponsor no more than twice in any year. 
System: Structural, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, or fire safety elements, materials, or components used separately or combined for use in a building. 
Take-out restaurant: An establishment where food and or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption, here all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the restaurant, and where ordering and pickup of food may take place from an automobile. 
Temporary-Local Directional Signs (T-LDS): Short-term signs which convey directions to a specific place or event. 
Temporary Uses: Specialized and intermittent uses of property such as animal shows, Christmas tree sales, circuses and carnivals, commercial filming limited, live entertainment, personal property sales, religious assemblies, retail sales outdoor, street fairs, and swap meets (nonrecurring) not to exceed 30 days or the time period set forth in these definitions, whichever is lesser. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all such uses. 
Tent: A temporary or permanent structure having a roof and/or walls of fabric. 
Thoroughfare Plan: That plan designated "thoroughfare plan," prepared under the direction of the Public Works Department, and as may be amended from time to time. Thoroughfare Plan may also refer to the Cobb County Thoroughfare Plan as amended from time to time if a City-wide thoroughfare plan is not available. 
Title loan establishment means any establishment whose business includes providing a short-term loan in which the borrower's car title is used as collateral. The borrower must be the lien holder (i.e. own the car outright). Loans are usually for less than 30 days. If the loan is not repaid, the lender can take ownership of the car and sell it to recoup the loan amount. 
Topography: The physical land surface relief describing the terrain elevation and slope. 
Townhouse: An attached or detached house in a row or group, each house separated from adjoining houses in the same row or group by architectural style, changing of façade, offsets and by fire walls or fire separations. Ownership is in fee simple. 
Toxic Pollutant: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA. 
Trailer, Camping: Any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel which is used or intended to be used for either living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, and which does not include all of the following facilities: a flush water closet, a lavatory, a bath or shower, and kitchen sink. 
Transom Window: A small window or series of panes above a door, or above a casement or double hung window. 
Tree: Any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant which normally obtains a trunk diameter of at least two inches and a height of at least ten feet and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree Bank: A fund in the City of Kennesaw's Comprehensive Annual Budget, which holds monies for the sole purpose of purchasing, planting and maintaining trees and landscaping materials on public property. This fund receives contributions made as an alternative compliance means of tree replacement during a land development process. Voluntary contributions may also be made to this fund. 
Tree-Save Area: All areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving specimen or significant trees, and/or conserving natural buffers. 
Trout Streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 etc. seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Tower: Means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including but not limited to self-supported or monopole towers and lattice-framed towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, and cellular telephone or PCS towers and all other non-alternative towers and structures. 
Understory Tree: Any tree which typically grows to a mature height of less than 40 feet. 
Unlawful Structure: A structure found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under the adopted building and safety codes, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
Unsafe Equipment: Any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
Unsafe Structure: A structure that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn the occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
User (pertaining to water and sewerage treatment): Any person, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW. 
Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and railroads. 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
1.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
2.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
3.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the Publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vernacular: Based on regional tradition and utilizing regional materials. 
Village Design: A mixed use corporate, commercial, office or residential district. 
Violation: Any breach of the provisions of this article, including failure to obtain a land disturbance permit when required, failure to follow best management practices, and violating NTU levels when BMPs were not followed. 
Visual Continuity: A sense of unity or belonging together that elements of the built environment exhibit because of similarities among them. 
Wall Sign: A sign, including an awning sign, permanently attached to the exterior wall of a building. 
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water, non-potable: Water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Water, potable: Any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
Water, used: Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
Water Purveyor: A supplier of water, including property owners supplying water for their own use. 
Water Quality Buffer: A designated area of adequate width to provide for protection of the stream bank, channel soils and vegetative cover, as determined by the community development department, that is adjacent to any state waters, watercourses, or drainage areas, and in which no land disturbing activities shall be undertaken unless approved in the site plan. Such activities may include stream crossings for transportation routes or utilities construction, sewer and water line construction and minor landscaping or channel improvement activities to stabilize critical areas. 
Water Quality Critical Area: The portion of the water supply watershed nearest the public water intake, where the most stringent land-use limitations of this article apply. Alternative ways to define the boundaries of the water quality critical area are provided in section 46-152(a). 
Watershed: The land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Water Supply Watershed: The drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally-owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
Water Table: A sloping horizontal surface, of brick or stone, on an exterior wall, usually at the foundation level. 
Weekend Directional Signs (WEDS): WEDS shall convey directions through the use of words, symbols, arrows or otherwise to a specific place, wherein the sign provides direction and attention to a temporary or non-permanent event or happening, such as the sale or lease of real property, to a religious assembly or community gathering, yard sales, moving sales or estate sales. 
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wetland Delineation: The establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the Corps. 
Wetland Protection District: All wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kennesaw and shown on the generalized wetland map. 
Window Parts: The moving units of a window are known as sashes and move within the fixed frame. The sash may consist of one large pane of glass or may be subdivided into smaller panes by thin members called muntins or glazing bars. 
Window Sign: A sign painted upon or affixed so as to be visible through a window. 
Wireless Transmission Facilities: All equipment at a single location used by a private business user, governmental user, or commercial wireless service provider to transmit, receive or relay electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio waves, microwave or any other wireless communication signals. Such a facility may include antennas, arrays of antennas, telecommunication towers, support structures, transmitters, receivers, base station, combiners, amplifiers, repeaters, filters or other electronic equipment; together with all associated cabling, wiring, equipment enclosures and other improvements. 
Wireless Communication Facility, concealed: A wireless communication facility with all the antennas camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the surface upon which they are mounted, or which has all facility components concealed behind landscaping or a façade or parapet wall. 
Yard: A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings, structures, uses, and decks are expressly permitted. When private roads are involved, the orientation and location of the building itself shall determine the front, back and side yards. 
Yard, front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street and the front setback line and projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the rear line of the lot and the line representing the minimum rear yard requirements. 
Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the side line of the lot and the minimum required side yard and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning Buffer: Any area that is required to remain undisturbed as a condition of zoning. 
Zoning District: Refers to the zoning designation of parcels of land as per the Chapter 2 of this UDC. 
Zoning Ordinance: The zoning regulations enacted by the Mayor and Council and set forth in the UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2012-15, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 8-17-15; Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15; Ord. No. 2016-04, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 2016-18, § 4, 8-15-16; Ord. No. 2018-21, § 2(Exh. C), 10-15-18; Ord. No. 2018-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18; Ord. No. 2018-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18) 
Chapter 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
2.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The use of buildings, structures, and land in accordance with the comprehensive plan shall comply with the use requirements for zoning districts set forth in Chapter 2. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which it is located. The regulations contained in this article, are intended to: promote the orderly future development of Kennesaw in accordance with the official comprehensive plan; discourage the size and generally type of development which would create excessive requirements and costs for public services; discourage uses which because of its size or type would generate abnormal amounts of traffic on minor streets; and protect and promote a suitable environment for family life. 
2.01.00 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

2.01.01 - Official Zoning Map 
A.  The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Kennesaw, Georgia," adopted by the Kennesaw City Council from time to time, and certified by the city clerk. Said map and all explanatory matter, including the adopted zoning resolution, thereon accompanies and is hereby made part of this ordinance. 
B.  Said map shall represent as close as possible the actual zoning, but in the event of a discrepancy the explanatory material shall prevail. 
C.  Said map shall be retained in the office of the city clerk. 
D.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the zoning map, such change shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council. 
E.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated or abandoned by official action of the Mayor and Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of same. 
2.01.02 - District Boundaries 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
C.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. However, the explanatory matter shall be the determining factor. 
D.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such lot more than thirty five (35) feet beyond the district boundary line. 
E.  Where any dispute exists, the metes and bounds legal description shall control. 
2.01.03 - Residential Zoning Districts 
The following residential zoning districts are established: 
A.  R-30, Single-Family residential district (30,000 square feet). The R-30 single-family residential district is established to provide locations for single-family detached dwellings or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses at low to moderate densities, with access both to public water and sewerage. 
B.  R-20 Single-Family residential district (20,000 square feet). The R-20 single-family residential district is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family, detached dwellings at medium densities as defined under the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and as may be amended from time to time, with access to both public water and sewerage. 
C.  R-15, Single-Family residential district (15,000 square feet). The R-15 single-family residential district is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family, detached dwellings at medium densities as defined by the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, with access to both public water and sewerage. 
D.  R-12, Single-Family residential district (12,000 square feet). The R-12 single-family residential district is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family, detached dwellings at medium densities as defined by the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, with access to both public water and sewerage. 
E.  R-10, Single-Family residential district (10,000 square feet). The R-10 single-family residential district is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family, detached dwellings at medium densities, with access to both public water and sewerage within designated medium density areas on the comprehensive land use plan and future land use map. 
F.  PUD-R, Planned Unit Development-residential district. The PUD-R planned unit development-residential district is established to encourage and provide flexible site plan and building arrangements under a unified plan of development rather than by lot-by-lot regulation. The PUD-R district is not intended to encourage greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning to assure the provision of park and recreation land and facilities for the use of the occupants of the development in order to obtain a more desirable environment. The density should be consistent with the surrounding development. 
G.  RA-4, Residential District (Four [4] units per acre). The RA-4 residential district is established to provide locations for the development of affordable single-family detached or attached residential dwelling units including the combination of duplexes, triplexes, and quadraplexes, with access to bath public water and sewerage for medium to high density residential classifications as defined under the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and as may be amended from time to time. The dwelling units are to be designed for placement on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit or on an adjoining lot where the units will be attached by a common party wall. 
H.  RM-8, Multiple-Family district (Eight [8] units per acre). The RM-8 multiple-family residential district is established to provide locations for multifamily residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses at high densities as defined under the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and as may be amended from time to time, with access to both public water and sewer. 
I.  RM-12, Multiple-Family district (Twelve [12] units per acre). The RM-12 multiple-family residential district is established to provide locations for multifamily residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses at high densities as defined under the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and as may be amended from time to time, with access to both public water and sewerage. 
J.  FST, Fee-Simple Townhouse district (multifamily). The FST fee-simple townhouse district is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family attached or detached dwellings at high densities as defined by the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and as may be amended from time to time, of two (2) to twelve (12) dwelling units per acre with access to both public water and sewerage. Each unit shall be individually metered. Each attached dwelling unit shall be separated by a fire wall from foundation to roof decking. 
K.  MHP, Mobile Home Park district. This district is established to provide areas where mobile home parks may be appropriate. 
2.01.04 - Commercial, Office and Institutional Districts 
The following commercial, office and institutional districts are established: 
A.  OI, Office/Institutional district. The OI Office/Institutional district is established to provide locations for nonretail commercial uses such as offices and financial institutions. The OI district is designed primarily to provide for four story and smaller office developments, office uses, motels, hotels, banking and professional offices that complement and provide step down nodal zoning away from more intensive commercial uses. 
B.  NS, Neighborhood Shopping district. The NS district is established to provide locations for specialized and/or limited low intensity shopping facilities which are on properties delineated within a neighborhood activity center, community activity center, or regional activity center as defined and shown on the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan, and as may be amended from time to time. These convenience shopping facilities should have low intensity retail commercial uses that have a neighborhood-oriented market and which supply necessities that usually require purchasing with a minimum of consumer travel. 
Areas zoned for the NS district are appropriately located at or adjacent to intersections as opposed to the edge of a NAC. The NS district may also be used to provide step down nodal zoning away from more intensive commercial uses within a community activity center or a regional activity center. The scope at which properties are developed within the NS district should reflect their relatively small neighborhood service area. Additionally, properties developed within the NS should be architecturally compatible with other nonresidential uses permitted within an NS district as defined by the comprehensive plan and the neighborhood residences they serve. 
C.  NRC, Neighborhood Retail Commercial district. The NRC neighborhood retail commercial district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to Neighborhood Activity Center as defined by the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and as may be amended from time to time. 
D.  CRC, Community Retail Commercial district. The CRC community retail commercial district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to serve several neighborhoods making up a community. The CRC district is aimed to provide for planned developments, one destination shopping and service locations to serve the community and to minimize traffic congestion. 
E.  GC, General Commercial district. The GC district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are oriented toward diverse range businesses that are service and product intensive with a need for major road access and visibility. 
F.  HGB, Highway General Business district. The HGB highway general business district is established to provide locations for commercial and service uses which are oriented toward general and specialty service businesses and interstate and state highway travelers. 
G.  UVC, Urban Village Commercial district. The UVC urban village commercial district is established to provide locations for planned mixed-use development of low intensity, low scale commercial, office, and residential uses not subdivided into customary streets and lots and which will not be subdivided. 
H.  PVC, Planned Village Community district. The PVC planned village community district is established to provide locations and encourage flexible site plans and building arrangements under a unified plan of development rather than a lot by lot regulation for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to be self-sufficient neighborhoods making up a community. The developer benefits from better land utilization and economy in the provision of roads and utilities and overall site design. 
Projects within the PVC should be designed to compact unified retail centers within the center of the community. Projects developed within the PVC should occupy a quadrant of an intersection and only ingress and egress from a major or collector street or state highway. Additionally, the desired quadrant location will provide for planned developments, one destination shopping, and service locations to serve [the] community, and to minimize traffic congestion. 
I.  PSC, Planned Shopping Center district. The PSC planned shopping center district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to serve several neighborhoods making up a community. The PSC district is aimed to provide for planned developments, one destination shopping and service locations to serve the community and to minimize traffic congestion. 
2.01.05 - Industrial Zoning Districts 
The following Industrial zoning districts are established: 
2.01.05.01 LI Light Industrial district: 
A.  Purpose and Intent: The LI light industrial district is established to provide locations for light industrial uses such as low intensity automobile repair and service, commercial greenhouses, distribution centers, warehouse and storage, transportation terminals. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the LI district should provide for uses that are low in intensity and scale such to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. 
B.  Uses. Any use not permitted, or not permitted by Special Exception, or not permitted by Land Use Permit is prohibited. To the extent there is a conflict between the Table of Land Uses and this district as set forth herein, this district shall control for purposes of determining whether and how the use is allowed. See Section 4.04.01 for standards associated with Special Exception uses. Any conflict between the standards set forth in this district and those set forth in Section 4.04.01 (as amended from time to time), the standards in Section 4.04.01 (as amended from time to time) shall control for purposes of allowing a Special Exception use. Certain uses marked with an asterisk (*) must ascribe to the specific regulations as set forth in this district. Particular uses may need to comply with a combination of special regulations (*), special exception regulations, and special land use permit requirement. 
The following uses are permitted: 
Accessory retail sales and services 
Agriculture produce stands 
Ambulance services 
Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes 
Amphitheaters 
Ancillary retail sales 
Animal hospitals 
Appliance repair (major) 
Assembly halls 
Automotive paint and body repair services 
Automotive parking lots and garages 
Automotive repair and maintenance facilities 
Automotive upholstery shops 
Aviation airports (private) 
Boat sales and service establishments 
Breeding and boarding kennels 
Building materials stores 
Bus stations 
Bus stations for freight 
Car washes 
Clinics 
Clubs or lodges (noncommercial) 
Colleges and universities (private), including but not limited to research and training facilities 
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries 
Commercial indoor recreation uses 
Commercial outdoor recreation uses 
Community fairs 
Contractors (general, heavy, special) (office/warehouse) 
Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted use 
Dairies 
Designated recycling collection locations* 
Dry cleaning plants 
Electrical supply stores 
Emissions/inspection stations 
Executive golf courses 
Exterminating facilities (insect and/or rodent) 
Farm and garden supply stores 
Farm equipment stores/repair 
Fast food restaurant 
Freight terminals 
Fuel and ice dealers 
Full service gasoline stations 
Funeral homes 
Golf courses (Par-3) 
Golf courses (18-hole regulation; private and public) 
Group homes* 
Halfway houses 
Heavy automotive repair establishments 
Helicopter landing areas 
Hospitals 
Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up establishments 
Light automotive repair 
Light manufacturing establishments 
Linen and diaper services 
Livestock sales pavilions 
Machine shops 
Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on site 
Mobile food vending unit 
Newspaper publishing facilities 
Nonautomotive repair service establishments 
Nonprofit riding stables 
Office service and supply establishments 
Other service establishments 
Outdoor golf driving ranges 
Pain management clinic 
Parking for vehicles 
Plumbing and/or heating equipment dealers 
Poultry hatcheries 
Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments 
Pro shops (accessory to driving ranges/golf courses) 
Professional offices 
Radio and television stations 
Rail stations (commuter) 
Railroad car classification yards 
Railroad stations 
Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses 
Religious assemblies 
Medical research centers 
Research testing laboratories 
Re-upholstery and furniture repair establishments 
Sawmills (temporary) 
Self-service storage facilities 
Sexually Oriented Businesses* 
Shelters (homeless)* 
Taxi stands and dispatching agencies 
Temporary Uses* 
Tire retreading and recapping facilities 
Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities 
Truck terminals 
Utility facilities (private) 
Vending machine sales, service, rental, or repair establishments 
Vocational schools (commercial) 
Warehouse and storage facilities 
Wholesale sales offices 
Wholesale trade and distribution facilities 
Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms 
Zoos 
The following uses are permitted by special exception: 
Amusement centers 
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (accessory use) 
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal use) 
Automobile and truck sales and service facilities 
Automotive storage yards and wrecker service 
Cemeteries 
Crematories, human or animal 
Drive in theaters 
Flea markets 
Mausoleums 
Motorcycles, ATV, and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities (need SE standards) 
Private community centers 
Private schools of general and special education 
The following uses are permitted only by special land use permit: 
Coliseums, stadiums, and conventions centers (privately owned) (SLUP) 
Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas (SLUP) 
Wireless telecommunications facilities (SLUP) 
C.  Requirements for certain uses. The following uses shall have the requirements as ascribed to them in this subsection.* 
1.  Designated Recycling Collection Locations: 
(a)  Must be maintained in a safe, clean, neat, and sanitary fashion; 
(b)  Such location shall be visually screened and maintained; 
(c)  Such location shall be within the building setbacks unless otherwise approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee due to topography, safety, internal traffic flow, site distance, or for other site-related circumstances not created by the property owner. 
2.  Group Home: 
(a)  A group home shall be shared by four or fewer persons, excluding resident staff; 
(b)  the group home must provide the City of Kennesaw with a copy of its scheduled activity plan, a copy of the group home rules, and, if applicable, evidence of active enforcement under the Georgia Association of Recovery Residence standards; 
(c)  the group home must be under the direction and guidance of a designated managing caregiver that resides at the group home; 
(d)  the designated managing caregiver or his or her designee shall be available on a 24-hour basis in the event of emergencies or complaints; and 
(e)  a group home must submit to random inspections by the City Code Enforcement. 
3.  Halfway House: 
(a)  Halfway Houses shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any day care center, school, religious assembly, school bus stop, public or private playground, park or swimming pool, or 'areas where minors congregate' as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12(a)(3). 
(b)  Measurement: For the purpose of measuring the distance required under this subparagraph, measurement shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure of the sensitive use. If there is no structure on the parcel comprising the sensitive use, then the point of measurement is to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel comprising the sensitive use. 
4.  Temporary Uses: 
(a)  An approved temporary use shall not exceed 30-days and may be renewed for not more than one additional 30-day period. 
(b)  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. 
(c)  Application for a temporary use shall be made with the City Business License division. 
5.  Shelters (homeless): 
(a)  Adequate showers and restroom facilities must be provided at the location to meet the needs of the overnight guests; 
(b)  Beds must be provided for all overnight guests excluding staff and volunteer workers; 
(c)  No shelter shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to the nearest single-family residence; 
(d)  Guests of the shelter shall be required to leave the shelter premises no later than 7:00 a.m.; 
(e)  All premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary fashion; 
(f)  Adequate provisions for transporting and parking guests shall be submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee. 
6.  Sexually oriented business: 
(a)  Measurement. For the purpose of measuring the distance required under this subparagraph, measurement shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure of the sensitive use. If there is no structure on the parcel comprising the sensitive use, then the point of measurement is to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel comprising the sensitive use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least 250 feet from another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless same is at least 500 feet from a religious assembly building, school building, governmentally owned and operated building, library building, civic center building, public park, hospital building, community club building, prison building or any residence (sensitive uses). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least 500 feet from a business licensed to sell alcohol on the premises (sensitive use). 
(e)  Sexually oriented businesses are also subject to licensing requirements as set forth in Chapter 22 of the Kennesaw City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
D.  Dimensional standards for Development. Setback shall be measured from the property line of the parcel. The property with the shortest amount of road frontage shall be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
1.  Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet 
2.  Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet 
3.  Maximum height: 50 feet (4 stories maximum) 
4.  A basement shall be counted as a story if the ceiling is six feet or more above the grade and is either subdivided or used for dwelling or business purposes. A basement is a portion of the building partly underground which has more than one-half of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
5.  Minimum building setbacks: 
(a)  Front yard as measured from arterial: 50 feet. 
(b)  Front yard as measured from collector: 50 feet. 
(c)  Front yard as measured from local: 50 feet. 
(d)  Side yard (aka minor side yard): 20 feet. 
(e)  Rear yard: 40 feet. 
(f)  Major side: 25 feet. 
6.  Maximum cover: 80% 
7.  Measuring building setbacks: The number and type of setbacks is determined based on the number and type of public road frontages for the lot as follows and as shown on the following diagram: 
(a)  One public road frontage: The front yard setback is measured from the one public road frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The yard opposite the front yard is the rear yard and the other two yards are side yards. 
(b)  Two public road frontages: The front yard setback is measured from the road with the shortest frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The major side yard setback is measured from the road with the longer frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The yard opposite the front yard is the rear yard and the yard opposite the major side yard is the minor side yard. 
(c)  Three public road frontages: The front yard setback is measured from the road with the shortest frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The two major side yard setbacks are measured from the other two road frontages (arterial, collector, or local). The remaining yard is a minor side yard. 
(d)  Building setbacks apply to both principal and accessory buildings and structure except where it explicitly states otherwise. 
(e)  Irregular shaped lots: The Planning and Zoning Administrator will determine setbacks for irregular shaped lots adhering to the spirit and intent of this section. 
E.  Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an LI district which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 50-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by City staff. The City discourages locating LI districts and developments adjacent to single-family residential districts, unless in a planned mixed use project. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification as set forth in the UDC. 
1.  Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
(a)  Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
(b)  Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
(c)  Reduction of glare; 
(d)  Buffering of noise; and 
(e)  Establishment of privacy. 
2.  Standards. Buffers and berms shall be required when an LI district is located adjacent to a residential district; a minimum 50-foot buffer is required. 
(a)  Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)  Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)  Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffers should provide a 100 percent visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)  Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)  Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(vi)  Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by Chapter 3 of the UDC pertaining to tree preservation and replacement, subject to review and approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(vii)  Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)  When topography and existing conditions allow, the required twenty-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)  Any appeals from a determination by the Zoning Administrator shall be to the Mayor and City Council. 
(b)  Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)  Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)  Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)  Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
F.  Floodplain, wetlands preservation, and water supply and watershed requirements. Any development must meet all state and federal requirements relating to floodplains and wetlands. The Mayor and City Council encourage preservation of wetland areas. Development and design shall first take into account the protection of environmental and natural resources as set forth in Chapter 3 regarding floodplain, soil erosion and sedimentation control, water supply and watersheds, river corridors, and stream buffers. Any development shall comply with Chapter 46 of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinance. Any development shall be designed to avoid unnecessary impervious surface cover; provide adequate access to lots and sites; avoid adverse effects of shadow glare, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on surrounding property. No floodplains and/or wetlands may be used in calculating the overall density of the development. 
G.  Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection: Any property located within the "protection area" as defined and established to be the stream channel and all the land within the 1st Class stream boundary and 2nd Class stream boundary of all 1st class and 2nd class flowing tributaries of the Chattahoochee River downstream from Buford Dam and upstream from Peachtree Creek as indicated on the Chattahoochee Tributary Map shall comply with Chapter 3.06.1 of the UDC, and as amended. 
H.  Landscaping and Tree Requirements: Any development must meet the landscaping and tree requirements and specifications as set forth in Section 3.07.00, and as amended. 
I.  Site Design standards: Any development must meet the applicable site design standards, including but not limited to site design standards for specific uses, conventional subdivision, and architectural design standards as set forth in Section 4.00.00, and as amended. 
J.  Accessory and temporary structures: Any development must meet the accessory and temporary structure requirements and specifications as set forth in Section 5.00.00, and as amended. 
K.  Signs: Standards for signs used as accessory structures or principal use on a parcel are regulated in Section 5.03.00, and as amended. 
L.  Wireless Telecommunication Facilities: Standards for wireless telecommunication facilities, which may be located on a lot or parcel with a principal use, are located in Section 5.04.00, and as amended. 
M.  Infrastructure requirements: Any development must comply with all applicable infrastructure requirements as set forth in Chapter 6 of the UDC, and as amended from time to time, including but not limited to those requirements and standards relating to streets, transportation, parking facilities, street lights, major thoroughfares, access, off-street parking facilities, parking lot design and driveway standards, sidewalks and pathways, bus shelters, easements, storm drainage systems, water and sewer, fences, buffers and berms, mailboxes, and irrigations systems, structural retaining walls, dams, cemeteries, utilities, condominiums and gated communities. 
N.  Special land use permits: Any development that requires a special land use permit must meet the specifications as set forth in Section 4.04.06 of the UDC, and as amended. 
O.  Use limitations: 
1.  Maximum floor area ratio is .50 for office uses and 0.75 for industrial uses 
2.  All refuse collection and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
3.  No uses that exceed state and federal guidelines for allowable emissions and discharge of effluents into the air, water and soil are permitted. 
4.  No uses that create an unabated noise creating a nuisance as defined under state law are permitted. 
5.  If potentially hazardous material or chemicals are used on the premises or pollutants result from the operation under this section, a spill containment plan shall be approved by City staff. 
6.  Any outside storage shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from any public right-of-way. In other cases, the setbacks as required for accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall apply. 
7.  No drive-in establishments are permitted. 
8.  No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
9.  No outside runs are permitted with any veterinary office use permitted within this district. 
10.  Maximum impervious surfaces (80%-RAC, 70%-CAC and NAC) shall be established within activity centers as identified by the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from time to time. 
2.01.05.02 HI Heavy Industrial district: 
A.  Purpose and intent. The HI heavy industrial district is established to provide locations for heavy industrial uses such as intensive automobile repair and service, heavy manufacturing, chemical manufacturing and storage, petroleum and petrochemical storage, warehousing. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the HI district should provide for uses that are lower in intensity and scale such to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. 
B.  Uses. Any use not permitted, or not permitted by Special Exception, or not permitted by Land Use Permit is prohibited. To the extent there is a conflict between the Table of Land Uses and this district as set forth herein, this district shall control for purposes of determining whether and how the use is allowed. See Section 4.04.01 for standards associated with Special Exception uses. Any conflict between the standards set forth in this district and those set forth in Section 4.04.01 (as amended from time to time), the standards in Section 4.04.01 (as amended from time to time) shall control for purposes of allowing a Special Exception use. Certain uses marked with an asterisk (*) must ascribe to the specific regulations as set forth in this district. Particular uses may need to comply with a combination of special regulations (*), special exception regulations, and special land use permit requirement. 
The following uses are permitted: 
Agriculture produce stands 
Ambulance services 
Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes 
Ancillary retail sales 
Animal hospitals 
Assembly halls 
Automotive paint and body repair services 
Automotive parking lots and garages 
Automotive repair and maintenance facilities 
Automotive upholstery shops 
Aviation airports (private) 
Boat sales and service establishments 
Breeding and boarding kennels 
Building materials stores 
Bus stations 
Bus stations for freight 
Car washes 
Clinics 
Clubs or lodges (noncommercial) 
Colleges and universities (private), including but not limited to research and training facilities 
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries 
Community fairs 
Consumer fireworks retail sales facility 
Contractors (general, heavy, special) (office/warehouse) 
Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted use 
Dairies 
Designated recycling collection locations* 
Dry cleaning plants 
Electrical supply stores 
Emissions/inspection stations 
Executive golf courses 
Exterminating facilities (insect and/or rodent) 
Farm equipment stores/repair 
Freight terminals 
Fuel and ice dealers 
Full service gasoline stations 
Golf courses (Par-3) 
Golf courses (18-hole regulation; private and public) 
Halfway houses 
Heavy automotive repair establishments 
Heavy repair service and trade shops 
Helicopter landing areas 
Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up establishments 
Light automotive repair 
Light manufacturing establishments 
Linen and diaper services 
Machine shops 
Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on site 
Newspaper publishing facilities 
Nonautomotive repair service establishments 
Nonprofit riding stables 
Office service and supply establishments 
Outdoor golf driving ranges 
Parking for vehicles 
Plumbing and/or heating equipment dealers 
Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments 
Private parks 
Pro shops (accessory to driving ranges/ golf courses) 
Radio and television stations 
Rail stations (commuter) 
Railroad car classification yards 
Railroad stations 
Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses 
Religious assemblies 
Medical research centers 
Research testing laboratories 
Re-upholstery and furniture repair establishments 
Sawmills (temporary) 
Self-service storage facilities 
Sexually Oriented Businesses* 
Shelters (homeless)* 
Taxi stands and dispatching agencies 
Temporary uses* 
Tire retreading and recapping facilities 
Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities 
Truck terminals 
Utility facilities (private) 
Vending machine sales, service, rental, or repair establishments 
Vocational schools (commercial) 
Warehouse and storage facilities 
Wholesale sales offices 
Wholesale trade and distribution facilities 
Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms 
Zoos 
The following uses are permitted by special exception: 
Amusement centers 
Asphalt plants 
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (accessory use) 
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal use) 
Automobile and truck sales and service facilities 
Automotive storage yards and wrecker service 
Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facilities 
Cemeteries 
Chemical plants or storage facilities 
Coliseums, stadiums, and conventions centers (privately owned) 
Composting plants* 
Concrete plants 
Crematories, human or animal 
Drive in theaters 
Hazardous waste sites 
Heavy manufacturing establishments 
Landfills (private)* 
Mausoleums 
Mining operations* 
Outdoor commercial racing (motorcycle, automobile, truck, tractor and motorized vehicles) 
Motorcycles, ATV, and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities 
Petroleum or bulk storage stations* 
Private community centers 
Private schools of general and special education 
Quarry or mining operation 
Recycling centers* 
Waste transfer station 
The following uses are permitted only by special land use permit: 
Asphalt plants 
Automotive salvage and wrecking yards 
Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facilities 
Chemical plants or storage facilities 
Coliseums, stadiums, and conventions centers (privately owned) 
Composting plants 
Concrete plants 
Hazardous waste sites 
Landfills (private) 
Outdoor commercial racing (motorcycle, automobile, truck, tractor and motorized vehicles) 
Petroleum or bulk storage stations 
Quarry or mining operation 
Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas 
Recycling centers 
Waste transfer station 
Wireless telecommunications facilities 
C.  Requirements for certain uses. The following uses shall have the requirements as ascribed to them in this subsection. 
1.  Designated Recycling Collection Locations: 
(a)  Must be maintained in a safe, clean, neat, and sanitary fashion; 
(b)  Such location shall be visually screened and maintained; 
(c)  Such location shall be within the building setbacks unless otherwise approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee due to topography, safety, internal traffic flow, site distance, or for other site-related circumstances not created by the property owner. 
2.  Temporary Uses: 
(a)  An approved temporary use shall not exceed 30-days and may be renewed for not more than one additional 30-day period; 
(b)  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided; 
(c)  Application for a temporary use shall be made with the City Business License division. 
3.  Shelters (homeless): 
(a)  Adequate showers and restroom facilities must be provided at the location to meet the needs of the overnight guests; 
(b)  Beds must be provided for all overnight guests excluding staff and volunteer workers; 
(c)  No shelter shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to the nearest single-family residence; 
(d)  Guests of the shelter shall be required to leave the shelter premises no later than 7:00 a.m.; 
(e)  All premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary fashion; 
(f)  Adequate provisions for transporting and parking guests shall be submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee. 
4.  Sexually oriented businesses: 
(a)  Measurement. For the purpose of measuring the distance required under this subparagraph, measurement shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure in which the applicant is located to the primary point of pedestrian entry of the structure of the sensitive use. If there is no structure on the parcel comprising the sensitive use, then the point of measurement is to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel comprising the sensitive use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least 250 feet from another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless same is at least 500 feet from a religious assembly building, school building, governmentally owned and operated building, library building, civic center building, public park, hospital building, community club building, prison building or any residence (sensitive uses). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least 500 feet from a business licensed to sell alcohol on the premises (sensitive use). 
(e)  Sexually oriented businesses are also subject to licensing requirements as set forth in Chapter 22 of the Kennesaw City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
5.  Mining 
(a)  Removal or extraction of dirt, sand and soil is subject to the following: (1) the removal area shall be completely enclosed with a fence not less than six feet in height when considered necessary by the Zoning Administrator; (2) Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit; (3) such uses shall not be established within 500 feet of a residential use or 200 feet of any other use; (4) this subsection shall not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district done for land development purposes. 
(b)  Removal of extraction of rock and gravel is subject to the following: (1) The removal area shall be sealed by fencing or grading or some other device from general public access; (2) all entrances shall be fenced and locked during nonbusiness hours; (3) drainage plans and plan for development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit; (4) the operational and removal area of such uses shall not be established within 4,000 feet of a residential use or 2,000 feet of any other use. 
(c)  No mining shall be allowed except after notice of a public hearing and public hearing by the Mayor and City Council for the purposes of evaluating and considering the adverse effects and impacts (if any) that may result to surrounding property owners and whether or not a nuisance, as defined by state law, would be created by allowing the use. 
6.  Petroleum or bulk storage facilities or chemical plants or storage facilities 
(a)  A special land use permit is required 
(b)  Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws is required 
(c)  All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained 
(d)  A spill containment plan shall be approved by City staff 
(e)  Minimum acreage is five acres 
(f)  No use shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any residential dwelling or school building 
(g)  Hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours 
(h)  Noise abatement and air pollution abatement plans shall be approved by City staff 
(i)  A fire prevention, evacuation and safety plan shall be approved by the County fire marshal 
7.  Private landfills, composting centers or recycling centers 
(a)  A special land use permit is required 
(b)  All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained 
(c)  Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws is required 
(d)  Such facilities shall only be allowed in heavy industrial zoning district, provided that the Mayor and City Council may grant a variance for filling of a specific natural land depression provided such fill shall not include garbage or other material subject to decomposition 
(e)  Such facilities shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council after public hearing. Both a development permit from the community development department and written approval of the County health department shall be issued before any landfill operation may begin 
(f)  Such facilities shall be allowed only in areas incapable of development without landfill operations as determined by the community development department 
(g)  No hazardous wastes as defined by state and federal law shall be disposed or discharged into a landfill site 
(h)  No garbage shall be disposed of within 2,000 feet of the public highway, a residence, or any gathering place unless approved by the Mayor and City Council 
(i)  Truck traffic routes and entrances to the facility shall be approved by a traffic engineer 
(j)  The sanitary landfill site must be accessible without travel through properties developed for residential use 
(k)  All sanitary landfills shall have and keep on their premises in good working order a crawler-type tractor equipped with either a straight blade bulldozer, an angel blade bulldozer, a scraper (eight cubic yards or larger), a front end loader, a bull clam, or other attachments of a similar nature. The combined weight of such tractor and accessories as set forth in this subsection shall be not less than 18,000 pounds. 
(l)  All sanitary landfills hereafter established or operated shall be enclosed with a fence at least six feet high with openings therein not more than those in two-inch mesh wire, or some other similar fencing materials or device. Such fencing shall be adequate to prevent paper and similar or related refuse from blowing from the landfill onto neighboring property 
(m)  All sanitary landfills shall have an operator in attendance at all times when the fill is in use, and such fill must be barricaded when closed to the public 
(n)  Any changes in the normal drainage of the property upon which the sanitary fill is located shall be accommodated by storm sewers as necessary to properly care for drainage. Such storm sewers shall be installed at the expense of the user 
(o)  All operators of sanitary landfills must pack and cover daily all materials placed thereon with at least six inches of earth in such a manner as to prevent fires and meet any and all other requirements of the fire code. All completed landfills must be covered with a least two feet of earth. Burning of any kind of refuse on the landfill is prohibited 
(p)  This section shall not prohibit the dumping for disposal by burial of dry waste building materials concurrently with and on the same property as a structure under construction. Such waste shall be covered with at least two feet of earth before occupancy of the structure, but no such waste may be buried within 20 feet of any structure, drainage easement or drain field. 
D.  Dimensional standards for Development. Setback shall be measured from the property line of the parcel. The property with the shortest amount of road frontage shall be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
1.  Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet 
2.  Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet 
3.  Maximum height: 50 feet (4 stories) 
4.  A basement shall be counted as a story if the ceiling is six feet or more above the grade and is either subdivided or used for dwelling or business purposes. A basement is a portion of the building partly underground which has more than one-half of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
5.  Minimum building setbacks: 
(a)  Front yard as measured from arterial: 50 feet. 
(b)  Front yard as measured from collector: 50 feet. 
(c)  Front yard as measured from local: 50 feet. 
(d)  Side yard (aka minor side yard): 20 feet. 
(e)  Rear yard: 40 feet. 
(f)  Major side: 25 feet. 
6.  Maximum cover: 80% 
7.  Measuring building setbacks: The number and type of setbacks are determined based on the number and type of public road frontages for the lot. 
(a)  One public road frontage: The front yard setback is measured from the one public road frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The yard opposite the front yard is the rear yard and the other two yards are side yards. 
(b)  Two public road frontages: The front yard setback is measured from the road with the shortest frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The major side yard setback is measured from the road with the longer frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The yard opposite the front yard is the rear yard and the yard opposite the major side yard is the minor side yard. 
(c)  Three public road frontages: The front yard setback is measured from the road with the shortest frontage (arterial, collector, or local). The two major side yard setbacks are measured from the other two road frontages (arterial, collector, or local). The remaining yard is a minor side yard. 
(d)  Building setbacks apply to both principal and accessory buildings and structure except where it explicitly states otherwise. 
(e)  Irregular shaped lots: The Planning and Zoning Administrator will determine setbacks for irregular shaped lots adhering to the spirit and intent of this section. 
E.  Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an HI district which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 50-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by City staff. The City discourages locating HI districts and developments adjacent to single-family residential districts, unless in a planned mixed use project. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification as set forth in the UDC. 
1.  Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
(a)  Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
(b)  Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
(c)  Reduction of glare; 
(d)  Buffering of noise; and 
(e)  Establishment of privacy. 
2.  Standards. Buffers and berms shall be required when an LI district is located adjacent to a residential district; a minimum 50-foot buffer is required. 
(a)  Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)  Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)  Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffers should provide a 100 percent visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)  Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)  Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(vi)  Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by Chapter 3 of the UDC pertaining to tree preservation and replacement, subject to review and approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(vii)  Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)  When topography and existing conditions allow, the required twenty-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)  Any appeals from a determination by the Zoning Administrator shall be to the Mayor and City Council. 
(b)  Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)  Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)  Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)  Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
F.  Floodplain, wetlands preservation, and water supply and watershed requirements. Any development must meet all state and federal requirements relating to floodplains and wetlands. The Mayor and City Council encourage preservation of wetland areas. Development and design shall first take into account the protection of environmental and natural resources as set forth in Chapter 3 regarding floodplain, soil erosion and sedimentation control, water supply and watersheds, river corridors, and stream buffers. Any development shall comply with Chapter 46 of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinance. Any development shall be designed to avoid unnecessary impervious surface cover; provide adequate access to lots and sites; avoid adverse effects of shadow glare, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on surrounding property. No floodplains and/or wetlands may be used in calculating the overall density of the development. 
G.  Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection: Any property located within the "protection area" as defined and established to be the stream channel and all the land within the 1st Class stream boundary and 2nd Class stream boundary of all 1st class and 2nd class flowing tributaries of the Chattahoochee River downstream from Buford Dam and upstream from Peachtree Creek as indicated on the Chattahoochee Tributary Map shall comply with Chapter 3.06.1 of the UDC, and as amended. 
H.  Landscaping and Tree Requirements: Any development must meet the landscaping and tree requirements and specifications as set forth in Section 3.07.00, and as amended. 
I.  Site Design standards: Any development must meet the applicable site design standards, including but not limited to site design standards for specific uses, conventional subdivision, and architectural design standards as set forth in Section 4.00.00, and as amended. 
J.  Accessory and temporary structures: Any development must meet the accessory and temporary structure requirements and specifications as set forth in Section 5.00.00, and as amended. 
K.  Signs: Standards for signs used as accessory structures or principal use on a parcel are regulated in Section 5.03.00, and as amended. 
L.  Infrastructure requirements: Any development must comply with all applicable infrastructure requirements as set forth in Chapter 6 of the UDC, and as amended from time to time, including but not limited to those requirements and standards relating to streets, transportation, parking facilities, street lights, major thoroughfares, access, off-street parking facilities, parking lot design and driveway standards, sidewalks and pathways, bus shelters, easements, storm drainage systems, water and sewer, fences, buffers and berms, mailboxes, and irrigations systems, structural retaining walls, dams, cemeteries, utilities, condominiums and gated communities. 
M.  Special land use permits. Any development that requires a special land use permit must meet the specifications as set forth in Section 4.04.06 of the UDC, and as amended. 
N.  Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Standards for wireless telecommunication facilities, which may be located on a lot or parcel with a principal use, are located in Section 5.04.00, and as amended. 
O.  Use limitations: 
1.  Maximum floor area ratio is .50 for office uses and 0.75 for industrial uses 
2.  All refuse collection and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
3.  No uses that exceed state and federal guidelines for allowable emissions and discharge of effluents into the air, water and soil are permitted. 
4.  No uses that create an unabated noise creating a nuisance as defined under state law are permitted. 
5.  If potentially hazardous material or chemicals are used on the premises or pollutants result from the operation under this section, a spill containment plan shall be approved by City staff. 
6.  Any outside storage shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from any public right-of-way. In other cases, the setbacks as required for accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall apply. 
7.  No drive-in establishments are permitted. 
8.  No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
9.  No outside runs are permitted with any veterinary office use permitted within this district. 
10.  Maximum impervious surfaces (80%-RAC, 70%-CAC and NAC) shall be established within activity centers as identified by the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
2.01.06 - Special Districts 
The following special zoning districts are established: 
A.  HIS, Historic District. The historical and architectural heritage of Kennesaw is among its most valued and important assets. The purpose of the Kennesaw Historic District (HIS) is to promote the cultural, economic and general welfare of the city, and the preservation and protection of the old, historic or architecturally worthy structures in quaint areas or neighborhoods which impact a distinct aspect of the city and which serve as visible reminders of the cultural, social, economic and architectural heritage of the city, the state, and the nation. 
1.  Boundary. The boundary of the historic properties shall be those specific properties as specified by the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission and so designated by ordinances adopted by the Mayor and Council, or designated on state or national registers, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §44-10-26 (the Georgia Historic Preservation Act—Acts 1980, pages 1723—1729). All historic properties shall be designated on a map entitled "Official Historic Properties Map of the City of Kennesaw," which shall be as adopted by the Mayor and Council, and the same required boundaries to be shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Kennesaw." 
2.  Relationship to Zoning District. 
a)  All that tract and parcel of land delineated on the historical district map of historic properties for the City of Kennesaw, dated May 19, 1978, presented on August 20, 1979, by Phil Secrist (Chairman of the Kennesaw Historical Society), and approved by Georgia Department of Natural Resources in October, 1979, and approved for the National Historic Register in April, 1980, which map is hereby incorporated by reference, shall be classified for zoning purposes as KHD (Kennesaw Historical District) and shall be designated as being a part of zoning district KHD (Kennesaw Historical District). Such zoning classification and designation shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the zoning classification and zoning designation applicable to such property at the time such property is designated as being a part of the historic district or is designated as historic property. 
b)  If a conflict exists with regard to a use which is available to property having more than one zoning classification or zoning district designation, then the more liberal or less restrictive use shall apply to such property; however, the minimum dimensional requirements applicable to such property shall be those requirements applicable to zoning district HIS (Historic Kennesaw District). 
3.  Classification of historic properties and development standards. 
a)  The Historic Preservation Commission shall evaluate all properties as designated on the Official Historic Properties Map of the City of Kennesaw, and the Official Zoning Map of the City of Kennesaw. All properties so designated shall be classified as one of the following categories: 
i.  Historic: More than 50 years old and contributing to the community's historic character; 
ii.  Historic-obscured: More than 50 years old but not contributing to the historical character of the community due to unsympathetic but not irreparable alterations; 
iii.  Non-historic: Less than 50 years old and contributing to the historic character of the community by possessing architectural character; 
iv.  Intrusion: Structures of any age which detract from the historic character of the district; and 
v.  Vacant. 
b)  All historic, historic-obscured, non-historic, and intrusion property classifications in the Kennesaw Historic District shall be shown on the Official Historic Properties Map of the City of Kennesaw, and the Official Zoning Map of the City of Kennesaw. In the event a question arises over the classification of the property, the property owner may file an appeal stating the reason(s) for the appeal with the zoning administrator. On such appeal, the commission shall reconsider their original finding and classify the property based on their current evaluation. If such appeal has not been remedied, the commission shall submit a report to the Mayor and Council indicating the reason(s) for their classification of the individual property. After considering the appeal as requested by the individual property owner on the classification of his property, the Mayor and Council may reclassify the property or any portion thereof as they determine. 
Refer to Chapter 10 of this UDC for information regarding the appeals process. 
B.  HPV, Historic Preservation Village. The HPV district is established to set aside certain properties for the purpose of providing an area that will be designed and used as a historic village. It is encouraged that resourcefulness and ingenuity will be used to assure that the property will meet the goals of the master plan of the City of Kennesaw as adopted by the Mayor and Council in June, 1995. The classification is primarily intended for properties located within Land Lot 138, 20th District, 2nd Section, and is bounded on the North by Cherokee Street and Big Shanty Road, on the east by Sardis Street, on the South by Old Highway 41, and on the West by CSX Railroad, and more particularly, Parcels 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 173 and 201. 
C.  CBD, Central Business District. The CBD is established in order to preserve and protect the cultural and historic aspects of downtown Kennesaw and simultaneously provide for the stimulation and enhancement of the vitality and economic growth of this special area. The classification is primarily intended for a focal point for upscale retail trade, tourism, and financial and public uses. The intent of the CBD is to develop a compact core to encourage and facilitate pedestrian movement and provide convenient access to the amenities of Historic Downtown Kennesaw. The CBD is designed to achieve the following: 
1.  Create an environment where residents and visitors can live, work, meet, and play. 
2.  Promote a balanced mix of retail, office-professional, entertainment, residential, civil, and cultural uses in the core downtown area. 
3.  Allow for growth of a healthy economic business district. 
4.  Incorporate aesthetically compatible design from gateway points to the core of the city to improve the aesthetics of street and built environments. 
5.  Ensure compatibility with the historic district to achieve architectural and design integrity and consistency. 
6.  Provide accessible and sufficient parking that is unobtrusive by encouraging shared, underground, and deck parking and alternative modes of transportation including pedestrian and bicycles. 
7.  Promote a pedestrian environment though sidewalk-oriented buildings and attractive street-facing façades that encourage pedestrian activity. 
8.  Provide safe and accessible parks and public and private open space. 
D.  Conservation Subdivision/Open Space development. The purposes of the Conservation Subdivision/Open Space development are: 
1.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
2.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
3.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
4.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils, which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
5.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
6.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
7.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
8.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
9.  To encourage street designs that reduces traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
10.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
11.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
12.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
13.  To encourage the development of residential communities designed to preserve and protect environmental resources, scenic vistas, and natural and cultivated landscapes. 
14.  To reduce infrastructure impact as a result of efficient community design. 
E.  SLO, Senior Living Overlay district. The purpose of this overlay zoning district is: 
1.  Establish high quality living standards for senior oriented housing 
2.  Create a self sufficient development that addresses transportation and service delivery issues specific to the area. 
3.  Create a unique site plan design that accomplishes the housing goals as adopted under the City of Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan. 
F.  Civilian Airport Hazard District 
1.  Definitions and Acronyms—The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  Above Ground Level ("AGL") means a reference of elevation above ground level. 
b.  Airport means Cobb County Airport-McCollum Field and Fulton County Airport - Charlie Brown Field and other civilian use public-owned airfields, including heliports as recognized by the State of Georgia. 
c.  Airport Manager means the administrative representative of each Airport. 
d.  Runway Elevation means height limitations originate from the nearest Airport's runway Mean Sea Level. Runway Elevations are documented in the Airport's Master Plan. 
e.  Airport Impact Zones means the Six (6) areas closest to Airport under which Airport operations regularly occur, as shown on the Airport Impact Zones Land Use Map. 
f.  Airport Operations means take off, climb out, approach, landing, and traffic pattern operations that may vary for each aircraft. 
g.  Airport Impact Zones Land Use Map means map describing compatible land uses within the vicinity of each Airport. 
h.  Airspace Surfaces means the same areas as stated in the Federal Aviation Regulations ("FAR") Part 77 Airspace Surfaces as amended from time-to-time. 
i.  Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA") means the federal agency titled "Federal Aviation Administration" which is charged with oversight and regulation of civil aviation to promote safety, including that of most publicly-owned airports. 
j.  Federal Aviation Regulations ("FAR") Part 77 Airspace Surfaces means regulated airspace surfaces promulgated in 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace. 
k.  TERPS means Terminal Instrument Procedures, which is the standard instrument approach procedures and takeoff minimums and obstacle departure procedures based on the criteria contained in FAA Order 8260.3 U.S. Standard for Terminal Instrument Procedures 
l.  Mean Sea Level ("MSL") means the elevation reference for objects above sea level. 
m.  Non-conforming Use means any structure, natural growth or use of land which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this chapter or an amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such regulations. 
n.  Obstruction to Air Navigation means an object of greater height than any of the heights or surfaces presented in Federal Aviation Regulations Part 77 Airspace Surfaces. (Obstructions to air navigation are presumed to be hazards to air navigation until an FAA aeronautical study has determined otherwise.) 
o.  Hazard to Air Navigation means an object which, as a result of an aeronautical study, the FAA determines will have a substantial adverse effect upon the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace by aircraft, operation of air navigation facilities, or existing or potential airport capacity. 
p.  Runway means an airport's paved or cleared strip on which planes land and take off. 
2.  Height Zoning—Height limitation zoning applies to structures and natural growth objects within the airspace as defined by the Federal Aviation Regulations Part 77 Airspace Surfaces and TERPS. 
a.  Construction or Alteration Requiring Notice to the FAA. Except for construction less than Twenty-five (25) feet AGL or as provided in FAR Part 77.15, any construction or alteration that meets or exceeds the height criteria established in FAR Part 77.13 as amended from time to time, shall complete the FAA notification process as provided in FAR Part 77.17 as amended from time-to-time, using the FAA Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration form 7460-1 as amended from time-to-time. 
b.  Height Limitation. The Civilian Airport Hazard District Ordinance does not preclude approval of obstructions to air navigation with heights in excess of those height limitations prescribed in FAR Part 77 and/or TERPS, if either of the following is met: 
i.  A determination of "No Hazard to Air Navigation" is issued from a FAA Airspace Study resulting from the Notice Requirement of FAR part 77.17 and the Airport Manager supports the determination. 
ii.  A variance is granted when such action is considered advisable to effectuate the purposes of this section and reasonable in the circumstances when considering the results of the determination of an FAA Airspace Study and the input from the Airport Manager. 
3.  Land Use Zoning Recommendations—Land use zoning recommendations prescribes land uses and zoning designations that are deemed compatible within the Airport Operations areas, as shown on the Airport Impact Zones Land Use Map. Table 1 presents recommended conforming land uses within each Airport Impact Zone. 
TABLE 1  AIRPORT IMPACT ZONES LAND USE RECOMMENDATIONS 

 
a.  Low density residential 
i.  Generally. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land within the zones listed in this section in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the Airport and any aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airfield lights and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airfield, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airfield, attract birds, or otherwise endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of any aircraft. 
4.  Existing Non-Conforming Uses or Heights. This Ordinance shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, change or alteration of any previously-approved nonconforming use or structure, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any previously-approved nonconforming use or structure, except as otherwise provided by this section, including those previously-approved nonconforming uses or structures under construction. 
a.  Nothing in this Section shall contradict the limitations placed on Non-conforming Uses of a building, structure or land as described in Section 134-31 of the City Ordinances—Non-conforming Uses. 
i.  Notwithstanding the preceding section, this Ordinance shall provide the right to require the owner of any existing nonconforming structure to mark and/or light any structure as deemed necessary by Cobb County. 
ii.  Notwithstanding the preceding section, no existing non-conforming natural growth may become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this ordinance. 
5.  Conflicting Regulations. In case of conflict between the regulations of this Chapter and other regulations, unless otherwise stated, the more stringent regulations shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
2.02.00 - LAND USES PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT 

2.02.01 - Generally 
The tables describe those uses that are permissible in each base zoning district. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. The zoning districts for the City of Kennesaw are shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Kennesaw, Georgia." 
2.02.02 - How to Read the Table of Uses 
A.  The table is provided for the convenience of the user; however, please consult the permitted uses (P) or special exception use (SE) sections of the specific zoning district(s) for possible use limitations for specific permitted uses or special exception uses. 
B.  Within the following table the letter "P" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district. 
C.  The letters "SE" indicates that the land use is permissible as a special exception use, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district, and the supplemental standards specified for the use. Supplemental standards are contained in Chapter 4. 
D.  A blank cell indicates the land use is prohibited. 
E.  Any land use that is not identified in the table is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. 
1.  A requested use shall be considered substantially similar when the characteristics of the requested use are equivalent in type, intensity, degree, or impact when compared to a use named in the table. Such characteristics include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Typical hours of operation; 
b.  Use of outdoor storage; 
c.  Trip generation rates; 
d.  Generation of noise, light pollution, odor, smoke, electromagnetic interference, or vibration; and 
e.  Customary functions of the use. 
2.  The administrative interpretation shall be subject to appeal, as set forth in Chapter 10 of the UDC. 
2.02.03 - Table of Land Uses — Residential Districts 
CBD - Central Business District Uses to be found under Chapter 4.02.03(C) 

 
This chart is provided for the convenience of the user; however, please consult the permitted uses (P) or special exception use (SE) sections of the specific zoning district(s) for possible use limitations for specific permitted uses or special exception uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 2, 4-20-15) 
2.02.04 - Table of Land Uses — Non-Residential Districts 
CBD - Central Business District Uses to be found under Chapter 4.02.03(C) 

 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2012-15, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 3, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 3, 8-17-15; Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 2016-18, § 5, 8-15-16; Ord. NO. 2018-24, §§ 3, 4(Exh. C), 10-15-18) 
2.03.00 - PUBLIC ART EXHIBITS 

2.03.01 - Purpose 
It is the intent of the City of Kennesaw to permit and encourage public art exhibits on a content-neutral basis. Public art exhibits are a unique medium of expression which serves the public interest. Public art exhibits have purposes distinct from signs and confer different benefits, including improved aesthetics; avenues for original artistic expression; public access to original works of art; community participation in the creation of original works of art; and community building through the presence of and identification with original works of art, particularly those of cultural, historic or social significance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.02 - Definitions 
City of Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission ("Commission"). Comprised of seven (7) individuals that are appointed by the mayor and council whose duty is to provide review and regulatory oversight over all public art exhibits submitted for approval to the City of Kennesaw. 
Murals. For purposes of this section, an original art mural exhibit means an original work of visual art which is tiled or painted directly upon or affixed directly to an exterior wall of a building. A mural is not a "sign" as defined by and regulated by the City of Kennesaw Sign Regulations. 
Public Art Exhibits ("The Exhibit"). Visual art which can be in the form of sculptured works, paintings, wall murals and any art arrangement located on public or private property that can be viewed by the general public on a permanent or temporary basis. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.03 - General Regulations 
1.  Permitted locations: Public Art Exhibits are allowed in all zoning districts within the corporate limits of the City of Kennesaw as well as publicly owned buildings and property approved by the city. 
2.  Public art exhibits are subject to any and all additional zoning regulations in the district in which the exhibit will be located. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.04 - Artist/Sponsor Acknowledgements and Title of Work 
An incorporate image or attached plaque identifying the artist, financial sponsor(s) and title of work of the public art exhibit will be allowed. The plaque or image of acknowledgements and titles will be an appropriate scale to the public art exhibit, shall not exceed 6"x6" and will not be incorporated into the artwork. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.05 - Review and approval process of public art exhibits 
A.  All public art exhibits shall be required to submit a written application on forms provided by the City of Kennesaw Planning and Zoning Department for a site plan permit. A complete permit application will include an artist rendering or visual representation of the art work proposed, owners affidavits, photos of existing conditions on the property including location on permanent structures or buildings, description of materials to be used in association with art work, maintenance agreement and schedules of maintenance, a rendering or visual representation of the plaque or image of acknowledgements and titles, and permit fee as adopted in the City of Kennesaw fee schedule. A complete application packet will be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator or designee. 
B.  The Planning and Zoning Administrator or designee will process the application and forward for review to the City of Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission on their prepared agenda within thirty days of receipt of application. The Planning and Zoning Administrator upon receipt of application, will review property for issues dealing with traffic issues and other city ordinances prior to processing for Art and Culture meeting agenda. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or designee will implement the following procedures for public notification: 1) Post a sign at the property at least ten days before the first public meeting alerting public of the time, date and location of the meeting where application will be considered; 2) Post application information and meeting information on the City of Kennesaw website; 3) Mailing of letters at least ten days prior to the first public meeting to property owners listed on the Cobb County Tax assessors records whose property are adjacent or abut the property that is referenced on the application. Said letter will provide application information, time, date and location of the Art and Culture Commission and Mayor and Council meetings. After the application has been reviewed, a written recommendation is rendered by the Art and Culture Commission. The application will then be forwarded to the Mayor and Council for final review and action by vote. 
C.  The commission will review and render written recommendations to the Mayor and Council by vote on all submitted site plan permit applications during a scheduled meeting. The property owner(s) or an official representative must be present at all meetings. The commission will provide a findings document in the form of minutes that will provide the basis of decisions. Permit applications will reflect the recommendation of the commission to the Mayor and Council with the appropriate signature from the chairperson of said commission. 
D.  Any proposed locations in the Central Business District, Historic Preservation District or other historic districts will require a written recommendation from the Historic Preservation Commission. 
E.  The applicant shall be required to attend all scheduled meetings of the commission and all scheduled meetings of the Mayor and Council. 
F.  All approved site plan permits for permanent art exhibits will be in effect for seven years from the date of approval. The commission will accept a renewal application if art exhibit is to continue. 
G.  All site plan permits for temporary and rotating exhibits shall have expiration dates based on the time period scheduled for the exhibit. 
H.  All proposed changes to public art exhibits, including acknowledgement and titles, shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 2017-08, 6-19-17) 
2.03.06 - Denial of site plan permit applications 
A.  In any instance where the application is denied by the Mayor and Council, the applicant may file an appeal to the Superior Court. 
B.  When an application for a permit under this chapter is denied by the Mayor and Council, the city shall not accept or consider an application for a permit under this chapter from that applicant or for the same exhibit within ninety (90) days of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.07 - City of Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission 
A.  Duties 
1.  Provide review, recommendations and regulatory oversight over all public art exhibits submitted for approval to the City of Kennesaw Mayor and Council. 
2.  Provide recommendations to Mayor and Council, city departments and boards regarding programs and community outreach activities that promote local cultural and artistic awareness and education. 
B.  Structure 
The commission will be comprised of seven (7) individuals appointed by Mayor and Council. The members will include: 
1.  A practicing architect licensed in the State of Georgia; 
2.  An active participant in local or state art councils or member of art/cultural foundations with professional background in art programs or art culture education; 
3.  An active student or professor from a college, university, technical school or other educational institution; 
4.  A business owner within the city limits of Kennesaw; 
5.  A current Cobb County resident; and 
6.  Of the seven (7) members, four shall be residents of the City of Kennesaw. 
C.  The commission will have staggered term limits as approved by the Mayor and Council. The commission will have annual elections to elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary. All meetings will follow the Roberts Rules of Order latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.08 - Prohibited public art exhibits 
Prohibited public art exhibits include: 
A.  A "sign" as defined and regulated by the City of Kennesaw adopted sign ordinance. 
B.  The exhibit contains sexually explicit conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in the Code of Ordinances, Article XIV, section 22-393. 
C.  The exhibit contains gang affiliation symbols. 
D.  The exhibit contains content or images which violate the criminal laws of the State of Georgia. 
E.  The exhibit is distracting enough to create a public safety issue by impeding traffic flow. 
F.  The exhibit incorporates materials that are not weather resistant or may be toxic in any way that may endanger the general public. 
G.  The exhibit incorporates any materials in violation of the citywide architectural standards or the historic district standards. 
H.  Art objects that are mass produced of standard design such as playground equipment, benches, statuary objects or fountains. 
I.  Reproductions of original works of art. 
J.  Existing works of art offered for sale or donation to the City which does not have an established and recognized significance as public art among art professionals and art appraisers. 
K.  Logos or corporate identity. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.09 - Items not applicable to this ordinance 
A.  Decorative or functional elements or architectural details, which are designed solely by the building architect as opposed to an artist commissioned for this purpose working individually or in collaboration with the building architect. 
B.  Decorative displays located on single family attached and detached zoning districts including Planned Unit Development districts. 
C.  Landscape architecture and landscape gardening except where these elements are designed by an artist and are an integral part of the work of art by the artist. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.10 - Non-Conforming exhibits 
A.  All exhibits that are in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance that meet the definitions of this chapter shall continue until there are improvements or physical change in the exhibit of 50% or more or if deterioration is identified as per section 2.03.11. 
B.  All exhibits that do not meet the definitions of this chapter shall be reviewed for further action as set forth in section 2.03.11. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
2.03.11 - Maintenance and violations 
A.  The Planning and Zoning Department shall be charged with authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of public art exhibits which violate the requirements of this chapter, become dilapidated or are abandoned. A public art exhibit shall be deemed to be dilapidated when 25% or more of the display surface area contains peeling or flaking paint, deteriorated components or parts, or is otherwise not preserved in the manner in which it was originally created. 
B.  Violation of this ordinance will result in the City of Kennesaw issuing a written notice to address the violation of this chapter. Notice of violation will be sent certified mail to the applicant and property owner of record. The applicant and property owner shall be granted 30 days from the date of said notice to comply with this ordinance or remove the exhibit. Failure to comply with this ordinance shall result in the revocation of the approved site plan permit requiring the removal of the approved art exhibit at the applicant and the property owner's expense. 
C.  If the public art exhibit is not brought into compliance or removed, the public art exhibit in violation shall be deemed a nuisance under section 46-31 and enforcement procedures defined under sections 46-32, 46-33 and 46-34 of the Code of Ordinances of Kennesaw. Abatement of the nuisance may involve the painting, repair, alteration or removal of the public art exhibit at the applicant and property owner's expense. The property owner shall be responsible for any and all costs and fees associated with the painting, repair, alteration or removal of the public art exhibit as set forth in section 46-33. 
D.  All costs and fees, including reasonable attorney fees, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred in the same manner as set forth in section 46-33. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
Chapter 3 - PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND RESOURCES 
3.00.00 - GENERALLY 
A.  The provisions set forth in Chapter 3 are intended to protect the natural features and natural resources within The City of Kennesaw, and to implement policies in the Comprehensive Plan. The natural features and natural resources included in Chapter 3 are the floodplain, soil erosion and sedimentation control, water supply and watersheds, wetlands, river corridors, and stream buffers. 
B.  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered New Construction. 
Appeal: A request for a review of the City of Kennesaw's interpretation of or decision with respect to any provision of an ordinance or code to the applicable appeals body. 
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated "AD" or "AH" Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard: the land subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-00, AE, AE, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas as referenced in Section 3.01.01 D. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base Flood Elevation: The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building: See definition of "structure". 
City of Kennesaw: A municipal corporation chartered pursuant to the laws of the State of Georgia, any department, board, or commission of such city, any elected or appointed official, or any employee or designee thereof. 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated Building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 1, 1980. 
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 1, 1980. 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Refers to the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown in the current land use plan, or as may be defined from time to time by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and its successors. 
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally Dependent Use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic Structure: any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or; (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Local permitting authority: The City of Kennesaw to include without limitation, individuals from public works, zoning, or building departments, environmental specialist or code enforcement as applicable. 
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this ordinance. 
Manufactured Home: A building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New Construction: For floodplain management purposes, any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 1, 1980 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 1, 1980. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit: The permit issued by the City of Kennesaw to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity under this ordinance. 
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is: 
(a)  built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
(d)  designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory Flood: The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood. The regulatory flood is defined as the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year assuming the drainage basin is fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. Only structural storm water control facilities that can be shown on the plans will remain on the final plat copies and are large enough to be included in the hydrograph routings shall be considered when determining the flood peak. 
Regulatory Flood Elevation: The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The regulatory flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the regulatory flood. 
Site: The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of Construction: The date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure: For floodplain management purposes, a structure is a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.01.00 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-20, adopted Aug. 20, 2018, amended § 3.01.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3.01.00 pertained to similar subject matter. 

3.01.01 - Generally 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
1.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or upon being rebuilt; 
2.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion outside the standards set forth herein; 
3.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood velocities, flood damage or erosion; 
4.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
5.  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
6.  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
B.  Applicability. This ordinance shall be applicable to all areas within the City of Kennesaw. 
C.  Designation of Ordinance Administrator. The Public Works Director or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
D.  Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following is adopted and incorporated herein by reference: 
1.  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated October 5, 2018 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those lands acquired by the City of Kennesaw through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Cobb County, Georgia, dated October 5, 2018 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
2.  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base floodplain with the approval of the City of Kennesaw. 
E.  Compatibility with other regulations. This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are cumulative of and in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control and be applicable. 
F.  Severability. The Mayor and Council of the City of Kennesaw hereby declare their intention to be that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance be severable, and in any section, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this ordinance shall be judged, decreed, or declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance since the remainder of this ordinance would have been adopted and enacted by the Mayor and City Council without the inclusion of any such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase. 
G.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create nor impose liability on the part of the City of Kennesaw nor on any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from adherence to or reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully rendered hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.01.02 - Permit Procedures and Requirements 
A.  Permit Application Requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an Area of Special Flood Hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Kennesaw a permit application on a form provided by the City of Kennesaw for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this ordinance. 
B.  Floodplain Management Plan Requirements. An application for a development project with any Area of Special Flood Hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
1.  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
(a)  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(b)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(c)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(d)  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(e)  Proposed grading plan; 
(f)  Base flood elevations and regulatory flood elevations; 
(g)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and regulatory floodplain; 
(h)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(i)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
2.  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in Sections 3.01.06 B.2.b. and 3.01.06 E.2; 
(d)  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 3.01.06 A. 5. 
(e)  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
3.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
4.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post-development conditions base flood elevations, regulatory flood elevations, flood protection elevations, Special Flood Hazard Areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
5.  Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
6.  All appropriate certifications required under this ordinance. 
7.  The approved floodplain management / flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.01.03 - Construction Stage Submittal Requirements 
A.  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management / flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the City of Kennesaw a certified as-built Elevation Certificate or Floodproofing Certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
B.  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The City of Kennesaw shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.01.04 - Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator 
Duties of the City of Kennesaw shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
3.  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the City of Kennesaw shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Sections 3.01.05 and 3.01.06. 
4.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
5.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
6.  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the City of Kennesaw shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
7.  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
8.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the City of Kennesaw shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
9.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the City of Kennesaw and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.01.05 - Standards for Land Development 
A.  Definition of Floodplain Boundaries 
1.  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
2.  For Special Flood Hazards Areas and flood prone areas, the regulatory flood elevations shall be determined by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor using the most current FEMA data. 
3.  The boundaries or limits of the floodplain shall be within 0.5 feet vertical accuracy on the site plan containing existing topographic information. 
B.  Definition of Floodway Boundaries 
1.  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. 
2.  Following a pre-development conference with the Public Works Director or his/her designee, the boundaries or limits of the floodway shall be shown on both the development and stormwater management site plans containing existing topographic information. 
C.  General Standards 
1.  No construction or structures, including grading, filling, cutting or displacement of earth shall be allowed within the regulatory floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the regulatory flood elevation beyond the boundaries of the ownership of the property being developed unless contained in a drainage easement obtained by the developer; 
b.  Reducing the regulatory flood storage capacity. All compensation for storage capacity shall occur either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed, or within a permanent, recorded flood control easement, and shall be within a reasonable proximity to the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include: lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain; or, lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain; or raising of the regulatory flood elevation within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed. All cut areas are to be graded to a slope of no less than 1.0 percent. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel. A hydrological analysis will be required by the owner or developer to determine the volume of flood storage created by raising the regulatory flood elevation; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics of the waters of the regulatory flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the property. Verification shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis; or, 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. In all cases effective transitions must be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased. 
2.  All proposed development or redevelopment shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
3.  Any significant changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Kennesaw using the community consent forms (FEMA) before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as built surveys, which demonstrate general conformance to the approved designs as submitted in the CLOMR application. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) or Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) must be issued by FEMA before the final plat can be approved or a certificate of occupancy can be issued. Significant changes or revisions shall be defined as any change to the FIRM easily observed when plotted at a scale of 1 inch = 1,000 feet. The changes or revisions may be due to, but are not limited to, more current and/or superior topographic information or compensatory cut and fill grading done as a part of the development. 
D.  Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments. An engineering study is required, appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb the regulatory floodplain. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Public Works Director or his/her designee, prior to the approval of any permit, which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the floodplain. Such study shall include: 
1.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
2.  Step-backwater analysis, using a method approved by the City of Kennesaw. Cross-sections submitted by the applicant and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood and regulatory flood profiles; 
3.  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that regulatory floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
4.  If changes to the regulatory flood elevation are proposed, profiles of the channel showing the existing and proposed regulatory flood elevations must be provided; and, 
5.  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all floodplain encroachments, and the location, method, and time frame for proposed mitigation. 
E.  Floodway Encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except when required for the construction of bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities-including communication lines, water, sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer, natural gas and electrical utilities-provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the regulatory or base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
2.  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Kennesaw until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable, is issued by FEMA. 
F.  Maintenance Requirements. Any development or redevelopment platted after adoption of this ordinance will be required to submit a flood plain management plan to the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The City of Kennesaw may direct the property owner or successor-in-title at no cost to the City of Kennesaw, to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Kennesaw. 
G.  Floodplain Compensation. To be determined by the Public Works Director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.01.06 - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
A.  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
1.  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain; 
2.  Substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
3.  Substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
4.  Substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
5.  Elevated buildings. All substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a currently licensed professional engineer in the state of Georgia or currently licensed architect in the state of Georgia or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
6.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
7.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
8.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
9.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
10.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and, 
11.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
B.  Building Standards For Structures and Buildings Within The Floodplain. 
1.  Residential buildings 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall not be allowed within the limits of the regulatory floodplain unless all the requirements of Section 3.01.05 C.1. have been met. If all of the requirements of Section 3.01.05 C.1. have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the regulatory flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.06 A5., "Elevated Buildings." 
2.  Non-residential buildings 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any structure shall not be allowed within the limits of the regulatory floodplain unless all requirements of Section 3.01.05 C.1. have been met. If all the requirements of Section 3.01.05 C.1. have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the regulatory flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection 3.01.06 A5., "Elevated Buildings." Substantial improvements may be authorized by the City of Kennesaw to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the regulatory flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the City of Kennesaw. 
3.  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be designed and constructed to pass all floodwater in a manner consistent with this ordinance. 
4.  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); 
b.  No recreational vehicle may be used for long-term or permanent residential housing. All recreational vehicles must comply with subsection (a) of this section. 
C.  Building Standards For Structures And Buildings Authorized Adjacent To The Floodplain 
1.  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base floor elevation or one (1) foot above the regulatory flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection 3.01.06 A5., "Elevated Buildings." 
2.  Non-residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the regulatory flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.01.06 A5., "Elevated Buildings." 
D.  Building Standards For Streams Without Established Base Flood Elevations And/Or Floodway (A-Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data has been provided (A-Zones) -or- where base flood data has been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the City of Kennesaw shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic base flood elevation or regulatory flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this section. If sufficient data is not available from these sources, then the City of Kennesaw may accept a hydrologic assessment performed and sealed by a registered professional engineer to determine the regulatory flood and floodway elevations. If further assessment is deemed necessary by the City of Kennesaw, it shall be carried out by a city approved engineer at applicant's expense. 
E.  Building Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO-Zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
1.  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards for "elevated buildings," subsection 3.01.06 A.5. of this ordinance. The applicant's or owner's engineer shall certify to the City of Kennesaw that the lowest floor elevation level is at or above minimum required elevation, and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file; 
2.  Substantial improvement of a non- residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A currently licensed professional engineer or currently licensed architect in the state of Georgia shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted current standards of practice; 
3.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure and shall be shown on all construction documents. 
F.  Standards for Subdivisions 
1.  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood and regulatory flood elevation data; 
2.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood or regulatory flood elevation, the lowest flood and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the City of Kennesaw; 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall be designed in such a manner as to be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
4.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and, 
5.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
G.  Standards for Utilities 
1.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and, 
b.  Discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
2.  On-site waste disposal systems (e.g. septic systems) shall be located outside the floodplain to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
H.  Standards For Dam Break Flood Zone. No occupied structure shall be allowed to be constructed within the dam break flood zone as identified in the inundation map of the Emergency Action Plan (EAP). 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.01.07 - Variance Procedures 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the City of Kennesaw, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
1.  Requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance shall be submitted to the City of Kennesaw. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the City of Kennesaw. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
2.  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the City of Kennesaw shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Mayor and Council as established by the City of Kennesaw in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Mayor and Council. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
3.  To the extent provided by law, any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Cobb County, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
4.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an Historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
5.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
6.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
7.  In reviewing such requests, the City of Kennesaw and Mayor and Council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance. 
8.  Conditions for Variances: 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  a finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
(iii)  a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a Historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The City Clerk of the City of Kennesaw shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
9.  Any applicant requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the City of Kennesaw and Mayor and Council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
10.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Kennesaw and the Mayor and Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this ordinance. 
11.  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, 8-20-18) 
3.02.00 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL ORDINANCE 
Title 
Now, therefore, be it ordained, by the City of Kennesaw, this ordinance will be known as the City of Kennesaw "Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 

3.02.01 - Definitions 
A.  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
1.  Best Management Practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
2.  Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
3.  Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
4.  Certified Personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
5.  City: Shall mean the city of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
6.  Coastal Marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
7.  Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
8.  CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
9.  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
10.  Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
11.  Design Professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
12.  Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division, City of Kennesaw, or its/their designee or authorized representative. 
13.  District: The Cobb County Soil and Water Conservation District, or its designee. 
14.  Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
15.  Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
16.  Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
17.  Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in Chapter 3.02.03(C) of this ordinance. 
18.  Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
19.  Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
20.  Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
21.  Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
22.  Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
23.  Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural operations as described in Chapter 3.02.02(A)(5). 
24.  Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
25.  Local Issuing Authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
26.  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et. seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
27.  Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
28.  Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
29.  NOI: A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
30.  NOT: A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
31.  Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
32.  Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
33.  Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
34.  Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
35.  Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
36.  Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
37.  Properly Designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NO! submittal. 
38.  Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
39.  Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
40.  Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
41.  Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Cobb County Soil and Water Conservation District, or its designee. 
42.  Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
43.  State General Permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
44.  State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
45.  Structural Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
46.  Trout Streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A, 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georeia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
47.  Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
48.  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
49.  Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.02 - Exemptions 
This ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. 
a.  For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. 
b.  For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. 
c.  The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of Chapter 3.02.03(C) of this ordinance, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project earned out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), (10) or (11) of this Chapter; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.03 - Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using Best Management Practices 
A.  General Provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Chapter 3.02.03(B) and (C) of this ordinance. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land- disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES General Permit. 
B.  Minimum Requirements/BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in Chapter 3.02.03(B) and (C) of this ordinance shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director, LIA, or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
2.  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land-disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in Chapter 3.02.03(C)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-till operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Chapter 3.02.03(B)(2) of this ordinance; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, or where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream 1 means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. 
a.  The City mandates an additional 25 feet of undisturbed natural vegetative buffer as measured horizontally beyond the end of the state mandated 25 feet (a combined 50 feet as measured from both stream banks). 
b.  In addition, the City mandates, an additional area setback be maintained of 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer (a combined 75 feet as measured from both stream banks), in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Within this additional setback area, grading, filling and earthmoving shall be limited to hand tool work to minimize disruption within the setback. Use of other equipment within the setback requires prior written approval of the City of Kennesaw. 
16.  The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer as referenced in 15(a) above: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(iii)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. 
17.  The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
a.  The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single—family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and Ponds. 
d.  When a pond, either new or existing, is incorporated into a development, the developer shall note on the plans if the pond is to be used for sediment control and/or retention during construction. If the pond is to be used for sediment control, the developer will be required to dredge, clean and grass the pond upon completion of construction of the project. Further, sediment control devices shall be required to protect downstream property during construction. If the pond is not completely contained on the owner's property, then it cannot be used to trap sediment. 
e.  Lakes, either new or existing, incorporated into a development shall not be used for sediment control and will be classified and used as adjacent property; siltation thereof will be treated as a violation of this article. 
f.  Hazardous sediment basins and floodwater retention structures shall be fenced and posted to avoid danger to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.04 - Maintenance 
A.  All erosion and sedimentation control measures, whether temporary or permanent, shall be maintained by the permittee or exempted person until the areas affected by such measures are permanently stabilized. 
B.  Other requirements. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the city from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions that contain stream buffer requirements which exceed the minimum requirements of this Chapter. 
C.  Coastal Marshlands. 
1.  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land- disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
2.  For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
D.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
1.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
2.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
E.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
F.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Chapter 3.02.03(B) and (C) of this ordinance. 
G.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.05 - Application/Permit Process 
A.  General. 
1.  The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review, before submittal, the general development plans and detailed plans with the city that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. 
2.  The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City without first obtaining a permit from the City to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Kennesaw Planning and Zoning Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Chapter 3.02.05(C) of this ordinance. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Chapter 3.02.03(B) and (C) of this ordinance will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by an electronic and Three (3) paper copies, each on 24x36 inch paper, of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7.10. 
3.  In addition to the local permitting fees, a fee, in an amount determined by the mayor and council, but not to exceed Eighty Dollars ($80.00) will be charged for a land disturbance permit. In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit, hi a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(9)—(10) shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Local Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless: 
a.  The plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by Chapter 3.02.03(C)(15),(16) and (17) have been obtained; 
b.  All fees have been paid; and 
c.  Bonding, if required as per Chapter 3.02.05(B)(6), has been obtained. 
Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised Plan submittal. 
5.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance Chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit application. 
6.  The Local Issuing Authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government approved surety, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof in a minimum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) up to, but not exceeding, Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this Chapter or with the conditions of the permit, after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the terms of the permit. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
7.  In the event permitee is not the owner of property for which the permit is sought, the property owner shall be required to sign the permit application indicating the property owner's agreement to be bound by all permissions, terms, and conditions contained in the permit. 
C.  Plan requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Chapter 3.02.03(B) and (C) of this ordinance, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance as though fully set forth herein, and except as amended hereby or by subsequent ordinance shall provide the minimum standards for the City. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
2.  Data Required for Site Plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless: 
a.  The erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the District pursuant to Chapter 3.02.05(B)(4) of this ordinance. 
b.  The Local Issuing Authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance; 
c.  Any variances required by Chapter 3.02.03(C)(15),(16) and (17) are obtained; 
d.  Bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Chapter 3.02.05(B)(6) are met; and 
e.  All ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. 
3.  If the permit is denied or requested to be resubmitted the reason for denial or request to resubmit shall be furnished in writing to the applicant within ten (10) business days of the denial or of a request to resubmit, as applicable. 
4.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
5.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
6.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
7.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (f)(1). 
8.  A permit issued by the LIA shall specify any special conditions under which the land-disturbing permit may be undertaken. 
9.  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by Cobb County Tax Commissioner or their designee, certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.06 - Inspection and Enforcement 
A.  The Public Works Director, or its designee, will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a permitee engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that permitee. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the permitee engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, the permitee shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. 
B.  The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The Public Works Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Local Issuing Authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties. 
E.  The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.07 - Penalties and Incentives 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have three (3) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within three (3) days, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that all work on the site be stopped until the stop work order is lifted or rescinded by the Director or the Local Issuing Authority; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and; 
3.  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the stop work order is lifted or rescinded by the Director or the Local Issuing Authority. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the stop work order is lifted or rescinded by the Director or the Local Issuing Authority, 
5.  Stop work orders referenced herein shall apply to all work activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a permitee engaged in land-disturbing activity has failed to comply with the approved soil erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that permitee. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the permitee engaged in the land- disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Chapter 3.02.05(B)(6). The Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land- disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary penalties. 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director or Local Issuing Authority issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day for each violation, plus any surcharges or additional costs and/or fees. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. The monetary penalty set forth herein is not exclusive and is cumulative to other remedies available under the laws of Georgia or City ordinance. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, there shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for their own occupancy, 
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, there shall be a minimum penalty of $ 1,000 per day for each violation involving land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.08 - Education and Certification 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph, 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.09 - Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review 
A.  Administrative remedies. 
1.  The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the permittee submitting the plan or the permitee to a hearing before the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal. 
2.  Variances involving the first twenty-five feet (25') of undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, as measured horizontally from both stream banks, can only be granted by EPD. Appeals must be directed to that office with a copy provided to the Director and LIA. 
3.  Variances involving the second twenty-five feet (25'), which is between twenty-five feet (25') to fifty feet (50'), of undisturbed natural vegetative buffer as measured horizontally from both stream banks, and activity within the third 25-foot buffer (area where no impervious cover may be installed) can be granted by the mayor and city council of the City of Kennesaw. Variances will only be considered in cases of practical difficulty or necessary hardships as outlined in the Chapter 9.02.00 et seq., variance procedures. All requirements described in Chapter 9.02.00 et seq. variance procedures must be met and the request filed with the Planning and Zoning Department to be heard by mayor and city council. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Local Issuing Authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies as set forth in Chapter 3.02.09, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Cobb County. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.02.10 - Effectivity, Validity and Liability 
A.  Effectivity. This ordinance shall become effective on the 4 th day of June 2018. 
B.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
C.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, grant of a permit, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Local Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, and as amended, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Exh. A, 6-4-18) 
3.03.00 - WATER SUPPLY AND WATERSHEDS (CHAPTER 46 OF THE CITY CODE OF ORDINANCE) 
3.04.00 - WETLANDS (CHAPTER 46 OF THE CITY CODE OF ORDINANCE) 
3.05.00 - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION (CHAPTER 46 OF THE CITY CODE OF ORDINANCE) 
3.06.00 - CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER TRIBUTARY PROTECTION 

3.06.01 - Intent and Purpose 
The intent of this article is to provide procedures and standards for review and approval of use of all land which is in the drainage basin of any tributary which flows into the Chattahoochee River. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, reduction of stream quality and vitality, or changes in hydraulic characteristics in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit land disturbing activities, adjacent to tributary streams, which lead to increases in erosion or to increased flood heights and velocities; 
2.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers; 
3.  Preserve and protect water and land resources in the Chattahoochee River watershed by protecting fish and wildlife habitats, water quality, preventing erosion of stream banks or siltation of streams, and maintaining cool water temperatures and adequate food supplies; 
4.  Protect, conserve, and promote the orderly and efficient development of water and land resources. 
This section is adopted pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-453(a). 
3.06.02 - Establishment of a Tributary Protection Area 
The "Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area" hereinafter referred to as the "protection area;" is defined and established to be the stream channel and all the land within the 1st Class stream boundary and 2nd Class stream boundary of all 1st Class and 2nd Class flowing tributaries of the Chattahoochee River downstream from Buford Dam and upstream from Peachtree Creek as indicated on the Chattahoochee Tributary Map. 
3.06.03 - Permit 
No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity or otherwise alter the hydraulic or vegetative characteristics of a protection area within a 1st Class stream boundary or a 2nd Class stream boundary of any 1st Class or 2nd Class stream as identified on the Chattahoochee Tributary Map without first having obtained a development permit from the zoning administrator. 
3.06.04 - Exceptions 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Any public agency or its contractor exempted by law from the application of this ordinance; 
2.  Any person performing work within a right-of-way of any public agency pursuant to a permit issued by such public agency; 
3.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. When emergency work is performed under this section the person performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the zoning administrator within three days after commencement of the work and shall thereafter obtain a development permit and perform such work as may be determined to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water quality, stability, or water conveyance capacity of the protection area; 
4.  Work consisting of the operation, repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land existing on the date of adoption of this ordinance or January 1, 1984, whichever is earlier; 
5.  Any project which had a development plan approved by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Kennesaw on or before January 1, 1984. 
3.07.00 - LANDSCAPING AND TREE REQUIREMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., adopted Dec. 21, 2015, repealed the former § 3.07.00, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 3.07.00 pertained landscaping, buffers, and tree conservation and replacement. 

3.07.01 - Purpose 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
1.  Protect and maintain the urban forest by managing the impact of development. 
2.  Preserve the environmental and aesthetic assets of the community by requiring tree planting and landscaping for development. 
3.  Provide protection from removal for all trees, without a permit, within the city unless exempted. 
4.  Provide the necessary information to facilitate development project design, plan review, and enforcement processes in order that the provisions of the ordinance are administered in the most effective, efficient and economical manner. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.02 - Application 
The terms, provisions and standards of this Chapter shall apply to any activity, private and/or governmental, on real property, which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit or creates a land disturbance through the use of motorized vehicles within the City of Kennesaw. (Chapter 46, Article III) 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.03 - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer. Any visual buffer or screening required by this chapter or any other pertinent section of the city zoning regulations. 
City or the words " the city " means the City of Kennesaw, Georgia or any designated employee thereof. 
Critical Root Zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The CRZ will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and one-half times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. 
Clearing. The removal of trees or other vegetation of two inches dbh or greater. 
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH). The diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade at its base. Whenever a branch, limb, defect or abnormal swelling of the trunk occurs at this height, the diameter at breast height (dbh) shall be measured at the nearest point above or below 4.5 feet at which a normal diameter occurs. 
Director means the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. 
Existing Density Factor (EDF) means density of existing trees to be conserved on a site. 
Landscape Plan. A map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where vegetation is to be retained or provided in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The landscape plan shall include any required buffer elements. 
Pervious Area means an area of a parcel that allows the penetration, percolation or soaking of rain water into the ground. Also known as "Green Area" or "Green Space". 
Street Yard means an area of a lot which lies between the street right-of-way line and the actual front wall line of the building, as such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the building, parallel to the street, until such imaginary extensions of such front building wall lines intersect the side property lines. In determining the actual building wall of the building for the purposes of this definition, steps and unenclosed porches shall be excluded, but such building wall line shall follow and include the irregular indentations of the building. A front building wall is a building wall fronting on a street. On corner lots the street yard shall consist of all the area of such lot between all abutting street right-of-way lines and their corresponding actual front building wall lines, as such lines are extended in the manner provided in this definition. When there are multiple buildings on a lot, the street yard shall consist of all the area of the lot between the street right-of-way line and an imaginary line beginning at one side of the property line, running parallel to the street, connecting to the front most corner of the building wall fronting the street and nearest such side property line, then following and connecting the front most walls of all buildings fronting on the street, and then extending to the other side property line, running parallel to the street. If a building has a rounded front, the front building wall corners shall be the points closest to the side boundaries; provided, however, that isolated buildings (e.g., fast food restaurants in a shopping center, photo processing drop-offs, bank drive-through, etc.) shall not be considered in delineating the street yard. Notwithstanding all of the foregoing, on land used only for parking purposes or only as a commercial or private parking lot, the street yard shall consist of the area between the street right-of-way line and the back property line. 
Tree Density Factor (TDF) means the minimum number of trees required to be maintained on a developed site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.04 - General Provisions Tree Removal and Permit Requirements 
1.  A Tree Removal Permit shall be obtained prior to the removal of any tree (DEAD or ALIVE) from all residential and/or commercial property located within the city limits. 
a.  A Permit Application is available on-line from the City Website or can be picked up at the Public Works Department. 
b.  Properties within the Historic District shall comply with Chapter 4.02.01 in addition the requirements outlined in this Section. 
i.  Applicants shall be required to pay an application fee for a Certificate of Appropriateness when applying for a permit within the Historic District in an amount as set forth by the city. 
ii.  All applications shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Committee. 
2.  Removal of Trees on Residential Properties. 
a.  A permit is required for the removal of any tree five (5) inches in diameter and larger (measured at 4.5 feet above the ground). Trees smaller than 5 inches in circumference (measured at 4.5 feet above the ground) are not regulated. 
b.  Removal of trees within common areas of residential neighborhoods such as clubhouses, tennis courts, pools, neighborhood entrances, etc. will be treated as commercial properties. 
3.  Removal of Trees on Commercial Sites 
a.  A permit shall be secured prior to the commencement of any planting, removal, trimming, or cutting of trees subject to this chapter. For purposes of this subsection, a landscape plan approved in writing by the City constitutes a permit. 
b.  No land disturbance permit for full site development shall be issued without it being determined that the proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of these regulations and Chapter 46, Article III. 
c.  The City shall have the authority to review all requests for permits to grant or deny permits or attach reasonable conditions to the permits. 
d.  Permits are not required for city, county and state department of transportation projects so long as tree preservation and protection requirements are included in the project. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.05 - Landscape Plan Required 
1.  Landscape plans shall be provided for all projects that exceed one (1) acre. The landscaping plan shall be prepared by, and bear the seal of, a landscape architect or professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
2.  The landscape plan shall: 
a.  Be drawn to scale and include property boundaries, north arrow, graphic scale, and date. 
b.  Include a vegetation survey, including an aerial photograph which outlines the subject site, provided at the same scale as the landscape plan. 
c.  Delineate existing and proposed structures, parking spaces, driveways and other vehicular use areas, sidewalks, utilities, easements, height and voltage of power lines on the property or adjacent property. 
d.  Critical layout dimensions for trees, plant beds and landscape features. 
e.  Method(s) to protect and relocate trees and native plant communities during construction. 
f.  Indicate the common and scientific name and quantity of plants to be installed. 
g.  Identify all landscape features and non-living landscape materials. 
h.  Show all areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law, including but not limited to trees, specimen trees, native plant species, native habitats and wetlands. 
i.  Illustrate geologic, historic and archeological features to be preserved. 
j.  Depict stormwater retention/detention areas and areas excluded from maximum permitted lawn area. 
k.  Irrigation system details, if irrigation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.06 - Vegetation and Tree Survey 
1.  A vegetation survey shall be provided for all sites at the same scale as the landscape plan. The vegetation survey shall be accompanied by an aerial photograph which outlines the subject site without obscuring its features. 
2.  All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried. Trees in other protected zones; such as stream buffers and flood plains need not be inventoried. 
3.  Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for large forested areas, subject to prior written approval of the City. Written guidelines for performing sample inventories can be obtained from the Director. 
4.  Accurate locations for specimen trees shall be shown on the plan with an indication of whether they are to be retained or removed. 
5.  Delineate all ground cover types (including pasture or forest) on the site and a general description of the types of trees and range of tree sizes in each forest-cover type [e.g. mixed pine and upland hardwoods 12 to 20 inches DBH]. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.07 - Density Factor Analysis 
A.  Overview 
1.  A basic requirement of this Chapter is that all applicable sites maintain a minimum number of trees on the developed site, based on pervious (green) area. 
2.  The Tree Density requirement shall be met independent of whether a site had trees prior to development. The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be conserved, planting new trees or some combination of the two. 
B.  Tree Density Factor 
1.  The tree density factor is dependent on the pervious area available based on the following equation: Tree Density Factor = Pervious Area (in square feet) ÷ 2750. 
C.  Existing Density Factor (EDF) 
1.  Trees that exist in any 100-year flood plain, stream buffers, wetland, or utility easements, cannot be counted toward meeting tree density requirements. These areas shall not be included in the "Pervious Area". 
2.  The EDF is calculated by dividing the diameter of each tree by 12, i.e., a 12-inch tree has a value of one (1) tree, a 24-inch tree has a value of two (2) trees. No trees less than 5 inches in diameter shall be counted as an existing tree. 
3.  Specimen Trees 
a.  Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for conservation. These trees are referred to as specimen trees. 
b.  The following criteria shall be used to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 
i.  Over story hardwoods and non-pine softwoods: seventeen (17) inch diameter or larger; 
ii.  Over story pines: thirty (30) inch diameter or larger; 
iii.  Understory trees: eight (8) inch diameter or larger. 
c.  Condition criteria 
i.  Life expectancy of greater than fifteen (15) years; 
ii.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay; 
iii.  No more than one (1) major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only); 
iv.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
d.  Conservation. In order to encourage the conservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be one and one-quarter (1¼) times the assigned unit value for existing trees. 
e.  Removal and Replacement. 
i.  If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written document indicating the reason for the removal shall be submitted to the Director for approval. 
ii.  Specimen trees must be replaced by species with comparable growth rate and potential for comparable size and quality. 
iii.  Any specimen tree removed without the required review and approval of the Director shall be replaced by trees with a total density equal to three (3) times the unit value of the tree removed. If a tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition, size alone will determine whether the tree was of specimen quality. The CRZ of the specimen tree shall remain pervious. 
D.  Replacement Density Factor 
1.  Additional (Tree) Density Factor (ADF) is the number of new trees to be planted on a site. 
2.  Calculate the ADF by subtracting the EDF from the TDF (ADF= TDF - EDF). 
3.  All replacement trees shall be, at a minimum, from 3-inches to 4-inches in diameter. 
4.  Any number or combination of transplant-sized trees can be used as long as the total Tree Density Factor units will equal or exceed the TDF, the trees are included on the attached list, and the species mix is acceptable to the City. 
E.  Additional Density Requirements 
1.  Subdivision and multi-family developments 
a.  Every lot in a subdivision shall have a minimum number of trees: 
i.  Lot Area Less than 0.20 acres: 2 trees 
ii.  Lot Area Larger than 0.2 acres: No. of Trees = area of lot (acres to one decimal point) × 10 
b.  These trees can be counted as part of the required trees (TDF). 
c.  At least twenty (20) percent of the required trees, and a minimum of one tree, must be planted in the front street yard area. 
d.  This requirement shall apply to the owner/developer or homebuilder, whoever is responsible for obtaining the certificate of occupancy for the individual lot. 
e.  Subdivision amenity/recreation areas shall meet all tree ordinance density requirements as part of the overall subdivision. 
2.  Commercial and Industrial Developments 
a.  A sufficient number of trees must be planted in interior portions of parking lots to achieve a minimum ratio of one (1) tree per twelve (12) parking spaces. 
b.  In addition, every parking space must be within fifty (50) feet of the trunk of a tree to assure uniform distribution of trees throughout the parking area. 
c.  Any redevelopment project which results in the removal and resurfacing of fifteen (15) percent or more of an existing parking lot (other than sealing or patching), must retrofit the entire parking lot to meet the tree planting standard in the previous paragraph. 
d.  All street yards shall be planted with one tree for each thirty-five (35) linear feet exclusive of driveways, access ways and sight distance triangles. Trees planted to meet the parking lot and street yard requirements must meet or exceed the minimum standards specified under this section, but there may be an additional requirement if the TDF requirement is met elsewhere on the site. 
3.  Out parcels that are part of larger shopping or commercial centers shall meet all tree density requirements separate from the overall shopping center. 
4.  Grading only permits 
a.  Grading projects, for which no full site plans have been submitted for review by the City, are subject to the same buffer requirements as development or redevelopment projects. 
b.  The grading plan shall conform to the review requirements as set forth in the UDC Chapter 10. 
c.  An estimated completion date must be noted on the plan. Buffer areas that must be landscaped shall be planted at the completion of the grading projects or postponed to an appropriate planting season, provided that appropriate performance security arrangements are made in accordance with Chapter 10.10.04. Planted buffers are subject to maintenance inspection procedures. 
5.  Speculative grading may be postponed for up to six months provided that appropriate performance security arrangements are made in accordance with this Section. 
6.  Tree Density requirements for additions to existing projects may be met in one of the following ways: 
a.  Calculate the area of any new land disturbance and/or improvements and add replacement trees based on that area (existing trees elsewhere on the site may not be counted with this option); or, 
b.  Base density requirements on the total site area and count any existing trees on the site (subject to all restrictions noted elsewhere in these standards). 
7.  Phased projects. 
a.  If a tract is to be developed in phases, a separate permit shall be required for each phase as appropriate. 
b.  Density calculations must be based on a site area established for each phase line or construction limit line. Existing trees to be counted toward meeting the density requirements must be within the limits of the phase line. 
c.  Time limit on approval. A permit shall be valid for 12 months. In the event the permittee has not begun the permitted work within 12 months, the permit shall lapse and a new permit must be obtained before work can begin. Once work is begun under a valid permit the permittee may continue the permitted work until the work is completed. Any permit, including grandfathered projects, will automatically lapse after 12 months of inactivity, unless the developer has obtained an extension from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.08 - Conservation of Mature Trees 
A.  Developers shall make all reasonable efforts to protect retained mature trees' critical root zones on the site using tree save fence or other approved method during the construction within the development site and abutting properties according to the following guidelines: 
1.  On lots and subdivisions of one (1) acre or more, 
a.  The applicant shall identify environmentally sensitive areas as part of the site plan design. 
b.  Such areas shall include wetlands, flood plains, permanent and intermittent streams with associated buffers, mature stands of trees and other significant aspects of the natural environment on the site. 
c.  Limits of disturbance to these areas shall be established and detailed on the site plan. 
d.  In order to protect the more environmentally sensitive areas, development shall be confined to the portion of the lot required for the intended construction. 
e.  These limits also to apply to priority trail and green space corridors as defined by the greenway and trail plan established by the City. 
2.  On lots and subdivisions of less than one (1) acre, 
a.  Root save areas shall be established in the setback and required yard areas to preserve mature trees in those areas. 
b.  Grading, trenching, or other land disturbance in these areas shall be limited to necessary storm drainage improvements, erosion control measures and access to streets, sidewalks, driveways, utility connections (power, water, cable) or other features required by code. 
3.  A maximum of ten (10%) percent of the trees in a designated 100-year flood plain, but outside applicable stream buffer zones, may be approved for removal or destruction. Recompense to the tree bank for trees removed or destroyed in designated wetlands or flood plain shall be calculated separately and multiplied by a factor of five (5) before being added to the recompense for other areas of the site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.09 - Maintenance of Trees 
A.  The city requires a surety for landscape performance and maintenance related to development or redevelopment of property. These requirements are defined in Section 80-184 of the City of Kennesaw Code of Ordinances. 
B.  The developer shall be responsible for maintaining the health of all replacement trees and landscape vegetation for a period of one (1) year from the date of the last certificate of occupancy issued for the subdivision or project. 
C.  The developer shall replace any tree that dies, becomes significantly deformed in growth, or becomes diseased during this time period. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.10 - Tree Conservation Standards 
A.  Tree Inventories and Surveys 
1.  All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements shall be inventoried. Trees in other protected zones; such as stream buffers and flood plains need not be inventoried. 
2.  Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for large forested areas, subject to prior approval of the City. Written guidelines for performing sample inventories can be obtained from the Director. 
3.  Specimen trees shall be shown on the plan with an indication of whether they are to be retained or removed. Accurate locations are requested when the conservation of a specimen tree is questionable or when a site design alteration is feasible. Approximate locations are acceptable otherwise. 
4.  Projects over one (1) acre must provide a landscape plan delineating all ground cover types (including pasture or forest) on the site and a general description of the types of trees and range of tree sizes in each forest-cover type [e.g. mixed pine and upland hardwoods 12 to 20 inches DBH]. 
5.  Any specimen tree that has a surveyed location shown on the plan will receive one and one-quarter (1¼) the normal unit value credit if there is to be no construction activity in that tree's CRZ. These trees must be represented on the plan by a circle the size of the CRZ. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.11 - Buffer Zones 
1.  All properties zoned commercial, office institutional, and industrial zoned shall establish a buffer along any property line that abuts a residential district. This standard also applies to screening from residential property separated by right-of-way and transmission easements. 
2.  All properties zoned mixed use and multi-family shall establish a buffer zone along any property line abutting a single family residential district. This standard also applies to screening from single family residential property that is separated by right-of-way and transmission easements. 
3.  Buffer zones shall incorporate tree specimens that will provide total screening of activity from property lines. 
4.  Combination of berms, hedges and tree installation to accomplish the intent of these standards shall be approved by the Director. Installation height for trees in these zones shall be at least five feet and be of an evergreen variety. 
5.  Landscaping buffer zones will meet the following minimum widths for each district: 
3.07 LI and HI - 50 feet 
3.08 PVC, PSC, HGB, GC - 40 feet 
3.09 CRC, NRC - 35 feet 
3.10 RM-8, RM-12, MHP - 25 feet 
3.11 OI, NS - 20 feet 
3.12 PUD-RRA-4, FST, HPV, UVC - 10 feet 
3.13 SLO - 10 feet 
6.  For subdivisions, all buffers shall be delineated on the final plat and identified as tree conservation easements. Final plats shall also identify any individual lots with other tree conservation and/or planting requirements. These lots shall be identified on the plat with a symbol and a corresponding note indicating the homebuilder's responsibility for such tree conservation and/or planting requirements. 
Protection of Trees during Construction 
1.  Developers shall make all reasonable efforts to protect retained trees during the construction process, including, but not limited to, the following measures: 
a.  Placing protective barriers around trees, and marking such areas with "tree save area" signs; 
b.  Not grading, excavating, or locating utilities within the trees' critical root zone (CRZ); 
c.  Maintaining the CRZ as a pervious surface; and, 
d.  Maintaining the topsoil in the CRZ and preventing siltation. 
2.  Tree protection devices shall be installed prior to the issuance of a land use permit for any clearing and/or grading. Tree protection shall consist of chain link fencing, orange laminated plastic fencing supported by posts, rail fencing, or other equivalent restraining material. Tree protection devices shall remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development and shall be subject to inspection by the Director. (See Figure). 

(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.12 - Tree Replacement Standards 
A.  Tree replacement plans should be prepared with appropriate consideration given to the function of trees in the urban landscape. Every effort should be made to maximize the environmental benefit of the plant material. 
B.  Planting Specifications. 
1.  Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders, or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to ensure a reasonable expectation of survival. 
2.  Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication, Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual, or similar publication. Reference the American Association of Nurserymen publication, American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60, 1973), for plant material quality specifications. Reference the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983 Castle Books), or similar publication, for information on tree species site requirements. 
C.  Species. 
1.  Species must be selected from the "Kennesaw Tree Species Selection List" shown in Appendix A. All trees shall be quality specimens and ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. 
2.  Flowering ornamental species are typically not acceptable for use in meeting density requirements. 
3.  When less than ten (10) trees are shown to be planted on a project, one (1) species of tree may be specified. When ten (10) to fifty (50) trees are shown, a minimum of three (3) species of trees is required. When more than fifty (50) trees are shown, a minimum of five (5) species of trees is required. 
4.  Where summer shading is required or recommended, the use of deciduous over story tree species is necessary. 
D.  Parking Lots and Street Yards. 
1.  All root zones must be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width (measured from back-of-curb where curbing is installed or edge or pavement otherwise). 
2.  The root zone for over story trees must be a minimum of 200 square feet. If that area is shared with other trees, add 100 square feet for each additional tree. 
3.  The root zone for understory trees must be a minimum of 100 square feet. If that area is shared with other understory trees, add fifty (50) square feet for each additional tree. 
4.  Parking lot islands, peninsulas and medians must have clean, cultivated soil to a total depth of two and one-half (2½) feet. Native subsoil, free of construction debris and litter, is acceptable in parking lot islands, peninsulas and medians if the entire area is amended with appropriate soil improvements and thoroughly tilled. Otherwise, loamy topsoil is required. 
5.  Parking lot islands, peninsulas and medians must be mulched with four (4) inches of suitable mulch material, replaced as needed. To discourage soil compaction from pedestrian traffic, these areas may be planted with low evergreen shrubs but not with grass. 
6.  Light poles are prohibited in parking lot islands, peninsulas and medians unless a plan is submitted by the lighting contractor showing minimum impact to the root zone. 
7.  No fastigiated (narrow-crowned) varieties of trees are permissible in parking lots. 
8.  Trees planted to meet parking lot and street yard requirements must be over story trees, a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter. 
9.  The use of at-grade planting areas in parking lots to promote storm water runoff and to supplement irrigation needs is encouraged, provided that the trees planted there will not be adversely impacted and that the system is designed by a licensed, professional civil engineer. 
10.  Where street yard trees will be planted near the edge of pavement of a public street with a design speed of forty-five (45) mph or higher, or in areas beneath overhead utility lines, the use of an understory species is required. 
E.  Root Barriers. Root barriers are required in parking lot islands, peninsulas, medians and alongside sidewalks. Root barriers must be commercially produce for the purpose of deflecting tree roots downward. Root barriers are typically made of polypropylene, polyethylene, or polystyrene, at least 0.060 inches thick, with vertical root guides every six (6) inches. Root barrier products should specify use as a tree root barrier. 
F.  Irrigation. Newly planted trees and existing trees subjected to construction impacts, typically need supplemental watering when rainfall is inadequate. Commercial project applicants should be prepared to discuss how trees are to be watered during their establishment or transition period, and may be required to submit a maintenance schedule. Their plan should indicate the method of irrigation that is proposed. 
G.  Public Streets Rights-of-Way. 
1.  No Trees may be planted within publicly-maintained street rights-of-way. 
H.  Subdivisions. 
1.  Trees shown to be planted in common areas within a subdivision (outside of amenity areas) shall be planted by the subdivision owner/developer. These trees must be in place before the final plat is approved. 
2.  Trees shown to be planted on individual lots must be planted by the owner/homebuilder. These trees must be in place before the certificate of occupancy for the affected lot is approved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.13 - Alternative Compliance 
1.  In situations where the tree conservation and replacement requirements cannot be met because a project site will not bear the required density of trees, a request for alternative compliance may be submitted to the Director. In no instance shall more than fifty (50) percent of the required site density factor be met through alternative compliance. 
2.  Parking Lot and Street Yard Requirements. 
a.  If sufficient cause is demonstrated that the parking lot and street yard planting requirements cannot be met, a request for alternative compliance which is equal to (or exceeds) the minimum requirements may be submitted to the Director. 
b.  Sufficient cause is deemed to be when enforcing any of the parking lot or street yard requirements would cause the applicant to violate any state or federal law or any City ordinance or zoning stipulation specific to the applicant. 
c.  A land disturbance permit will only be issued after the Director has approved and received the necessary documentation and funds if required. 
3.  Alternative compliance methods include the following. 
a.  Off-site Planting. 
•  The off-site location, if at all possible, should be in the same area of the city as the project site and shall be on public property. 
•  A tree replacement plan, meeting all applicable standards in these guidelines, must be reviewed and approved by the Director before any work is started. 
•  The following note must be shown on the approved plan: "A tree replacement plan addendum for this project shall be submitted to the Director at least thirty (30) days prior to requesting a final inspection. This plan shall include the species, size and location of trees to be planted off-site to meet the tree density deficit shown. Release of this project is subject to approval of this plan as well as verification of the installation of the trees." 
b.  City Tree Bank Fund. The City will accept contributions to the tree bank fund which will be used for the sole purpose of planting trees and landscaping material on public property. The locations of plantings will be determined by the Director. Calculating contribution amounts are as follows: 
i.  Contribution calculations are based on a tree unit value of $400.00 each, representing material costs, labor, maintenance and guarantee for trees planted. 
ii.  To determine the appropriate contribution, first calculate the tree density factor deficit (TFD) or unit value that cannot be planted-on site then multiply by $400.00 per tree. 
iii.  Fund administration. The City Tree Bank fund will be administered by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.14 - Public Tree Protection and Care 
A.  Except as hereinafter provided, no person except a public utility shall cut, prune, injure or remove any living tree on or in a public highway, right-of-way, public park, public place, triangle, sidewalk, or other public property; or cut or disturb or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree on public property; or spray with any chemical insecticide or herbicide or other oils or whitewash any tree on public property; or place any wire, rope, sign, poster, barricade, or other fixture on a tree or tree guard on public property; or injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any such tree, or for any entity, utility, citizen, or tree care company or government to trench, cut, grade, clear, or fill within the critical root zone of any public tree without the expressed written consent of the Director. 
B.  It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or government entity/department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision of this ordinance by receipt of written consent of the Director for each instance allowing such actions. 
C.  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all streets, parks, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety and wellbeing. 
D.  All tree work taking place on public property being conducted by contractors, sub-contractors, or county/city employees will conform to International Society of Arboriculture and ANSI 300 and Z-133 arboricultural standards for tree work. 
E.  It may become necessary, from time to time for emergency crews to prune or remove trees to provide for public safety or restore phone or electrical service. Such an action may be conducted by government, emergency or public utility crews without permit so as to allow immediate action to prevent damage or correct a condition which may pose a hazard to life or property. The Director shall be notified of any such action within 24 hours of the action being initiated, by the entity taking such action, for each instance of action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
3.07.15 - Notification and Penalties for Damaging Trees on Public Property 
A.  Any person who shall injure, damage or destroy any public tree situated upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public property within the city shall promptly notify the Director of such fact and shall, within such reasonable time as specified by the Director, repair or replace the same to the satisfaction of the Director. 
B.  Should the person fail or refuse to repair or replace the damaged or destroyed trees or plants within such reasonable time, the Director shall do or cause to be done the necessary repairing or replacement, and the costs of this work shall be recovered from the person responsible for the damage or destruction by, a proper action of law. In any such action, "The Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants," published by the Council of Trees and Landscape Appraisers, current edition, shall form the basis for establishing any monetary damages due for damage or destruction to the tree. In addition, the City may recover any other damages or losses to which it is entitled by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, Att., 12-21-15) 
City of Kennesaw Tree Species Selection List 

 
Chapter 4 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 
4.00.00 - GENERALLY 

4.00.01 - Purpose 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide design standards applicable to all development activity within the City of Kennesaw. This chapter also provides design standards applicable in specific situations, such as development within overlay districts or development of specific uses that require additional standards to address potential impacts. 
4.00.02 - Principles of Site Design and Development 
Development design shall first take into account the protection of environmental and natural resources as set forth in Chapter 3. All development shall be designed to avoid unnecessary impervious surface cover; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; and to avoid adverse effects of shadow, glare, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on surrounding properties. 
4.00.03 - Applicability 
The design standards set forth in this chapter apply to all development in the City of Kennesaw. 
4.01.00 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BASE ZONING DISTRICTS 

4.01.01 - Application of Regulations 
A.  Use. No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part hereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered in nonconformity with the regulations of this ordinance or amendments thereto, for the district in which it is located. 
B.  Height and density. Unless a proper variance is granted, no building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as: 
1.  To exceed the height limits; 
2.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
3.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or 
4.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, courtyards or other open spaces, than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  Lot size. Unless a proper variance is granted, no lot, even though consisting of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yards, lot area per family or other criteria of this ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
D.  Yard use limitations. Unless a proper variance is granted, no part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking or loading space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking or loading space required for another building. 
E.  Annexed land. Any parcel or parcels of land annexed to the City of Kennesaw in the future shall follow rezoning procedures and be rezoned to a City of Kennesaw zoning category. If the zoning designation is the same as Cobb County's the fee for application shall be waived. 
F.  Use prohibited when not specified. If not otherwise stated, any use not specifically permitted in a use district as provided under this UDC Chapter, shall be prohibited in that district. 
G.  Double frontage lot. Where an existing double frontage lot faces a residential district on one side and nonresidential district on the opposite side, such a lot when zoned UVC, CRC, GC, HI, or LI shall have vehicular access only from the major thoroughfare; and all signs and advertising, if permitted in the UVC, CRC, GC, HI, and LI district, shall face the major thoroughfare. 
H.  Buffer required. 
1.  A buffer shall be required for the following: 
a.  All property zoned for commercial, office-professional, and industrial uses shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a residential district or a front property line abutting a public street across from a residential district. 
b.  All property zoned for multifamily and mixed uses shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a single-family residential district or a front property line abutting a public street across from a single-family residential district. 
c.  All commercial, office-professional and industrial property in the mixed use district shall have a buffer along any rear and side property line abutting a multifamily use or district or a front property line abutting a public street across from a multifamily use or district. 
2.  All buffers shall consist of a landscaped open space area and, if required by this section, screening. All landscaped open space areas and screening shall be established in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Landscaped open space areas shall be established and maintained along required property lot lines in accordance with general landscaping policies, standards and specifications established and approved by the City Council. 
b.  Landscaped open space areas shall meet the following minimum width requirements for each district where abutting residential district; single-family: 
i  LI, HI, - Fifty (50) feet. 
ii  PVC, PSC, HGB, GC, and Mixed Use (except for multifamily uses) - Forty (40) feet. 
iii  CRC, NRC - thirty-five (35) feet. 
iv  RM-8, RM-12, MHP, and multifamily uses in the mixed district - twenty-five (25) feet. 
v  OI, NS, - twenty (20) feet. 
vi  PUD-R, RA-4, FST, HPV, and UVC - ten (10) feet. 
vii  HIS — See historic district regulations. 
c.  Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by Plan Review Committee and applicable city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
i.  Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs; 
ii.  Species are to be ecologically compatible to site and appropriate for design situation; 
iii.  Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffer should maximize visual barrier to height of six (6) feet within two (2) years of planting; 
iv.  Minimum height of plant materials at installation is to be five (5) feet for trees and two (2) feet for shrubs: 
v.  Fencing or walls are to be minimum six (6) feet in height; 
vi.  Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the tree preservation ordinance; 
vii.  Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner(s) to ensure that the above objectives and standards are met; and 
viii.  When topography and existing conditions allow, the required buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
d.  Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
i  Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features; 
ii  Berms shall be stabilized; 
iii  Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns; and 
iv  Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
3.  The City of Kennesaw Plan Review Committee and staff may require additional screening outside required landscaped area for purposes of obscuring features, such as parking lots, rear entrances, utility and maintenance structures, loading facilities, swimming pools and recreation areas within any multifamily, commercial, office-professional, light industrial and multiuse district. 
4.  The screening requirements of this section may be waived or varied by the Mayor and City Council, if and only if: 
a.  It can be clearly demonstrated that existing topography and/or vegetation achieve the purpose and intent of this section. 
b.  It can be clearly demonstrated in a specific instance, that for topographic reasons, a fence, wall and/or other screening device required herein could not possibly screen activities conducted on ground level from view from the normal level of a first story window on any lot in a residential district abutting the use. 
5.  All buffers shall be designated on the property plat and recorded as a permanent buffer. 
4.01.02 - Dimensional Standards for Development 
Dimensional standards for each zoning district are provided in Table 4.01.02 below: 
Table 4.01.02: District Dimensional Regulations 

 
4.02.00 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

4.02.01 - General Regulations and Design Standards for Historic Districts 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The historical and architectural heritage of Kennesaw is among its most valued and important assets. The purpose of the Kennesaw Historic District (KHD) is to promote the cultural, economic and general welfare of the city, and the preservation and protection of the old, historic or architecturally worthy structures in quaint areas or neighborhoods which impact a distinct aspect of the city and which serve as visible reminders of the cultural, social, economic and architectural heritage of the city, the state, and the nation. 
B.  Creation of Historic Preservation Commission. See Section 8.03.02 of this UDC for creation of the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission. 
C.  Boundaries. 
1.  The boundary of the historic properties shall be those specific properties as specified by the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission and so designated by ordinances adopted by the Mayor and City Council, or designated on state or national registers, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26 (the Georgia Historic Preservation Act—Acts 1980, pages 1723—1729). All historic properties shall be designated on a map entitled "Official Historic District Map of the City of Kennesaw," which shall be as adopted by the Mayor and City Council, and the same required boundaries to be shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Kennesaw." 
2.  Any amendment to the boundary of historic properties or the "Official Historic Properties Map of the City of Kennesaw" shall be recommended by the Historic Preservation Commission and adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The Historic Preservation Commission and the Mayor and Council will each hold public hearings before taking action of any proposed district changes in accordance with appropriate State Historic Preservation Office approval. 
3.  Notice of the public hearing held by the Mayor and City Council and the public hearing held by the commission shall be advertised in accordance with Chapter 10 of this UDC, and the following: 
a.  An advertisement providing notice of the hearing shall be published at least two times in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. 
b.  The commission shall cause written notice of the hearing to be mailed to all owners and occupants of the property(ies) proposed to be designated. 
c.  All written notices to property owners or occupants of property(ies) shall be mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing before the commission and again for the public hearing before the Mayor and City Council. 
d.  At least one (1) published notice shall appear in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the municipality not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing before the Historic Preservation Commission and Mayor and City Council. 
4.  The commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and shall report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art proposed for designation or acquisition. This report shall be submitted to the historic preservation section of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor at least thirty (30) days prior to any public hearing held to designate any property or any amendment thereto as a historic property. 
D.  Relationship to zoning district. 
1.  All that tract and parcel of land delineated on the historical district map of historic properties for the City of Kennesaw, dated May 19, 1978, presented on August 20, 1979, by Phil Secrist (Chairman of the Kennesaw Historical Society), and approved by Georgia Department of Natural Resources in October, 1979, and approved for the National Historic Register in April, 1980, which map is hereby incorporated by reference, shall be classified for zoning purposes as KHD (Kennesaw Historical District) and shall be designated as being a part of zoning district KHD (Kennesaw Historical District). Such zoning classification and designation shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the zoning classification and zoning designation applicable to such property at the time such property is designated as being a part of the historic district or is designated as historic property. 
2.  If a conflict exists with regard to a use which is available to property having more than one zoning classification or zoning district designation, then the more liberal or less restrictive use shall apply to such property; however, the minimum dimensional requirements applicable to such property shall be those requirements applicable to zoning district KHD (Kennesaw Historic District). 
E.  Classification of historic properties and development standards. 
1.  The commission shall evaluate all properties as designated on the Official Historic Properties Map of the City of Kennesaw, and the Official Zoning Map of the City of Kennesaw. 
2.  All properties so designated shall be classified as one of the following categories: 
a.  Historic. More than fifty (50) years old and contributing to the community's historic character; 
b.  Historic-obscured. More than fifty (50) years old but not contributing to the historical character of the community due to unsympathetic but not irreparable alterations; 
c.  Non-historic. Less than fifty (50) years old and contributing to the historic character of the community by possessing architectural character; 
d.  Intrusion. Structures of any age which detract from the historic character of the district; and 
e.  Vacant 
3.  All historic, historic-obscured, non-historic, and intrusion property classifications in the Kennesaw Historic District shall be shown on the Official Historic Properties Map of the City of Kennesaw, and the Official Zoning Map of the City of Kennesaw. In the event a question arises over the classification of the property, the property owner may file an appeal stating the reason(s) for the appeal with the Zoning Administrator. On such appeal, the commission shall reconsider their original finding and classify the property based on their current evaluation. If such appeal has not been remedied, the commission shall submit a report to the Mayor and City Council indicating the reason(s) for their classification of the individual property. After considering the appeal as requested by the individual property owner on the classification of the property, the Mayor and City Council may reclassify the property or any portion thereof as they determine. 
F.  Development standards and general regulations of historic properties. Design Review Guidelines as adopted by the Mayor and City Council and incorporated hereto. 
1.  A building or structure classified as historic, historic-obscured, or non-historic, or any part thereof, or any appurtenance element related thereto shall only be moved, reconstructed, altered or maintained in a manner that will preserve the historical and/or architectural character of the building, structure or appurtenance element thereto. 
2.  Any change materially affecting the external architectural appearance of any historic property will be compatible with other buildings and structures within the historic district and particularly buildings classified as historic and with historic squares and places to which it is visually related. 
3.  On any building classified as historic, historic-obscured, or non-historic where the commission fails to approve the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, such building or structure shall not be demolished or in any way altered unless specific approval is granted by the Mayor and City Council upon an appeal of the commission's decision. 
4.  A historic building shall not be relocated onto another site unless it is shown that the preservation on its existing site is not consistent with the purpose(s) of this section. 
5.  In the review of the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for any structure, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or interior use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
6.  On any historic property where a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued, any change to the property shall be completed in accordance with the approved application material. 
7.  All historic property shall be maintained in such manner to ensure no destruction, deterioration or other harmful effect by virtue of neglect occurs. Any such structure or property determined by the commission to be affected by neglect of maintenance shall be restored by the property owner to such condition as specified by the building official within the time period prescribed by him. 
8.  Any historic property wherein destruction, deterioration, or other harmful effect has been determined by the commission to exist due to neglect, accident or intentional damage, the commission at its discretion may require the property to be restored to its original condition prior to such change resulting from the neglect, accident or intentional damage or impose other conditions as appropriate. If restoration is required, such action taken by the commission shall be recorded as a matter of record with the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Cobb County or other appropriate agency. 
G.  General landscaping requirements. An application for Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required to submit a landscaping plan which is designed to be consistent with the structures proposed and designed in accordance with the Kennesaw Historic District Design Standards, the adopted Landscaping Ordinance as part of the UDC amended from time to time. 
H.  Duties, responsibilities, and powers of the Historic Preservation Commission. The duties responsibilities and powers of the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission are provided in Chapter 8 of this UDC. 
I.  Certificate of Appropriateness required. 
1.  A Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Zoning Administrator after approval by the commission shall be required before any of the following conditions occur within the boundary of a designated historic property: 
a.  Any new construction of a principal building or accessory building or structure; 
b.  Any change in the exterior architectural appearance of existing buildings by additions, reconstruction, alteration or maintenance, including exterior color changes; 
c.  Demolition of a historic building or structure classified by the commission as historic, historic-obscured, or non-historic under Section 4.02.01(E). 
d.  Moving of a historic building or structure classified by the Commission as historic, historic-obscured, or non-historic under Section 4.02.01(E), and 
e.  Any change in external environmental features. 
2.  After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of the historic property or of a structure, site or work of art within the historic district shall be made or permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless and until all requirements of this ordinance are met. 
J.  Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be made in the office of the Zoning Administrator. See Chapter 10 of the UDC (10.3.13) for procedural requirements. 
K.  Exclusions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and/or repair of any exterior elements of any building, structure or property nor shall anything in this section be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such element which any authorized public official shall certify as required by public health or safety. Nothing in this section shall be construed to void any plan(s) or permit(s) having received approval from any appropriate officer, board or commission of the city for a project prior to the enactment of this section. The Zoning Administrator shall determine the validity of any prior approval of any plan(s) or permit(s) as applied in this section. 
L.  Undue hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this section would result in an exceptional and practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the Mayor and City Council, in passing upon any application, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances to this section, the Mayor and City Council may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in their judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this ordinance. A situation of the person's own making shall not be considered an undue hardship. 
M.  Administrative Approvals for Certificate of Appropriateness 
1.  Authority. The Director for Museum and Preservation Services or a designated City of Kennesaw staff member qualified in Historic Preservation may issue certificates of appropriateness for minor works projects that otherwise meets all requirements. Minor works projects are limited to the following: 
a.  Alteration or removal of existing accessory structures or buildings. 
b.  Additions to existing accessory structures or buildings with a total additional floor area not exceeding 300 square feet 
c.  New accessory structures or buildings less than 300 square feet 
d.  Alterations, additions or removal of existing awnings, canopies or shutters 
e.  Installation of new awnings, canopies or shutters 
f.  Alteration, addition or removal of existing decks with a maximum height of 42 inches that do not require the removal or alteration of the existing building or structure and provided that the proposed deck is not visible from the street 
g.  Construction of new decks with a maximum height of 42 inches that do not require removal or alteration of the existing building or structure and provided that the proposed deck is not visible from the street 
h.  Alteration, addition or removal of exterior doors 
i.  Installation of new exterior doors 
j.  Installation, alteration or removal of storm doors 
k.  Construction of new fences, walls, hedges or other screen plantings with a maximum height of 42 inches 
l.  Removal of existing fences, walls, hedges or other screen plantings with a maximum height of 42 inches 
m.  Alteration of exposed foundations 
n.  Installation addition or removal of gutters and downspouts 
o.  Installation of house numbers and mail boxes 
p.  Pruning of shrubbery, limbs of trees eight inches in diameter and greater measured 4.5 feet from the ground level 
q.  Removal of dead, diseased or dangerous trees 
r.  Installation, alteration or removal of exterior lighting fixtures 
s.  Installation of mechanical equipment such as heating and air conditioning units provided that all units are provided with appropriate screening 
t.  Installation of window mounted air conditioning units 
u.  Alteration, addition or removal of existing patios provided the patio is not visible from the right-of-way 
v.  Construction of new patios provided the patio is not visible from City right-of-way 
w.  Installation, removal or alteration of signs 
x.  Replacement of roof coverings when proposed materials are similar to existing materials and the roof pitch or slope is not being altered 
y.  Installation of satellite dishes or television antennae 
z.  Alteration, addition or removal of exterior stairs and steps that do not require the removal or alteration of the existing building or structure and provided that the proposed stairs and steps are not visible from the street 
aa.  Construction of new exterior stairs and steps that do not require the removal or alteration of the existing building or structure and provided that the proposed stairs and steps are not visible from the street 
bb.  Renewal of expired certificates of appropriateness provided there are no changes to the original approved certificate 
cc.  Emergency installation of temporary features or repair measures to protect a historic resource or structure that do not permanently alter the structure or resource. Temporary features are limited to a maximum of twelve months. 
N.  Removal or destruction of documented historic structures in violation of Section 4.02.00. 
1.  The City of Kennesaw after confirming that a historic structure was removed from historic property or demolished destroyed or partially dismantled without following the approval process specified in this chapter and UDC will be determined to be in violation of this code. 
2.  The City of Kennesaw will issue citations through the Municipal Court of the City of Kennesaw and assess the replacement value of the structure removed, damaged, partially dismantled or demolished. 
3.  The Building Official of the City Kennesaw will be required to provide to the Municipal Court of Kennesaw and all parties an estimate of the replacement value of subject structure. 
4.  The City of Kennesaw shall impose a fine equal to the replacement value assessed for the replacement of the structure removed, demolished, destroyed or partially dismantled without approval by the City of Kennesaw. The assessments shall be determined by estimates submitted by the Building Official of Kennesaw and official values on record of the Cobb County Tax Assessors office whichever is higher. The City of Kennesaw shall submit these estimates for determination of replacement value to the municipal court and all appropriate court jurisdictions for resolution of the violation. 
4.02.02 - Design Standards for the Historic Preservation Village Overlay (HPV) District 
A.  Purpose and Intent. 
1.  The HPV district is established to set aside certain properties for the purpose of providing an area that will be designed and used as a historic village. It is encouraged that resourcefulness and ingenuity will be used to assure that the property will meet the goals of the master plan of the City of Kennesaw as adopted by the Mayor and City Council in June, 1995. 
2.  The classification is primarily intended for properties located within Land Lot 138, 20th District, 2nd Section, and is bounded on the north by Cherokee Street and Big Shanty Road, on the east by Sardis Street, on the south by Old Highway 41, and on the west by CSX Railroad, and more particularly, Parcels 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 173 and 201. 
Within any HPV district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  Buildings of historical significance either on the historic register or eligible for placement on the historic register. 
b.  Museums by their nature that would lend themselves to the historic character of the area. 
c.  Outbuildings and structures that by their nature would lend to the historic character of the area. 
d.  Associated low intensity office and limited retail uses. 
e.  Hotels consistent with the historic and cultural era of the surrounding site. 
f.  Religious Assemblies. 
B.  Special exception uses. Within any HPV district, the following uses shall be permitted by special exception: 
1.  Cemeteries. 
2.  Mausoleums. 
3.  Other facilities for disposal of the deceased. 
4.  Private community centers. 
5.  Private schools of general and special education. 
6.  Religious Assemblies' accessory cemeteries and schools. 
C.  Use limitations. Within any HPV district, the following use limitations apply: 
1.  Must meet design review guidelines, and as may be amended from time to time. 
2.  No adult entertainment. 
D.  Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the HPV district which proposes a lighted facility must have an approved lighting plan consistent with lighting styles from the Civil War (1860-65) era. 
E.  Conditions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: Two acres or more; 
2.  Minimum public road frontage of 100 feet; 
3.  Overall parking and landscape plan for entire site to be approved by the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission; and 
4.  One paved parking space shall be provided for every person lawfully permitted within the structure at one time, plus one per employee. In the absence of designated assembly areas, one paved space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
F.  Landscape buffer/screening requirements. 
1.  Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an HPV district which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum thirty (30) feet landscaped, screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property will be subject to review and approval by the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission. 
2.  Required buffers may be included within required setbacks, however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. 
3.  Additionally, necessary private utilities and/or access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over, or across a designated, undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
4.  Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
a.  Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
b.  Control or direct vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
c.  Reduce glare; 
d.  Buffer noise; and 
e.  Establish privacy. 
5.  Standard. Buffers and/or berms shall be required when a HPV district is located adjacent to a more restrictive residential district; minimum ten (10) feet buffer. 
a.  Landscaped buffers are subject to review and approval by the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with the following standards: 
i.  Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs; 
ii.  Species are to be ecologically compatible to site and appropriate for design situation; 
iii.  Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffer should maximize visual barrier to height of six (6) feet within two (2) years of planting; 
iv.  Minimum height of plant materials at installation is to be five (5) feet for trees and two (2) feet for shrubs; 
v.  Fencing or walls are to be minimum six (6) feet in height as approved by city staff; 
vi.  Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the Kennesaw Tree Preservation and Replacement Ordinance, subject to review and approval by staff; 
vii.  Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner(s) to ensure that the above objectives and standards are met; 
viii.  When topography and existing conditions allow, the required thirty (30) feet buffer should be an undisturbed buffer; and 
ix.  Any appeals from a determination by Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission shall be to the Mayor and City Council. 
b.  Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
i.  Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features; 
ii.  Berms shall be stabilized; 
iii.  Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns; and 
iv.  Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
G.  Parking requirements. 
1.  Individual buildings located within the HPV district will not be required to provide on-site parking. The building and its site must, however, provide for a clearly identified easement/walkway to the common areas as recommended by the master plan. Total square footage of the building and its estimated parking needs will be deducted from the total number of spaces as shown on the master plan. 
2.  See section 6.02.05 for off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 4, 4-20-15) 
4.02.03 - Site Design Standards for the Central Business District 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  The Central Business District (CBD) is established in order to preserve and protect the cultural and historic aspects of downtown Kennesaw and simultaneously provide for the stimulation and enhancement of the vitality and economic growth of this special area. 
2.  The classification is primarily intended for a focal point for upscale retail trade, tourism, and financial and public uses. The intent of the Central Business District (CBD) is to develop a compact core to encourage and facilitate pedestrian movement and provide convenient access to the amenities of Historic Downtown Kennesaw. 
3.  The CBD is designed to achieve the following: 
a.  Create an environment where residents and visitors can live, work, meet, and play. 
b.  Promote a balanced mix of retail, office-professional, entertainment, residential, civil, and cultural uses in the core downtown area. 
c.  Allow for growth of a healthy economic business district. 
d.  Incorporate aesthetically compatible design from gateway points to the core of the city to improve the aesthetics of street and built environments. 
e.  Ensure compatibility with the historic district to achieve architectural and design integrity and consistency. 
f.  Provide accessible and sufficient parking that is unobtrusive by encouraging shared, underground, and deck parking and alternative modes of transportation including pedestrian and bicycles. 
g.  Promote a pedestrian environment though sidewalk-oriented buildings and attractive street-facing façades that encourage pedestrian activity. 
h.  Provide safe and accessible parks and public and private open space. 
B.  Lot size, setback and building height requirements. Within the CBD the following lot size and setback requirements shall apply. 
1.  Minimum lot size, widths and depths: None. It is the intent that each enterprise or use be located on a site commensurate with its use and sufficient to meet the requirements of off-street parking, loading and unloading, and setback requirements, where applicable. 
2.  Maximum lot coverage: Not more than eighty-seven (87) percent of the area of any lot may be covered by buildings structures or storm water facilities. 
3.  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front - Established to "build-to-line" which equals the averaged distance from the property lines measured from existing structures along right-of-way adjoining properties as measured from existing structures. 
b.  Side - None, except when abutting a residential zoning district where there is no intervening right-of-way, the setbacks requirement is ten feet. Where alleys exist between districts, the setbacks shall be five feet from the property line/alley right-of-way. 
c.  Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district where there is no intervening right-of-way the setback requirement is 25 feet. 
d.  Where an alley exists between districts, the setback shall be five feet from the property line/alley right-of-way. 
4.  Maximum building height: Subject to the Historic District Design Guidelines 
5.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) - 1.10 
Calculations for FAR: Floor Area/Lot Area = FAR 
C.  Permitted uses. Within the CBD, the following uses shall be permitted: 
1.  General retail uses: 
a.  Antiques 
b.  Animal hospitals 
c.  Appliance store 
d.  Arts and crafts 
e.  Bakery 
f.  Bicycles shop 
g.  Book store 
h.  Butcher 
i.  Carpet and floor covering 
j.  Cosmetics 
k.  Draperies and slipcovers 
l.  Fabric store 
m.  Farmers market (fully enclosed and open-air) 
n.  Flower shop 
o.  Food 
p.  Fraternity and sorority houses/residence halls (must be university authorized dwellings) 
q.  Fruit/vegetable stand 
r.  Garden supplies 
s.  Gift shop/glassware 
t.  Growler establishments 
u.  Hardware store 
v.  Home/office furnishings 
w.  Ice cream shop 
x.  Jewelry store 
y.  Leather goods/luggage 
z.  Massage therapy establishments 
aa.  Massage therapy associated with the following uses: 
•  As part of a salon service establishment 
•  As part of a medical, chiropractic or sports medicine establishment 
bb.  Medical and surgical equipment 
cc.  Music shop 
dd.  Nautical supplies 
ee.  Office supplies 
ff.  Pets and pet supplies 
gg.  Pharmacy 
hh.  Photographic equipment/supplies 
ii.  Spa and salon establishments 
jj.  Sporting goods 
kk.  Toy store 
2.  Services and professional uses: 
a.  Banks/financial institutions limited to one drive-through and/or automated transaction machines 
b.  Interior decorating establishments 
c.  Medical and dental clinics 
d.  Medical and dental laboratories 
e.  Photographic studios 
f.  Printing and publishing 
g.  Professional offices 
h.  Sports medical physical therapy 
3.  Services and facilities: 
a.  Auction 
b.  Barber/beauty shops and salons 
c.  Bed and breakfast inn and residential-type inns 
d.  Broadcast studios 
e.  Butcher shops 
f.  Caterers 
g.  Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations limited to off-site processing for customer pick-up. 
h.  Exercise facilities e.g. gyms and clubs 
i.  Galleries 
j.  Alternative wireless communications facilities (Special land use approval required) 
k.  Government facilities including but not limited to the following: 
i.  Government offices 
ii.  Public works facilities 
iii.  Community centers 
iv.  Public parks, clubhouses 
v.  Amphitheaters 
l.  Hotels 
m.  Laundromats limited to self-service facilities 
n.  Libraries 
o.  Motels 
p.  Museums 
q.  Newsstands 
r.  Outdoor cafes 
s.  Parking lot and garages (commercial or public) 
t.  Pet grooming 
u.  Religious assemblies 
v.  Restaurant excluding drive-in and drive through 
w.  Rest/personal care/convalescent homes 
x.  Small item repair 
y.  Tailoring 
z.  Tobacconist 
aa.  Taverns/cocktail lounges 
bb.  Vocational schools some examples being: arts and crafts, business, beauty, dancing, driving, gymnastics, photography, modeling and karate-judo. 
4.  Residential uses: 
a.  Condominiums 
b.  Mixed use residential/commercial 
c.  Single family detached 
d.  Townhomes 
5.  The permitted uses under this section shall be allowed in such a way as to promote a diverse mixture of the uses so as to avoid concentrations of such uses within close proximity of which may cumulatively create a nuisance, safety or health hazard or parking problem that may negatively affect the overall financial stability of surrounding uses. 
All retail and professional uses varied in nature that meet the CBD vision and adopted comprehensive plan and all other adopted planning studies for the City of Kennesaw that is not listed as a prohibited use under Section 4.02.03E. 
D.  Special exception uses. Within the CBD the following uses shall be permitted by special exception as per Section 4.04.01. 
1.  Cemeteries 
2.  Private community centers 
3.  Private schools of general and special education 
4.  Religious assemblies' accessory cemeteries and schools. 
E.  Use limitations. Within the CBD the following use limitations apply: 
1.  All projects located within the historic district shall meet the City of Kennesaw design review guidelines as may be amended from time to time. 
2.  No (new or used) car lots 
3.  No car repair shops to be established 
4.  No sexually oriented businesses as defined in the Kennesaw Code of Ordinances Business Licenses shall be allowed. 
5.  No overnight outside storage shall be allowed. 
6.  No more than five percent of total store inventory may be displayed outside. 
7.  All items stored outside shall be moveable to indoor without compromising accessibility to the building. 
8.  No items shall be displayed on paved areas or parking lots, except for temporary permits for special sales events not to exceed seven days more than four times per calendar year. 
9.  Items may be displayed on porches or adjacent to primary structures only in non-paved areas. 
10.  Sidewalk/yard sales shall only be conducted after issuance of the proper permit. 
11.  All abandoned or disposed items including recycling and trash shall be removed within three days. 
12.  No chemical manufacturing, storage or distribution shall be allowed. 
13.  No enameling, plating or paint (except for artist studios) shall be allowed. 
14.  No detention centers or halfway houses shall be allowed. 
15.  No tire shredding or recycling centers shall be allowed. 
16.  No manufacture or disposal of hazardous or radioactive waste materials shall be allowed. 
17.  No scrap yards shall be allowed. 
18.  No manufactured/mobile homes shall be allowed. 
19.  No commercial sand, gravel or other mineral extraction shall be allowed. 
20.  No indoor or outdoor shooting ranges shall be allowed. 
21.  No tattoo parlors shall be allowed. 
22.  No body piercing facilities, as a primary use shall be allowed. 
23.  No extended stay hotels/motels shall be allowed. 
24.  No chain link fences shall be permitted. 
25.  No overnight parking of commercial vehicles (except for mini-vans or cars) shall be allowed. 
26.  No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds shall be allowed. 
27.  No outside animal runs with any veterinary office or kennel shall be allowed. 
28.  No detention or retention or wet weather ponds allowed. 
29.  No gas stations to be established. The wholesale and retail sale of all fuel sources are governed by this restriction. 
30.  No automobile, truck, motorcycle or recreational vehicle rental facilities to be established 
31.  No drive-through amenity to be established in association with any eating and drinking establishments located within the Central Business District. 
32.  No funeral homes allowed. 
F.  Gateway corridors: 
1.  Cherokee Street 
2.  Watts Drive 
3.  North Main Street (Old Hwy 41) 
4.  South Main Street (Old Hwy 41) 
5.  Summer Street 
G.  Residential development standards: 
1.  Condominiums: Minimum floor area for all units - 1,000 square feet 
2.  Mixed use retail/residential with residential on second floor 
a.  The non-residential portion of the development shall obtain a certificate of completion before the issuance of the certificates of occupancy for the last 20 percent of residential units for the residential portion. 
b.  The gross floor area occupied by residential uses shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total gross floor area of the buildings or individual structures. 
c.  Minimum floor area for all residential units—1,000 square feet 
3.  Single family, detached: The minimum floor area of residential dwellings shall be 1,100 square feet. 
4.  Townhouses: The minimum floor area of all residential units—1,000 square feet 
5.  For-Rent Residential Apartment units: 
a.  To be allowed only in mixed use residential/commercial projects 
b.  Rental apartment units will be allowed subject to specific development agreement conditions as part of the Central Business District project approval process as per UDC Section 4.02.03(H). 
c.  Minimum floor area for all residential units in mixed use residential project to average 1,000 sq feet. 
d.  Units with a floor plan totaling the minimum of 850 square feet can be utilized for no more than 30 percent of the total apartment units for the project. 
H.  Approval process for projects. Projects to be processed in the following order: 
1.  City of Kennesaw staff shall conduct a minimum of one consultation with applicant to review project concept and factors to consider in the planning and design phase prior to initial site plan and architectural review. 
2.  Conceptual site plan and architectural review by City of Kennesaw staff 
3.  Submittal to the Kennesaw Downtown Development Authority (KDDA) for review and comment only. 
4.  Submittal to the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) for certificate of appropriateness approval if within a historic district. If subject property is not in the historic district then concept approval will be required. 
5.  Site Plan review and approval by City of Kennesaw staff required. 
6.  Final plan approval by Mayor and Council 
I.  The site plan of the project shall be consistent with the City of Kennesaw adopted Comprehensive Plan, Depot Master Plan and LCI study. 
J.  The project shall be designed as to provide a proper transition, land use and design so as not to negatively affect surrounding properties. 
K.  The site plan of the project shall incorporate public space architectural and urban features consistent with the City wide Architectural Design Standards and the City of Kennesaw Historic District Design Standards including fountains, gardens, squares, courtyards, lighting, signage, and paving that blend the mixed uses. 
L.  Each applicant shall submit a business plan which contains at a minimum the following information: 
1.  Type of business 
2.  Projected market targeted 
3.  Projected customer generation 
4.  Plan on traffic control for ingress/egress of property 
5.  Study on similar uses in area 
6.  Projected economic impact to City of Kennesaw 
M.  General requirements: 
1.  Compliance to downtown redevelopment plan vision 
2.  A balanced mixture of uses to meet downtown redevelopment plan vision 
3.  Positive economic development impact 
4.  Architectural design and quality shall be consistent with City of Kennesaw Design Guidelines and compatible with the city's architectural heritage. 
5.  Pedestrian and vehicular connectivity shall be incorporated into site design. 
6.  The height of fences and walls located between the building façade and a street shall not exceed forty (40) inches and in other areas shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
7.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link or similar elements shall be visible from any street, public park, sidewalk, public or private open space or outdoor dining area. 
8.  Loading docks and dumpsters shall be entirely screened from view with vertically enclosed opaque walls. 
9.  Utilities shall be placed underground. 
10.  Building mechanical and accessory features: 
a.  Shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure or on rooftops and shall not be visible from any public open space or sidewalk area. 
b.  When located on rooftops shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with materials similar to the building. 
11.  Any project permitted within the CBD which proposes a lighted facility including signs, parking lots, and entrance ways shall have an approved lighting plan consistent with lighting styles utilized in the downtown streetscape design and approved under the City of Kennesaw Historic Design Standards and Citywide Design Guidelines. 
12.  All sign locations located within historic district will be subject to review and approval by the HPC. 
a.  City staff will review and process the sign permit application as per design standards as set forth in Chapter 5.03.00 of the sign ordinance after review and approval from HPC. 
b.  All temporary signs will be regulated as per Chapter 5.03.00. 
N.  Parking, road and access requirements. Overall parking plans for the entire project site shall be approved by city staff through the plan review process. All parking requirements can be provided off-site. No alley parking is permitted. 
1.  Angled on-street parking on both sides shall be permitted dependent upon site plan review and approval. 
2.  Rear access shall be provided to townhouse and multifamily garages, single-family dwelling garages, and commercial loading and service areas, where such access is feasible. 
3.  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: All new non-residential uses shall provide one (1) such space for every twenty (20) automobile spaces but not less than one (1) space and new residential uses shall provide one (1) such space for every five (5) units. Such spaces shall be located a maximum distance of 100 feet from the primary pedestrian entrance. 
O.  Incentive/zoning bonuses. 
1.  Common access drives and access curb cuts: All projects incorporating common access drives for multiple parcels along the identified gateway corridors in this section will be granted an increase of floor area ratio by .10, subject to all other limitations. 
2.  Pedestrian linkage: All projects that promote pedestrian/bicycle pathways and inter-parcel access will be granted an increase of floor area ratio by .10 
P.  Landscaping design guidelines. All CBD project applications will include a landscape plan that has location and type for benches, waste receptacles, lighting, paving material, bicycle racks, newspaper stands, plant material, fencing, private open space, internal sidewalks and trails. The following components will be incorporated into the plan: 
1.  Use of sod on yard areas facing public right-of-way 
2.  Compliance to tree ordinance in UDC chapter three 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 5, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 2016-06, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 2016-07, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 2016-21, 9-6-16) 
4.02.04 - Design Standards for the Senior Living Overlay District (SLO) 
A.  Purpose and intent. The Senior Living Overlay (SLO) District is established to promote development of senior citizen housing products and/or services pursuant to the identified market demand for senior housing products. Any zoning district plot developed or used pursuant to SLO regulations shall not thereafter be used for any purpose other than the provisions of Senior Living unless and until the Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, has certified in writing that the alternate use satisfies all applicable land use regulations pertaining to the underlying zoning district classification. It is the purpose of the Senior Living Overlay District to provide a process by which housing policies identified in the Comprehensive Plan may be executed. 
B.  Lands Subject to SLO District Classification. The SLO District classification is available as an overlay in the following zoning districts: CBD, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-12, R-10, PUD-R, RD, RA-4, RM-8, RM-12, and FST. Applications shall comply with all other provisions of this UDC and all other applicable laws. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of the SLO District and this UDC, the stricter standard shall apply. 
C.  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Senior Living Overlay District: 
1.  Non-Supportive Senior Living Facilities 
2.  Supportive Senior Living Facilities 
D.  Senior Living Development Criteria. 
1.  Non-Supportive Uses. Non-supportive Senior Living development projects may be introduced under the SLO District, when the proposed use meets all of the following criteria: 
a.  Residential occupancy shall promote senior citizens 55 years of age or older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as amended from time to time. 
b.  The impact of the use will be equivalent to those impacts produced by uses otherwise allowed for land development within the underlying zoning classification, with considerations being given to the type of living units, number of living units, the probable number of residents and the generated demand on public facilities and services. 
c.  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the use will be compatible with, and will not adversely affect, the livability or appropriate development of adjacent properties and surrounding neighborhoods, with consideration to scale, size, coverage, and density; to the availability of civic facilities and utilities; to the generation of traffic and the capacity of surrounding streets; and to any other relevant impacts of the use. 
d.  The location, design, and site planning of the use will provide a convenient, safe, attractive, walkable, and functional live, work and play community. 
e.  The use will be so located as to provide residents easy pedestrian and vehicular access to community amenities such as transit, shopping, services (including medical), parks, recreational facilities, and social and educational activities or facilities. 
f.  Housing shall be specifically designed for senior citizens and include facilities generally associated with the needs and interests of this age group. Such facilities shall include common meeting rooms, recreation facilities and outdoor open space, secure parking areas, safety bars and rails in units, emergency signal systems, adequate exterior lighting for security, ramps and other provisions required for elderly persons by state law or federal regulation. 
g.  Portions of projects should incorporate applicable accessibility and "easy living" standards (as administered and copyrighted by a coalition of Georgia citizens including AARP of Georgia, Atlanta Regional Commission, Concrete Change, Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Governor's Council on Developmental Disabilities, Home Builders Association of Georgia, Shepherd Center and the Statewide Independent Living Council of Georgia). 
h.  A minimum of 1.25 parking spaces per unit shall be provided. Overall parking plans for the entire project site shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of this UDC. 
i.  If property is located within a locally designated historic district, a Certificate of Appropriateness will be required by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
2.  Supportive Uses. Supportive Senior Living development projects may be introduced under the SLO District, when the proposed use meets all of the following criteria: 
a.  All Supportive Uses will follow the criteria set forth in this section of the UDC. 
b.  Each facility may include a centralized kitchen with dining facilities sufficient to serve all occupants. However, this shall not preclude kitchenette facilities within each unit. 
c.  A minimum of 0.75 spaces per residential unit shall be provided. Parking plans must include provisions for adequate shuttle services or other public transportation services to serve each facility. Overall parking plans for the project site shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of this UDC. If property is located within a locally designated historic district, a Certificate of Appropriateness will be required by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
E.  Use Limitations. Subject to underlying base zoning district standards. 
F.  Lot size and setback requirements. 
1.  For all underlying Residential zoning classifications: 
a.  Minimum lot size: 3 acres 
b.  For minimum lot widths, road frontage, and setback distances refer to standards for base zoning district 
2.  For the underlying CBD zoning classification: 
a.  Minimum lot size: 3 acres 
3.  For minimum lot widths, road frontage, and setback distances refer to Sections 4.01.01. The referenced minimums may be decreased by the city staff upon proper showing that such is necessary to provide compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
4.  Density bonuses may be allowed where necessary to incorporate a unique design feature such as rear parking, gardens and courtyards or architectural features. 
G.  For underlying, residential zoning classifications, refer to table 4.01.02 that specifies the site standards for underlying base zoning districts. 
H.  Landscape Buffers and Screening Requirements. 
1.  Landscape Buffers. Refer to Sections 3.07.00, for guidelines by Base Zoning District. 
2.  Screening Requirements 
a.  Unless otherwise noted within this overlay district's requirements, any property within the SLO district which abuts a more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 20-foot (for Non-Supportive uses) or 40-foot (for Supportive uses) landscaped screening or maintained natural buffer adjacent to all residential property. Minimum buffers may be increased by city staff based on existing conditions such as tract size or topographic conditions in order to provide compatibility with adjacent residential uses. When abutting a non-residentially zoned property, a minimum 10-foot landscaped screening or maintained natural buffer is required subject to approval by city staff. 
b.  Refer to UDC Chapter 4 for guidelines by Base Zoning District. 
I.  Environmental Requirements. Any development must meet all federal, state and local requirements relating to flood plains, wetlands, river corridor protection and stream buffers subject to the provisions in Chapter 3. No flood plain and/or wetlands may be used in calculating the overall density of the development. 
J.  Building and Structure Requirements. Building and Structure Requirements shall meet the requirements of this UDC unless otherwise addressed in this section. 
K.  Accessory Buildings, Structures, Uses and Decks. Building and Structure Requirements shall meet the requirements of this UDC unless otherwise addressed in this section. 
4.03.00 - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 

4.03.01 - Purposes 
A.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
B.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
C.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
D.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils, which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
E.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
F.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
G.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
H.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
I.  To encourage street designs that reduces traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
J.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
K.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
L.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
M.  To encourage the development of residential communities designed to preserve and protect environmental resources, scenic vistas, and natural and cultivated landscapes. 
N.  To reduce infrastructure impact as a result of efficient community design. 
4.03.02 - General Regulations 
A.  Applicability of Regulations. 
1.  Compliance with this conservation subdivision ordinance is available as an overlay in the following zoning districts:, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-12, R-10, PUD-R, RM-4, RM-8, RM-12, and FST. 
2.  The overlay district shall be a use by right as of the effective date of the adoption of this article. 
3.  Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions outlined in herein. 
4.  Any conflict between these standards and the code of ordinance, the more stringent will apply. 
B.  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
C.  Lot density determination. 
1.  The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision is based on the net highest yield of developable lots as allowed under the underlying zoning district. Density is defined under Chapter 1. 
2.  The design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
D.  Procedure for approval. Site plan shall be submitted by the owner or developer for review and approval in accordance with the requirement and procedures of the development regulations. 
E.  Variance. 
1.  The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall have authority to grant an administrative variance under Section 9.04.01 of the UDC. 
2.  Any other variance outside the scope of Section 9.04.01 shall require a variance before the Mayor and City Council. 
4.03.03 - Application Requirements 
A.  Site Plan Required. The applicant must submit a site plan that is sealed by a registered engineer, landscape architect, or land surveyor which contains, at a minimum, the following features: 
1.  Property boundaries; 
2.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands, 100-year floodplains and other hydrologic features; 
3.  Topographic contours of no less than five-foot intervals; 
4.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in this ordinance; 
5.  General vegetation characteristics including tree lines, woodlands, open fields, and meadows; 
6.  General soil types; 
7.  The planned location of protected open space; 
8.  Existing roads, easements and structures; 
9.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails or proposed trails or greenways identified on the Kennesaw Trail Network Plan, when adopted; 
10.  A complete tree survey and inventory as described in the UDC, Chapter 3 tree preservation standards; 
11.  Identify steep slope areas greater than twenty-five (25) percent; 
12.  Provide distance/directional chart to open spaces in adjacent developments; 
13.  Provide certification statement of any existing archaeological sites and cemeteries. 
B.  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in Section 4.03.05, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
C.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, as described in Section 4.03.05, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
4.03.04 - Development Requirements 
Development in this overlay district shall meet the requirements of the underlying zoning district, development standards, and this ordinance. The city reserves the right to require an archaeological survey prior to plan approval. Plan approval by the Plan Review Committee will be required. 
4.03.05 - Open Space 
A.  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the Open Space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
B.  Standards to determine open space. 
1.  The minimum restricted Open Space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space. 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least seventy-five (75) feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act regardless of whether such wetlands are jurisdictional under said Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; 
f.  Archaeological sites, civil war entrenchments, cemeteries and burial grounds; and, 
g.  Perennial and intermittent streams. 
3.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
a.  Historic sites, a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure (habitation sites, funerary sites, rock shelters, village sites, hunting and fishing sites, ceremonial sites, petroglyphs, rock carvings, gardens grounds, battlefields, ruins of historic buildings and structures, campsites, trails, areas of land, cemeteries, designed landscapes, and natural features, such as springs and rock formations, and land areas having cultural significance); 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; 
f.  Greenspace that connects to neighboring greenspace areas that may be candidates for future open space or proposed trails for greenways identified on the Kennesaw Trail Network Plan, when adopted; and 
g.  Recognized wildlife habitats and scenic vistas as identified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
4.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and limited small areas (less than 400 square feet) of impervious surface not related to active recreation may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the forty (40) percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas (400 square feet or greater) of impervious surface not related to active recreation shall be excluded from the open space. 
5.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract, the common open area. The common open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
6.  The common open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
C.  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
4.  Passive recreation areas; 
5.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than 10 percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
6.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
7.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
8.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines, as described in "The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual", 2004 Edition; or 
9.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
D.  Prohibited uses of open space. In addition to other uses of open space not included herein, uses of open space may never include: 
1.  Golf courses; 
2.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
3.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and, 
4.  Other prohibited activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
E.  Ownership and management of open space. 
1.  Ownership of open space. 
a.  The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. 
b.  If a Homeowners Association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. 
c.  If a Homeowners Association is the owner, the Homeowners' Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. 
d.  The responsibility for maintaining the Open Space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
2.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the appropriate party of the City of Kennesaw; and, 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
3.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Kennesaw may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, Homeowner's Association, or to the individual property owners that make up the Homeowner's Association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
F.  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
1.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one that is consistent with the methods of permanent protection provided under the State of Georgia's Greenspace Program or, if such program is no longer functioning in the state, then one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
iii  If the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Kennesaw, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Kennesaw shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Kennesaw. 
2.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this ordinance, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
4.04.00 - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

4.04.01 - Special Exception Uses 
A.  Those uses which, with the proper scrutiny and conditions, may be appropriately located within certain specified zoning districts. 
B.  Authorization. The Zoning Administrator or his designee shall issue a certificate of special exception to an applicant when the conditions relating to the special exception uses listed herein are met. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Any other facility for the disposal of the dead provided all requirements by the cemetery have been satisfied. 
2.  Cemeteries for human or animal interment with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size of ten (10) acres; 
b.  Minimum public road frontage of 100 feet; 
c.  When abutting any residential property line, a fifty (50) feet natural/landscaped buffer shall be approved by city staff (see Landscaping Standards); 
d.  Permanent public ingress/egress shall be provided; 
e.  Compliance with all State of Georgia requirements; and 
f.  Overall parking and landscaping plan to be approved by city staff. 
3.  Religious Assemblies' accessory cemeteries and schools with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  A religious assembly may have an accessory cemetery with the following minimum requirements: 
i.  Minimum lot size of two (2) acres for cemetery; 
ii.  When abutting any residential property line a fifty (50) feet natural landscaped buffer shall be approved by city staff (see Landscape Standards); 
iii.  Permanent public ingress/egress shall be provided; 
iv.  Compliance with all State of Georgia requirements; and 
v.  Overall parking and landscaping plan to be approved by city staff. 
b.  A religious assembly may have an accessory school with the following minimum requirements: 
i.  Minimum lot size of five (5) acres; 
ii.  Minimum public road frontage of 100 feet; 
iii.  Overall parking and landscape plan for entire site to be approved by city staff; and 
iv.  One (1) paved parking space per every one (1) full-time employee of the accessory school in addition to required parking for the principal religious assembly use. 
4.  Mausoleums: when used in conjunction with a cemetery provided that all requirements for the cemetery have been satisfied. 
5.  Private community center: A place, structure, area, or other private or non-publicly owned facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. 
a.  Minimum of three (3) acres; 
b.  Structures associated with said use to be located a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from any property line; 
c.  Structures associated with said use to be limited to forty-five (45) feet in height; 
d.  When abutting any residential property line a twenty-five (25) feet landscaped, screening buffer shall be approved by city staff (see landscaping requirements); 
e.  Overall parking and landscape plan for entire site to be approved by planning and zoning staff and city staff (see Landscaping Standards); 
f.  One paved parking space shall be provided for every person lawfully permitted within the assembly areas at one time, plus one per employee. In the absence of designated assembly areas, one paved space per 300 square feet of gross floor area; and 
g.  Lighting plan to be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
6.  Private schools of general and special education with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size of five (5) acres; 
b.  Minimum public road frontage of 100 feet; 
c.  Overall parking and landscape plan for entire site to be approved by city staff; and 
d.  One paved parking space shall be provided for every person lawfully permitted within the assembly areas at one time, plus one per employee. In the absence of designated assembly areas, one paved space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Bed and breakfast establishment: A private owner-occupied single-family residence, with a maximum of five guestrooms rented for a daily fee, which is subordinate to the primary residence. 
a.  Allowable districts: HPV, NS, NRC, PVC, CBD, and UVC 
b.  A minimum of 2,000 square feet of heated living area in the structure to be used as the bed and breakfast is required. 
c.  The bed and breakfast shall be owner occupied. 
d.  Parking requirements shall be one (1) space per guest room in addition to a required one (1) space per employee plus one (1) space per three (3) seats in assembly areas for functions. 
i.  Parking spaces shall be screened from all adjoining residential properties with a solid fence, of a minimum of six (6) feet in height, or evergreen trees and shrubs densely planted which will provide a visual screen height of six (6) feet within two (2) years of planting. 
e.  One identification sign shall be allowed on each street frontage. All signs must adhere to the City of Kennesaw Sign Ordinance. 
f.  Per state regulations, food service is limited to registered guests and must be included in the price of the overnight accommodations. Food service may be provided to outside guests only in the event of a special function. In this case, an outside vendor may be permitted to provide food service. Appropriate licensing will be required for food and beverage service. 
g.  Special events such as parties, weddings and meetings shall be permitted. 
h.  Individual rooms that are rented shall not contain cooking facilities, nor shall any food preparation or cooking for guests be conducted within any bedroom made available for rent. 
i.  The bed and breakfast establishment must comply with the required minimum lot area for existing uses and underlying zoning district, conform to all codes and regulations of the City of Kennesaw, Cobb County where applicable, and the State of Georgia laws. 
j.  The resident owner shall keep a current guest register including names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests. 
k.  Maximum length of stay for any guests shall not exceed fourteen (14) days. 
l.  The resident owner shall comply with all business license and Hotel-Motel excise tax and revenue collection laws of the City of Kennesaw, Cobb County and the State of Georgia. 
8.  Extended stay facilities. 
a.  Extended stay hotel or motels shall be defined as any hotel or motel in which fifty percent or greater of all guest rooms have facilities for both the storage and preparation of food and which are designed or utilized for weekly or monthly occupancy. 
b.  Extended stay hotel and motels are permitted within the Highway General Business District (HGB) zoning districts, subject to a special land use permit, and shall comply with the following restrictions: 
i.  All guest rooms that have facilities for both the storage and preparation of food and have less than 300 square feet of floor area are limited to a maximum of two persons per such room; however, for all such guest rooms greater than 300 square feet, one additional person shall be allowable per each additional seventy-five (75) square feet of floor area up to and including a maximum of four (4) persons. 
ii.  No more than ten percent of individual guests shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the same licensed facility for more than a ninety (90) day period. 
iii.  An indoor or fenced outdoor active recreation area shall be provided. The size of each recreation area shall be calculated at a ratio of five (5) square feet per room with a minimum provision of 750 square feet. All recreation areas must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Director prior to development to ensure that all applicable safety specifications and standards are met. 
iv.  No permanent business license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guest room of the facility. 
v.  No hotel or motel under this section is to be converted to or used as an apartment or condominium without zoning approval of the City Council. Any hotel or motel converted to such use must meet all applicable state and local codes, including zoning standards. 
vi.  Each guest room must be protected with a sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal or the fire marshal's designee. 
vii.  Each guest room having a stove-top unit or other type burner unit shall be required to also include a maximum sixty (60) minute automatic power off timer for each such unit. 
viii.  A hard-wired smoke detector shall be provided, installed, and operation at all times in each guest room. 
ix.  No outside storage or permanent parking or equipment or vehicles shall be allowed. 
x.  All such facilities shall provide a fifty (50) feet undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for multi-family residential purposes and/or a 100 feet undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for single-family residential purposes. 
xi.  No building may be placed within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property, inclusive of the required buffer. 
xii.  These restrictions shall apply to all facilities permitted or expanded after the date of enactment of this ordinance. 
xiii.  All extended stay facilities shall have a maximum density of seventy-five (75) guest units per gross acre of development. 
9.  Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal and accessory uses) with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size of two acres 
b.  Utilization of permanent structures as defined in UDC and building codes for construction 
c.  Compliance of city wide architectural standards. 
10.  Automobile and truck sales and service facilities with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size of two acres 
b.  Utilization of permanent structures as defined in UDC and adopted building codes for construction 
c.  Compliance of city wide architectural standards 
11.  Automotive storage yards and wrecker service establishments with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size of four acres 
b.  Screening of storage and parking areas with a consistent landscaping buffer with a width of twenty feet around perimeter of storage areas 
c.  Secured entry to storage areas with utilization of fencing and automated devices 
d.  Compliance with all other standards that apply to this use under the UDC 
e.  Utilization of permanent structures as defined in the UDC and adopted building codes for construction 
12.  Billiards and pool halls meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Compliance with all State and local codes for business license and fire safety codes 
b.  Use not to cause a nuisance as defined by the City of Kennesaw Code of Ordinances 
13.  Motorcycle, ATV and three wheel vehicle sales and service facilities must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size two acres 
b.  Permanent structures to be utilized as defined by the UDC and building code standards 
c.  Compliance with city wide architectural standards 
d.  Compliance with all other applicable chapters in the UDC 
14.  Asphalt/concrete plants subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Special land use approval 
b.  Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws 
c.  All necessary state and federal permits 
d.  Spill containment plan to be approved by the City of Kennesaw 
e.  Minimum lot size five acres 
f.  No use or activity shall be closer than 1,000 feet from any property line of residentially zoned property. 
g.  Hours of operation will be limited to daylight hours as defined in the City of Kennesaw Code of Ordinances 
h.  Compliance with State and Federal guidelines for pollution and noise abatement 
15.  Bio-medical waste disposal facility and hazardous waste facility subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Special land use permit approval 
b.  All use and activity shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from any property line of residentially zoned property 
c.  Spill containment plan to be approved by the City of Kennesaw 
d.  No outside storage of materials. All activity to be conducted within an enclosed building 
e.  Compliance with all State and Federal laws 
f.  Minimum of five acres required 
g.  Must meet all State and Federal environmental laws 
16.  Heavy Manufacturing establishments subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  All uses and activity will not be located closer than 500 feet from any property line of any residentially zoned property 
b.  All activity to be conducted inside an enclosed building with no outside storage except for vehicles used in conjunction with operation 
c.  Compliance with State and Federal laws 
d.  Subject to City of Kennesaw noise abatement laws 
17.  Petroleum/bulk storage and chemical plan facilities subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Special land use permit 
b.  Minimum acreage to be five acres 
c.  No use or activity to be located closer than 1,000 feet from any property line of residentially zoned property or from any property line where a school is located 
d.  Hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours 
e.  Spill containment plan to be approved by the City of Kennesaw 
18.  Private Landfills/composting facilities subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum ten acres required 
b.  Special land use permit approval 
c.  No hazardous waste defined by State and Federal law to be disposed or discharged into the landfill 
d.  Site to be accessible without travel on residential streets near residential neighborhoods 
e.  All operations to meet the State and Federal laws regarding the use and containment of materials 
f.  All uses and activity will not be located closer than 2,000 yards of a public highway, residence, school, public or private parks or any gathering place 
19.  Recycling Centers subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size of two acres required 
b.  All activity to be conducted within an enclosed building 
c.  There will be no exterior storage of material 
d.  Special land use permit approval 
20.  Waste Transfer Station subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum lots size of five acres required 
b.  All operations and uses to be located no closer than 1,000 feet from any property line of residentially zoned property, schools and parks 
c.  Special land use permit approval 
d.  Noise and odor abatement plan to be approved by the City of Kennesaw 
e.  Compliance with all State and Federal laws 
21.  Coliseums, stadiums and convention centers subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size of ten acres required 
b.  Traffic and parking plan to be approved by the City of Kennesaw 
c.  Special land use permit approval 
22.  Quarries or mining operations subject to the following requirements: 
a.  A lot size requirement of ten acres minimum 
b.  All activity and uses are to be located no closer than 1,000 feet from a property line of residentially zoned property 
c.  Noise and pollution abatement plan to be approved by the City of Kennesaw. 
d.  Special land use permit approval 
e.  Compliance with all State and Federal Laws 
23.  Flea Market establishment subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Indoor flea markets subject to Plan Review Committee review and approval for safety compliance 
b.  Outdoor flea market establishment requires three acre minimum lot size 
c.  All structures utilized for this use must meet City standards for permanent structures and meet city wide architectural standards 
24.  Automobile Storage and wrecker service 
a.  Should be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than 8 feet, which provides visual screening 
b.  No dismantling, repair, or other such activity shall be conducted 
c.  Such use shall be located at least 40 feet from any residential district or use 
d.  Such automobiles shall not be held longer than provided by State and City law 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 6, 4-20-15) 
4.04.02 - Reserved 
4.04.03 - Standards for Self Service Storage Facilities and Climate Controlled Storage Facilities 
A.  Establish minimum standards for use, site development, construction and placement of self service storage facilities and allow service conveniences that satisfy the needs of the citizens of the City of Kennesaw. 
B.  Self-Service Storage Facilities (SSSF) shall be permitted within the following districts with a minimum of 3 acres required. 
1.  Heavy Industrial 
2.  Light Industrial 
3.  General Commercial 
4.  CRC-Community Retail Commercial 
C.  General regulations. 
1.  The only commercial activities permitted exclusively on the site of SSSF shall be rental of storage bays, pick-up and delivery of goods or property in dead storage. Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate, or process goods, service or repair vehicles, boats, small engines or electrical equipment or to conduct similar repair activities, conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind; rehearsing or practice utilizing band instruments or conversion to an apartment or dwelling unit; or conduct any other commercial or industrial activities on the site. 
2.  The SSSF shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot high minimum fence or wall. Said fence or wall shall be constructed of either brick, stone, masonry units, wood, chain link, cyclone or other similar materials to be approved by the Zoning Administrator or his designee. Said fence or wall shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the side and rear property lines, fences and walls shall adhere to the required front yard setback. 
3.  Individual storage bays within a SSSF shall not be considered a premise for the purpose of assigning a legal address in order to obtain an occupational license or any other governmental permit or licenses to do business. 
4.  Except as provided all property stored on site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals are prohibited. 
5.  Minimum lot size. Not withstanding any other provisions of this code, the minimum lot size of a SSSF shall be one acre. 
6.  Outside storage. Open storage of recreational vehicles and dry storage of pleasure boats of the type customarily maintained by private individuals for their personal use shall be permitted within a SSSF provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Such storage shall take place only within a designated area. The area so designated shall be clearly delineated upon the site plan submitted for approval by the City Council when applying for a special land use permit. 
b.  The storage area shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total buildable area of the site. 
c.  The storage area shall be entirely screened from view from adjacent residential and office areas and public streets by a building or by the installation of a six (6) or eight (8) foot high wall or fence. If existing vegetation or topography provides the required screening, then this wall or fence requirement may be eliminated upon approval by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. 
d.  Vehicles shall not be stored within the area set aside for minimum building setbacks. 
e.  No vehicles maintenance, washing or repair shall be permitted on site. Pleasure boats stored on site shall be stored upon wheeled trailers. No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on site. 
D.  Development regulations. 
1.  Separation between storage buildings. If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot separations between individual buildings. Buildings shall be situated or screened so that overhead access doors are not visible from public roads residentially or office and institutionally zoned property. 
2.  Maximum bay size. The maximum size of a storage bay shall be 450 square feet. 
E.  Exterior architectural elements to comply with the City Wide Architectural Standards. 
F.  Parking requirements. 
1.  Designated customer parking is not required, however a minimum of five (5) parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the facilities leasing office, if a leasing office is located on site. 
G.  Signage. 
1.  Maximum number. One (1) free-standing sign shall be allowed for each lot frontage on which a SSSF has access to a public dedicated street. In addition, one (1) flat wall mounted sign may be utilized. 
2.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a free-standing sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
3.  Maximum sign area. The maximum total sign structure area for a free standing or wall mounted sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. If a ground base sign is utilized, the maximum total sign area may be increased to 120 square feet. 
4.  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited on the site: 
a.  Off-premise signs; 
b.  General outdoor advertising signs; 
c.  Signs placed on the doors of individual storage bays; 
d.  Roof mounted signs; 
e.  Signs attached to a required wall or fence are also prohibited, but may be approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee and a sign ordinance enforcement officer. 
H.  Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lights shall be shielded to ensue that light and glare are limited to the premises and are directed away from adjacent properties. Lights shall be low-intensity. If a SSSF abuts a residentially zoned property, outdoor lighting shall be limited to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet. 
I.  No exterior loud speakers or paging equipment shall be permitted on the site. 
4.04.04 - Standards for Manufactured Homes and Factory Built Buildings 
A.  Manufactured homes, Class I. 
1.  Zoning. No manufactured home, Class I, shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in Kennesaw except one zoned MHP or on a site for which a land-use permit for such has been issued by the city, except that such units may be located for sale upon a site properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity. 
2.  Notification of purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the zoning requirements of paragraph (a) above, and this notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser at the time of any sale that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller for a minimum of three years from the date of sale and shall be produced for inspection by Kennesaw at any time during the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays established by the city, through any authorized agent appointed by the city manager for the city, upon request by the city of inspection. 
B.  Manufactured homes, Class II. 
1.  Zoning and permits. No manufactured home of this class shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in Kennesaw except one zoned MHP or on a site for which a land-use permit for such use has been obtained from the city, (except that such units may be located for sale upon property properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity), unless the following requirements are met: 
a.  An application shall be filed with the city, through the zoning department, for a permit from the City Council to allow such installation, use and occupancy for single-family purposes on any site zoned for single-family use and permit must be obtained prior to transportation to such site. Such application shall be on forms specified by the city and shall include such information as is reasonably necessary for evaluation of the application. 
b.  The following, as a minimum, shall be filed with the application: 
i.  Complete set of design plans as approved by ICC which should also include a drawing depicting each elevation of the exterior appearance of the unit. 
ii.  Plat of the proposed site prepared by a registered surveyor showing at a minimum the exterior boundaries of the site, proposed location of the unit upon the site, and side, front and rear setbacks of the unit as proposed to be located, as measured from the exterior boundaries of the lot. 
iii.  A fee in an amount determined by the City Council and on file in the office of the zoning department and with the clerk of the city. 
iv.  A certificate from an inspector selected or approved by the city certifying that the unit was manufactured in accordance with the ICC approved plans and the building codes in effect for the city at the time of filing the application for a permit (for example, building, heating and air conditioning, plumbing, electrical or other codes) 
c.  The permit herein required shall be in addition to all other permits or requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
d.  No action on a request for permit shall be considered by the City Council until (1) a sign is posted on the proposed site for a period of not less than ten (10) days stating the requested action and the date, time and place for hearing and (2) a hearing is conducted by the City Council. 
e.  No such permit shall be granted unless the unit, when completely installed as a single family dwelling unit, will be compatible with the adjacent and surrounding area, especially in size, exterior appearance, front, rear and side setbacks, and will have no adverse effect upon the value of adjacent property and the surrounding area and will not otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city. 
f.  No unit shall be installed upon any site unless and until any permit herein required is granted and unless and until all permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the city. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the city, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections required for on-site work. Such fees shall not exceed the amount charged for similar inspections and/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
g.  In addition to obtaining the above permit, and prior to occupancy, every such unit which is installed shall be installed on a permanent foundation, which is permanently enclosed, and shall have all wheels, axles and hitches removed. 
h.  No unit shall be installed upon any lot or parcel of land which forms a part of a platted subdivision for which a plat has been approved by the City of Kennesaw and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Cobb Superior Court. 
2.  Notification to purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the requirements of zoning or the necessity to obtain a permit as set forth in the preceding paragraph 1. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser at the time of closing that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller and subject to inspection in the same manner as such statements are required to be retained for Class I units. 
C.  Industrialized buildings. 
1.  Permits required. No industrialized building shall be installed upon any site unless and until all permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation, or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the city. 
2.  Permit fees. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the city, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections and/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
3.  Insignia requirements. No industrialized building shall be installed or occupied in the City of Kennesaw unless it bears an insignia of the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia indicating Georgia state approval pursuant to the Acts of the General Assembly. 
4.  Zoning. No industrialized building shall be erected upon any site in the city, nor used for any purpose, unless the site is properly zoned for the intended use or a land-use permit has been obtained for the intended use and unless all other requirements of zoning (setback requirement, building size, etc.,) and other ordinances of the city are met which are applicable to the zoning classification for the site or for the installation. 
5.  Other ordinances. This ordinance does not eliminate the necessity of complying with any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city which relate to matter addressed, investigated and approved by the State of Georgia through its Department of Community Affairs resulting in the issuance of its insignia. 
6.  It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of any industrialized building to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of these requirements. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each at the time of completion of a sale that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained and open for inspection the same as for a Manufactured Home, Class I, above. 
D.  Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or loss of business license of any seller. In addition, any manufactured home or industrialized building erected, constructed, parked, occupied or used in violation of the terms of this ordinance shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued, and such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state and the industrialized building or manufactured home shall be instantly removed from the site. In addition, the terms of this ordinance may be enforced by the city, or proper city authority authorized by the City of Kennesaw, by injunction or otherwise. This right to injunctive relief is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the right of any person, firm or corporation, resident, property owner or other enforcement of this ordinance or of such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the city in pursuance of this ordinance. 
4.04.05 - Standards for Home Occupations 
A.  The Mayor and City Council may permit land use permits for the operations of home occupations or professions in areas and districts where the zoning regulations would otherwise prohibit such operations. "Home occupation" is hereby defined as being those occupations which can ordinarily be carried on out of a residence or other structure without having any significant effect on the neighborhood or area from which such home occupation is carried on. 
B.  In addition thereto, the Mayor and City Council is hereby authorized to grant land use permits for occupations or businesses compatible with the neighborhood from which such business or occupation is operated and where no nuisance as defined in Georgia law or other significant adverse effect would result to the area or district zoned. 
C.  All applications for land use permits shall require all applicable information for processing as per Chapter 10 of the UDC and be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning and that public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as applications for rezoning are so conducted. 
D.  In no event shall the Mayor and City Council grant a land use permit for a period of time in excess of 24 months except on re-application, re-advertisement, and public hearing. 
E.  Standards for decision. The Mayor and City Council shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a land use permit: 
1.  Safety, health, welfare, and moral concerns involving the surrounding neighborhood; 
2.  Parking and traffic considerations; 
3.  Number of nonrelated employees; 
4.  Number of commercial and business deliveries; 
5.  The city's general presumption that residential neighborhoods should not allow non-compatible business uses; 
6.  Compatibility of the business use to the neighborhood; 
7.  Hours of operation; 
8.  Existing business uses in the vicinity; 
9.  Effect on property values of surrounding property; 
10.  Circumstances surrounding neighborhood complaints; 
11.  Intensity of the proposed business use; and 
12.  Location of use within the neighborhood. 
F.  A land use permit is a privilege permit and may be revoked by the Mayor and City Council following notice and hearing should the use be deemed to be a nuisance or create a safety hazard. 
4.04.06 - Standards for Special Land Use Permits 
A.  A special land use permit shall be required for the following types of uses of property regardless of the zoning classification of district for the realty: 
1.  Radio, television, microwave, land mobile, telephone, or other communication towers or antennas, communication equipment buildings; 
2.  Asphalt plants; 
3.  Concrete plants; 
4.  Private landfills; 
5.  Biomedical waste disposal, hazardous waste disposal facilities; 
6.  Composting; 
7.  Auto salvaging and wrecking yard; 
8.  Coliseum; 
9.  Stadium; 
10.  Quarries or mining operations; 
11.  Cell Towers, Radio and Television Communication Towers 
12.  Waste Transfer Station 
B.  The Mayor and City Council may grant special land use permits for the enumerated uses in areas and districts where zoning regulations would otherwise prohibit such operations or uses. 
C.  All applications for special land use permits shall require all applicable information for processing as per Chapter 10 and be advised in the same manner as applications for rezoning and that public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as application for rezoning are so conducted. 
D.  The Mayor and City Council may grant a special land use permit for any period of time in the discretion of the governing authority. 
E.  Standards for decision. In addition to general district, the Mayor and City Council shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a special land use permit: 
1.  Whether or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located; 
2.  Whether or not the use is otherwise compatible with the neighborhood; safety, health, welfare, and moral concerns involving the surrounding neighborhood; 
3.  Whether or not the use proposed will result in a nuisance as defined under Georgia law; 
4.  Whether or not quiet enjoyment of surrounding property will be adversely affected; 
5.  Whether or not property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected; 
6.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations; 
7.  Whether or not the site or intensity of use is appropriate; 
8.  Whether or not special or unique conditions overcome the governing authority's general presumption that residential neighborhoods should not allow non-compatible business uses; 
9.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation; 
10.  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed on commercial and business deliveries; 
11.  Whether or not adequate landscape plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition; and 
12.  Whether or not the public health, safety, welfare, or moral concerns of the surrounding neighborhood will be adversely affected. 
4.04.07 - Standards for Temporary Mobile Home Occupancy Permit 
A.  In all classifications there may be established a use for the temporary location of a mobile home or a temporary land use only upon [issuance of] a temporary land use permit which may be issued by the governing authority upon the following conditions: 
1.  Application for a use permit shall be filed and shall meet all the requirements of an application for zoning as provided by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Kennesaw. Such application shall have attached thereto a separate statement of the applicant that he recognizes that the use permit, if granted, is for a temporary time only and that [the] applicant shall cause the removal of said mobile home or the removal of all property on the termination of the use permit; or upon applicant's failure to do so irrevocably grants the governing authority the right to remove the mobile home or property from the premises at the expense of the applicant for which the applicant agrees to pay. 
2.  Use permits may be issued for a period of not more than twenty-four (24) calendar months other than medical hardships and construction hardship permits which shall be not more than twelve (12) months and shall terminate automatically unless reissued. Any such use for a period of more than twelve (12) months shall necessitate applying for a new permit or renewal. 
B.  The governing authority may permit [the following]: 
1.  A mobile home may be parked and occupied in all residential or commercial districts where a building permit has been applied for and obtained from the proper department of the City of Kennesaw for the construction of either a home or a place of business. 
2.  A mobile home to be parked and occupied in any residential area where a medical hardship exists. "Medical hardship" is hereby defined as a person whose health or mental condition necessitates attention and supervision from the occupants of the dwelling located on the lot on which it is desired to have the mobile home parked and occupied and in no case shall such a use be allowed unless it is shown by the Cobb County Health Department or other appropriate medical evidence that the person to occupy the mobile home falls within the provisions herein provided for and, provided further that it is satisfactorily shown that the dwelling on the premises does not contain sufficient facilities to accommodate the proposed occupant of the mobile home. (In addition, the application shall contain an affidavit or certified statement of a physician showing that present facilities are inadequate and [stating that] a hardship condition requiring the use of a mobile home for the health care of a member of the immediate family or the occupant of the premises [exists].) 
3.  A mobile home to be parked and occupied in any commercial or industrial district where a building permit or permits have been applied for and where its primary function is that of an office or for storage or related purposes. 
4.  A mobile home to be parked and occupied in any district on property owned or leased by a religious assembly or a school for a period not to exceed 12 months where its primary function is that of an office or classroom or for storage or related proposes; provided that not more than one mobile home for each two acres of vacant land may be located thereon. 
5.  In all residential classifications, the Zoning Administrator may grant a use permit for the temporary use of one of the homes or for the parking of a mobile home to be used as a real estate sales office for sale of the lots for new homes built and developed within the boundaries of the development provided that final plans have been approved therefore by all required authorities. The specific location of said mobile home shall be subject to the approval of the building official. 
6.  In all classifications, the Mayor and Council may grant a temporary use permit for the use of the land itself under the same ordinance governing mobile home use. 
7.  Be it further provided that in all instances where an application for a mobile home permit has been applied for, that the governing authority shall take into consideration the need for such permit, the aesthetic effect that it may have on the neighborhood, the location on the property of the mobile home and may in its discretion grant or refuse a permit, and the grant or refusal shall not be mandatory, but in all instances, shall be permissible depending on the finding of the Mayor and Council as to the conditions stated herein and any other lawful criteria. 
C.  Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this ordinance either without obtaining a permit or for causing said mobile home to be parked or occupied for a period in excess of that granted by the governing authority of the City of Kennesaw, shall be deemed to have violated this ordinance and be subject to all remedies provided under the ordinances of the City of Kennesaw. 
D.  For purposes of this ordinance only, "mobile home" is defined to include both mobile structures designed to function as residences and mobile structures designed to function as classrooms, offices, and storage buildings. 
E.  Any violation of this ordinance or the cessation of the need for a use permit shall be grounds for revocation of such permit by the Mayor and Council in addition to all other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7, 4-20-15) 
4.04.08 - Standards for Pawnshops, Title Loan, Check Cashing and Payday Loan Establishments 
All check cashing establishments will be subject to the following standards: 
•  1,000 feet minimum distance from another check cashing establishment measured from property line to property line. 
•  500 feet minimum distance from residentially zoned property measured from building to building. 
All pawnshops will be subject to the following standards: 
•  1,000 feet minimum distance from another pawnshop measured from property line to property line. 
•  500 feet minimum distance from residentially zoned property measured from building to building. 
All payday loan establishments will be subject to the following standards: 
•  1,000 feet minimum distance from another payday loan establishment measured from property line to property line. 
•  500 feet minimum distance from residentially zoned property measured from building to building. 
All title loan establishments will be subject to the following standards: 
•  1,000 feet minimum distance from another title loan establishment measured from property line to property line. 
•  500 feet minimum distance from residentially zoned property measured from building to building. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 2, 8-17-15) 
4.05.00 - CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 

4.05.01 - Generally 
A.  Jurisdiction of chapter. This chapter shall govern the use of all land and developments thereof within the corporate limits of the city. 
B.  Purpose of chapter. The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare and to require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the jurisdiction of the city. Further, the purposes of the regulation of the subdivision of land are to, among others: 
1.  Encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities; 
2.  Assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
3.  Assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
4.  Assure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of public land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and 
5.  Assure, in general, the wise development of new areas in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
C.  Conformance with zoning regulations. No subdivision shall be accepted for review which does not conform with the zoning regulations applicable to the land for which it is proposed. 
D.  Conformance with chapter. Any sub-divider of land within the corporate limits of the city shall submit to the Planning Commission plats of the subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth in this chapter. 
E.  Approval required prior to construction. No sub-divider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, before obtaining preliminary plat approval from the Planning Commission, as certified thereon, and approval of plans and profiles by the city engineer. 
F.  Installation of improvements. Improvements may be made in a subdivision as are depicted on the preliminary plat previously approved by the Planning Commission, with final plat approval to be obtained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 10 of the UDC. 
G.  Final approval prior to subdividing. No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for any other purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, or subdivision plat, or part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the Mayor and Council; and such approval shall be entered on the final plat. 
H.  Issuance of building permits. 
1.  No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the incorporated area of the city unless the street giving access to the lot upon which such building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time. Provided, however, the Mayor and Council, meeting in regular session, may, in their discretion, issue building permits for the purpose of model homes, up to five (5) percent of the total number of lots in the phase unit of the subdivision approved by the Mayor and Council in the preliminary plat, after the bonds specified in this chapter have been posted by the owner or sub-divider and after all final engineering plans have been completed and before the actual installation of curbs, gutters and base and binder of the streets therein, where such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the preliminary subdivision plat as approved by the Mayor and Council or on a street located and accepted by the city. However, if the percentage is equal to less than two (2) building permits, then two (2) permits may be issued. Provided, however, that private streets and other private access ways may be approved under the terms of those rules and regulations in group development plans, condominium projects, apartment projects, townhouses, commercial developments, shopping centers or other development. 
2.  If permits are issued prior to street acceptance, it shall be the sole responsibility of the sub-divider/developer to ensure that all setback requirements as well as all other requirements as specified in this Code are upheld. 
I.  Approval by individual agencies. No subdivision plat shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court of the county without the plat having first been submitted to and approved by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall not approve any subdivision plat without such plat having first been reviewed and approved by the city engineer and the health department to the extent that each has jurisdiction. 
J.  Fees. 
1.  Fees are hereby established to cover the cost of administration expenses. All required fees and charges are specified by other ordinances and resolutions by the Mayor and Council. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the city clerk and may be altered or amended only by the Mayor and Council. 
2.  Upon the submission of any preliminary plat, final plat or other regulatory plan or plat required to be reviewed or approved under this chapter, any person who submits such plan shall deposit and pay to the city the required fees as noted in the City Wide Master Fee Schedule. After the approval of any plat or plan required to be approved under this chapter, the actual cost of engineering and approval of the plan shall be determined, and any person submitting such plat or plan shall pay the fee under the City Wide Master Fee Schedule or 120 percent of the actual cost of the engineering services for the approval of such plat or plan. The initial deposit shall be credited against the total cost determined in this subsection. This section shall also apply to plans for all commercial and industrial developments and shall be in addition to all other charges required by this Code. 
K.  Administration of Chapter. This chapter shall be administered by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The Planning Commission may from time to time issue instructions and operating procedures to be followed in the administration of this chapter to inform the public and expedite plat approvals. 
L.  Amendments; hearings; variances. 
1.  The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to amend this chapter after a public hearing thereon. 
2.  Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least three days prior to such meeting. 
3.  In cases of undue hardship under this chapter, any property owner may petition the Planning Commission for relief. The Planning Commission shall prepare and forward to the Mayor and Council any recommended amendments for the Mayor and Council's consideration. In cases where the Planning Commission fails to recommend amendments due to individual hardships, the property owner may then appeal to the Mayor and Council for relief. 
M.  Violation of chapter; penalty. 
1.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any person who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
2.  In any case in which any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter or amendment thereto adopted by the Mayor and Council, the legal counsel of the city or any owner of real estate within the district in which such land is situated, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate the unlawful use. 
4.05.02 - General Principles of Design 
A.  Access. 
1.  Every subdivision and every lot within shall be served by a publicly-dedicated street. 
2.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
3.  No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
B.  Conformance to the master plan. 
1.  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the master plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the Planning Commission. 
2.  All highways, streets and other features of the master plan shall be platted by the sub-divider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the master plan. In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway, the approval of the State Department of Transportation may be required by the Planning Commission. 
3.  Where features of the master plan (other than minor streets and collector streets) such as school sites, parks, arterial streets, major thoroughfares and other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, or when these features have not been anticipated by the master plan and planning policy, but are considered essential by the Planning Commission, such features shall be dedicated. The Planning Commission shall require the dedication of recreational areas, school sites and/or open space as deemed appropriate for the size and type of development. 
4.  The Planning Commission may waive the platting and reservation requirements mentioned in this section whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release stating that such a planned feature is not required. 
5.  The Planning Commission shall disapprove plats when such planned features, as specified by the master plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
6.  Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land to public use and the Planning Commission or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not required or suitable for public use, the Planning Commission may either refuse to approve the plat or it may require the prearrangement of lots to include such land. 
C.  Discrepancy between chapter and zoning and other regulations. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards of dimensions noted in this article and those contained in the zoning ordinance, building code or other official regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive shall apply. 
D.  Group development projects. The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified in the case of a plan and program for group development projects or neighborhood unit or planned unit development which is not divided into customary lots, blocks and streets, which in the judgment of the Planning Commission provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, provided zoning density standards for the entire tract are not exceeded, and which also provides such covenants or other legal procedures as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. Plans for such developments shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission whether or not such plat is to be recorded and no building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. Prior to processing such a planned unit development, the sub-divider shall indicate his willingness to increase processing time specified in Chapter 10 of the UDC. 
1.  Modifications of the provisions set forth in this chapter may be authorized by the Planning Commission in specific cases when, in its opinion, undue hardships may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical and other exceptional conditions require such modifications, and that the granting of the modifications will not adversely affect the general public or nullify the intent of this chapter; provided further that any such modification granted by the Planning Commission shall be made in writing to the sub-divider and also made a part of the Planning Commission's records and the plat. 
2.  Application for any modifications must be filed in writing with necessary supporting documents with the Planning Commission by the sub-divider and shall explain, in detail, the reasons and facts supporting the application. 
4.05.03 - Required Minimum Improvements 
A.  Applicability of article. The sub-divider shall provide improvements as required by this article and by applicable city specifications and requirements. 
B.  Street grading. 
1.  All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded to the standards of the city. 
2.  When property adjacent to the street is not owned by the sub-divider, the sub-divider shall obtain the necessary easements for sloping banks before submitting the preliminary plat, as required in Chapter 10. 
C.  Street paving. 
1.  Street paving widths shall be in conformance with standards set forth in Chapter 6 of the UDC. 
2.  Street pavements shall be installed according to standards adopted by the City under Chapter 6 of the UDC. 
D.  Curbs and gutters. 
1.  Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets, except where noted in this chapter. Installation shall be in accordance with the standards adopted by the city. 
2.  Curbs and gutters shall be of a straight or standard construction on one or both sides of streets, as applicable, where sidewalks are required. 
E.  Sidewalks. 
1.  The sub-divider shall furnish all required sidewalks. 
2.  Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet and shall be provided under the following conditions: 
a.  Sidewalks shall be required in subdivisions located within one mile from an existing or proposed school on one side of any subdivision street terminating at or adjacent to such school, when the Planning Commission determines sidewalks are necessary to provide for pedestrian movement. 
b.  The Planning Commission may require additional sidewalks and wider sidewalks within a distance of up to one mile on streets leading to or going through commercial areas, street sites, places of public assembly and other congested areas. 
c.  Sidewalks in residential areas shall not be adjacent to street curbs. 
F.  Water supply. 
1.  Where a public water supply is within a reasonable distance, the sub-divider shall install or have installed a system of water mains and connect to such supply. The mains and connections to each lot shall be installed prior to the paving of the street. 
2.  Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system approved by the health department. 
G.  Sanitary sewage disposal. 
1.  When in the written opinion of the health department, public sanitary sewers are within reasonable access of the subdivision, the sub-divider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. All street sewers serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the sub-divider. 
2.  When in the written opinion of the health department, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot or a community sewage disposal system may be used when in compliance with the standards of the health department. 
3.  When the operation of a temporary sanitary sewer system requires land to be set aside for a disposal plant, the property owner shall give the city title to the property for as long as the plant is in operation. Such title may carry a reversionary clause returning the property to the owner when the site is no longer necessary for the operation of the plant. 
4.  In a drainage basin which at the time of plat application is scheduled for a public sewage system, all subdivisions shall be provided with a temporary community sewage disposal system, as approved by the health department. Such system shall include permanent sewerage outfall lines plus a temporary treatment plant to be installed by the sub-divider. 
5.  Whenever the installation of a sanitary sewer is required as provided by this chapter, no new street shall be paved without such sewer being first installed in accordance with the requirements of the health department sewer specifications. 
H.  Storm drainage. 
1.  Every subdivision shall be served by storm drainage facilities, including drains, sewers, catch basins, culverts and other facilities. 
2.  All drainage facilities shall be so designed as to serve the entire drainage area in which these facilities are located. All street drains serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the sub-divider. 
3.  All surface water drainage shall be transported to existing storm sewers or to drainage facilities approved by the city engineer. 
4.  Whenever drainage ditches are used, such ditches shall retain natural design characteristics and be so designed that they do not present a hazard to life and safety. 
5.  All drainage features shall be in accordance with standards and specifications of the city, and no extension shall be made from the street drainage through the abutting property without approval of the city engineer. 
6.  When the construction of a proposed public road makes it necessary to cross a storm drain, the developer shall provide and install the required size and length of pipe acceptable to the city engineer. 
i.  In cases where the developer or owner chooses not to develop the land through which the drain runs, the trench may be left open; however, in such cases the plat must be so marked and an easement shown thereon, indicating that no building or driveway shall be built over or within forty (40) feet of the open drain. 
ii.  Where the developer chooses to leave the drain open and the drain is crossed by a driveway, the size of pipe shall be determined by the city engineer, and no building permit will be approved unless the installation meets the requirements of the city engineer. 
iii.  Notwithstanding the controls set forth in this subsection, the building inspector may refuse to issue a building permit on any lot or lots where the land is subject to floods or where, in the opinion of the building inspector, the topographic features of the property are such that a building could not be properly maintained on the lot. 
7.  Improvements, such as widening, deepening, relocating, clearing, protecting or otherwise improving existing lakes and shorelines, streambeds and other watercourses, for the control of mosquitoes and public health nuisance, shall be provided by the developer in accordance with standards are requirements of the health department. 
8.  Any water impoundment structure shall be constructed so as to minimize mosquito breeding and other nuisance hazards. The outside toe of any dam shall be at least fifty (50) feet away from the toe of the street right-of-way slope. Any dam to be constructed within the city shall require the approval of the city engineer and the health department, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications as determined by them. 
9.  No land subject to flooding as determined by the city engineer shall be platted or improved for residential or other use which may be endangered by floods, unless such land shall be raised four feet above the existing or forecast flood level with fill dirt taken from within that part of the subdivision within the floodplain, unless a greater height is specified by the city engineer; such fill areas shall include all land twenty (20) feet beyond the sites proposed for structures, and no such structure shall have any part below such four-foot level. Provided, however, that cutting and filling operations shall not deepen the floodplain below its lowest level or reduce the cross section of the floodplain. Provided further that all existing natural cover shall be replaced in kind after cutting and filling operations are complete. 
I.  Monuments and iron pipes. 
1.  Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established where plat boundary lines intersect with land lot lines. 
2.  Monuments shall consist of two (2) inch iron pipe, sixteen (16) inches in length. Monuments shall be set so the top of the pipe shall be six inches above the ground level, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
3.  The accurate location, material and size of all existing monuments shall be shown on the final plat, as well as the future location of monuments to be placed after street improvements have been completed. 
4.  Iron pipes at least three-fourths (3/4) inch by sixteen (16) inches shall be placed at all corners of each lot and shall be set flush to the ground. 
J.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with city specifications. 
K.  Street trees. Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall be placed or retained so as not to obstruct sight distances at street intersections. 
L.  Completion. At such time as any or all improvements are completed, the sub-divider shall notify the city in writing, accurately identifying the improvements covered. 
M.  Acceptance. Upon notification of completion of minimum improvements, the city shall within forty-five (45) days after such notice accept or reject, in writing, the completed improvements, stating the deficiencies, if any. Improvements shall not be accepted unless they conform to these regulations and applicable city specifications. All work performed under this chapter shall conform to this Code and all technical specifications and regulations adopted by the Mayor and Council. Work found to be deficient by city inspectors shall be corrected by the sub-divider at his expense and within the time frames required by the city. 
N.  Guarantee. The sub-divider shall guarantee to the city, for a period of two years after completion and acceptance of the improvements, all material and workmanship. The sub-divider shall post bond with the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of such guaranty. In lieu of furnishing the sub-divider's bond, the sub-divider may assign to the city an approved contractor's guaranty and bond. Such guaranty and bond shall be posted prior to approval by the city of the subdivision plat. 
4.07.00 - STANDARDS FOR LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN (LEED) 
A.  Intent. The City of Kennesaw is committed to minimizing the short term and long term negative impacts construction has on the environment. The intent of this section is to provide owners and occupants of commercial buildings, offices, industrial buildings, multiple residences and senior citizen multiple residences with an opportunity for energy and water savings; good indoor air quality and healthy, pleasant and productive surroundings. The purpose of this section is to provide benefits to the community by having buildings constructed that are resource-efficient and conserve energy. 
This section provides incentives for voluntary participation in sustainability efforts for new construction as a development option. 
B.  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). The City of Kennesaw hereby promotes the utilization of the Green Building Council's (USGBC) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEEDNC) Rating System, Version 2.2 and any amendments thereto or subsequent versions. The LEED-NC system (for new construction) establishes several levels of environmental achievement from the certified rating to a platinum rating. The ratings are attained by earning LEED points in the categories of sustainable sites, water efficiency, energy and atmosphere, materials and resources, indoor environmental quality and innovation and design process. Alternatively, compliance with the requirements of this section may be achieved for new construction. 
C.  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to all new construction of a commercial building, office building, industrial building, schools, multiple residence or senior citizen multiple residence equal to or greater than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area space where the owner or builder wish to pursue sustainability goals and certification through the LEED program. 

4.07.01 - City of Kennesaw Incentives Review 
The City of Kennesaw's commitment to becoming a green community is reinforced by the support to promote sustainable construction projects. The incentives for each project will be assessed by the City of Kennesaw collective review by the following Departments and Committees: 
A.  Environmental Committee 
B.  Planning and Zoning Department 
C.  Public Works Department 
D.  Economic Development Department 
Possible incentives include but not limited to the following: 
A.  Reduced construction permit fees 
B.  Expedited plan review timetable 
C.  Zoning bonuses including density, site design and setback reductions will be considered 
D.  Other Economic Incentives identified by the Economic Development Department. 
Each project will be analyzed on its own merit and will require analysis by the City Departments as per Section 4.08.01 
4.07.02 - Process for Analysis of LEED compliance and City of Kennesaw consideration of development incentives 
A.  All new projects will be reviewed by the City of Kennesaw Plan Review Committee as part of the adopted project review process for new construction. 
B.  The property owner will submit a written request for sustainability review to the Plan Review Committee. The request will itemize the following information: 
1.  Total square footage of project 
2.  Proposed certification level pursued (gold, silver platinum) as regulated by the US Green Building Council (USGBC) 
3.  Other sustainability efforts to be listed such as Earthcraft and Energy star initiatives 
4.  Estimates of cost to implement LEED rated installation 
5.  List of other similar projects completed that achieved LEED certification by same builder or owner 
6.  Any additional information required by the Plan Review Committee deemed relevant to the request. 
C.  ["Reserved."] 
D.  Written request and itemized information will be forwarded to the reviewing departments as listed in Section 4.07.01 for a collective review and assessment. 
E.  If Economic Incentives are identified by the collective department review, the Economic Development Department will submit the assessment and recommendations/findings to the owner for review. 
F.  If all parties agree on the assessment and finding by the City of Kennesaw and if Economic Incentives are being pursued, then the prepared Incentive package will be submitted for approval by Mayor and Council for ratification as an Economic Development Incentive Resolution specific to the project. 
4.08.00 - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

4.08.01 - City-Wide Architectural Design Standards 
This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of the Architectural Design, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Architectural Design Standards Ordinance of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia." 
A.  Purpose and scope 
1.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the design and construction of buildings and related structures in all districts excluding single and two family uses. 
2.  The Mayor and City Council find that the interests served through the adoption of these design standards includes the quality of architecture and building construction and protection of property values, prevention of the physical deterioration of buildings and the promotion of the image of the community and the general welfare of the city. 
B.  General regulations 
1.  As part of the submittal for site plan approval within any zoning district, architectural plans shall be submitted for review by the community development department and meet the minimum submittal requirements as specified in Chapter 10 of this UDC. 
2.  Architectural elevations showing the building's design and a description of structural and exterior material proposed shall be provided in accordance with this chapter as required for site plan review. 
C.  Design standards 
1.  Building orientation. The orientation of any proposed building shall be carefully scrutinized so as to mitigate the visual and audible impact of service areas, loading areas, or similar operations on the adjoining properties and general public. 
a.  Buildings shall not be designed or oriented to expose loading docks, service areas, or non-residential overhead doors to the public rights-of-way. 
b.  Buildings proposed in commercial districts that are adjacent to residential developments shall not be designed or oriented to expose loading docks, service areas, or similar operations towards the adjacent residential developments. 
c.  If it is not feasible to design or orient the loading docks, service areas, or similar operations away from the residential developments of public rights-of-way, additional landscape buffering, screening walls, and fences may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  Architectural elements. In order to reduce the negative aesthetic impacts of large buildings, additional architectural elements shall be incorporated into the overall building design. 
a.  Non single-family buildings proposed in residential districts shall incorporate residential design elements such as, pitched roofs, dormers, cupolas, or other similar roof elements into the building design in order to minimize the aesthetic impact of the differing uses. 
b.  Buildings proposed in commercial districts that are adjacent to residential developments are recommended to include an articulated roofline, giving emphasis to architectural elements that will divide the mass of a large building into smaller, identifiable pieces. Flat roof buildings shall not be encouraged, and only be approved by the Mayor or City Council. 
c.  Commercial buildings shall incorporate architectural design elements, materials, and colors into the side and rear building elevations, similar to those used in the front building elevation. 
d.  Commercial buildings shall incorporate façade modulation in all building elevations in order to preserve building scale and reduce the aesthetic impact of long, large expansive wall surfaces. The variation in wall surfaces can be accomplished either by physical offsets or by the use of color, pattern, or texture. 
e.  Roof mounted mechanical units, satellite dishes, or other similar equipment shall be screened from the public view by the extension of a parapet wall or other roof structure. 
f.  In the case where the parapet wall cannot feasibly screen the roof-mounted equipment, point-in-place or other appropriate screening shall be required. Such screening shall have similar design features as the building including material, shape, and color considerations. Wooden fences shall not be considered appropriate. 
3.  Exterior material selection. The building's exterior material selection shall be compatible with other building and structures in adjoining developments. The minimum requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  In, PUD-R, RA-4, RM-8, RM-12, FST districts, primarily residential construction materials such as, brick, stone, wood, lap siding, and architectural shingles, shall be utilized in the design. 
i.  Attached dwelling structures shall incorporate at a minimum, forty-five (45) percent brick, stone, or similar substantial material in the overall building design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces. 
ii.  Multiple family structures shall incorporate at a minimum, fifty (50) percent brick, stone, or similar substantial material into the overall building design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces. 
iii.  CBD, HPV and properties in the historic districts are subject to historical design standards contained herein. 
b.  In LI and HI districts, architectural pre-cast tilt-up concrete panels are an acceptable exterior material provided that additional architectural detailing is provided along the public faces of the building. 
c.  In OI, NS, NRC, CRC, GC, HBG, UVC, PVC, PSC, LI, HI districts, all proposed architectural material shall be dominated with permanency and strength of materials in proportion to the aesthetic characteristics of the buildings bulk and shape. Structures in these districts shall incorporate at a minimum, 50 percent brick, stone, stucco, or other similar substantial material into the overall building design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces. 
d.  The use of metal panels or sheet metal will not be considered an acceptable exterior building or accessory building material in any residential or commercial district. (Contrary to above, standing seam material may be utilized for roofing in any zoning district.) 
D.  Waiver of requirements. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, may grant administrative relief to the requirements of this ordinance. The Zoning Administrator's, or his/her designee, authority is limited to the following circumstances: 
1.  Property located within an existing commercial development or park built prior to the adoption date of ordinance. This applies to office and industrial parks and retail developments for extension of said buildings. 
2.  Property located an interior street of development and does not contain frontage along a major or minor collector or arterial street as defined under Chapter 6 of the UDC. 
3.  Existing principal structure constructed prior to the adoption of this section. 
E.  The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, upon review and determination that a subject property meets the criteria for administrative relief will issue a letter of approval to the property owner. A copy of this approval will be submitted to the official building files located in the building services department. 
F.  If subject properties do not meet the above mentioned criteria there shall be no deviation from the terms of this section unless a waiver has been granted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Kennesaw through the variance application process as set forth in Chapter 9 of the UDC. 
G.  The Mayor and City Council reserves the right to waive or modify to a lesser restriction any provision or requirement of architectural design elements contained in this chapter in any redevelopment of property within the city. 
1.  The Mayor and City Council may consider modifications that do not adversely affect the intent of these regulations and adequately safeguard the general public and surrounding property. 
2.  Exceptions will only be considered for those areas where special circumstances warrant a change and where the modification or waiver is determined to be in the best interest of the general public. 
TECHNICAL DOCUMENTS 
1.  City-wide Architectural Design Standards, 2007 
2.  Historic District Design Standards, 2006 
4.09.00 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OVERLAY DISTRICTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., adopted March 7, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as App. A, § 4.02.00. For clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as App. A, § 4.09.00. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

1.1 - Intent 
The intent and purpose of this code is to enable and support the implementation of the following policies: 
a.  That downtown Kennesaw and the Cherokee Street corridor is the focal point for high-quality, mixed-use development in the City of Kennesaw as established in the 2014 Cherokee Street Gateway Visioning Plan and the 2006-2026 Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  That within Kennesaw ordinary activities of daily life should occur within walking or bicycling distance of most dwellings. 
c.  That interconnected networks of thoroughfares should be designed to disperse traffic and reduce the length of automobile trips. 
d.  That a range of housing options should be provided to accommodate different needs in the community. 
e.  That the quality of life in existing neighborhoods should be preserved, protected, and enhanced. 
f.  That development patterns should enable children to walk or bicycle to school. 
g.  That a range of open spaces including parks, squares, playgrounds, and preserved green corridors should be distributed throughout Kennesaw. 
h.  That buildings and landscaping should contribute to the physical definition of thoroughfares as public spaces. 
i.  That development should adequately accommodate automobiles while respecting the pedestrian and the spatial form of public areas. 
j.  That community design should reinforce safe environments, but not at the expense of accessibility. 
k.  That civic buildings and public gathering places should be provided as locations that reinforce community identity. 
l.  That civic buildings should be distinctive and appropriate to a role more important than the other buildings that constitute the fabric of the area. 
m.  That the harmonious redevelopment of Kennesaw should be secured through design-based codes in select areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
1.2 - Applicability 
1.2.1 In areas subject to this code, all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter or inconsistent with its provisions in the City of Kennesaw Code of Ordinances are hereby superseded to the limited extent necessary to give this code full force and effect. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this shall not serve to supplant any state or federally mandated regulation, sign ordinance, platting ordinance, bonding requirements, development permitting, historic preservation and Historic Design Guidelines, nonconforming uses, Adult entertainment and sexually oriented businesses, alcohol permits and licenses, building code, soil erosion and sedimentation code, stormwater, impact fee ordinances, fire safety or life safety code as the City may have adopted or as amended from time to time. 
1.2.2 Should any provision of this be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect this chapter as a whole or any part hereof except that specific provision which was the subject of the declaration. 
1.2.3 Capitalized terms used throughout this code may be defined in Article 6 Definitions of Terms. Article 6 contains regulatory language that is integral to this code. Those terms not defined in Article 6 shall be accorded their commonly accepted meanings. In the event of conflicts between these definitions and those of Appendix A Section 1.09.02 Definitions of the Unified Development Code, those of this code shall take precedence when applied to the regulations found herein. 
1.2.4 The metrics of Article 5 Standards and Tables are an integral part of this code. The diagrams and illustrations that accompany those standards should be incorporated, unless modified herein. 
1.2.5 Where in conflict, numerical metrics shall take precedence over graphic metrics. 
1.2.6 Where this document conflicts with the Historic District Design Standards, the Historic Design Standards shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
1.3 - Rezoning Process 
1.3.1 Properties may only be rezoned to this code consistent with the currently adopted Special Update to the Future Land Use Plan, referred to hereafter as the Official Regulating Plan, and in accordance with Article 2. 
1.3.2 The procedure for rezoning to the Official Regulating Plan shall be the same as required for any other application for zoning map amendment as described in Chapter 10 of the Unified Development Code, subject to the provisions thereto and additional requirements set forth below. 
1.3.3 An update to the Official Regulating Plan submitted by any entity, including the City, shall provide the following: 
a.  A Regulating Plan in accordance with the requirements of Section 2.1.2; 
b.  Standards for Special Districts if applicable; and 
c.  Requested Variances for concurrent consideration by Mayor and City Council, if applicable. 
d.  Requested rezoning to the Official Regulating Plan for concurrent consideration by Mayor and City Council, if applicable. 
1.3.4 Once the Mayor and City Council approves a rezoning under this code, the parcel(s), their t-zones or special districts shall be designated DBC (Design Based Code) on the City of Kennesaw zoning map. 
1.3.5 Rezoning to the Official Regulating Plan will be processed by the City with application fee for a period of 6 months after the adoption of this code or as may be approved by action of the Mayor and City Council. 
1.3.6 Special Area Plans identified in Section 2.14 may only be approved by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth for updates to the Official Regulating Plan applications. 
1.3.7 The following approval process is specific to parcels zoned T5 within the Downtown Activity Center (DAC) as defined by the Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time: 
a.  Prior to rezoning to a T5 district, City of Kennesaw staff shall conduct a minimum of one consultation with applicant to review project concept and factors to consider in the planning and design phase prior to initial site plan and architectural review. Such consultation shall include consideration of the following: 
i.  Conceptual site plan and architectural review by City of Kennesaw staff. 
ii.  Submittal to the Kennesaw Downtown Development Authority (KDDA) for review and comment only. 
iii.  Submittal to the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) for certificate of appropriateness approval if within a historic district. If subject property is not in the historic district then concept approval will be required. 
iv.  Site Plan review and approval by City of Kennesaw staff required. 
b.  Final plan approval by Mayor and Council as required by section 2.11 of the City Charter, and as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
1.4 - Transect Zones, Civic Zones, and Special Districts 
1.4.1 The standards for Transect Zones and Civic Zones shall be as set forth in Articles 3, 4, and 5. 
1.4.2 Areas that, by their intrinsic character, cannot conform to the requirements of any Transect Zone may be designated as Special Districts on a Regulating Plan. 
1.4.3 The standards for Special Districts shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council as part of Regulating Plan and shall include either: 
a.  Standards specifically prepared for the Special District and recorded in Table 13: Special Districts; or 
b.  Standards of any City of Kennesaw zoning district. 
1.4.4 Special Districts shall comply with all additional Special District provisions identified in Articles 3 and 4, unless relief is granted by Variance, and one of the following: 
a.  Special District provisions set forth in Table 13: Special Districts, as applicable; or 
b.  The requirements the base zoning, including conditions, as applicable; or 
c.  The requirements of any other City of Kennesaw zoning district, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
1.5 - Variances. 
1.5.1 There shall be two types of deviation from the requirements of this code: administrative variances and variances. Whether a deviation requires an administrative variance or variance shall be determined by the planning and zoning administrator except where specifically prescribed in this code. 
1.5.2 An administrative variance is a ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific provision of this code but is justified by its intent. An administrative variance shall be processed consistent with Chapter 9 of the UDC, or as may be amended from time to time. 
1.5.3 Administrative variances relating to a physical element or metric of this code shall be based upon credible submitted evidence demonstrating that: 
a.  Approval, if granted, would not offend the spirit or intent of this code as set forth in Section 1.1 Intent; 
b.  There are such extraordinary and exceptional situations or conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property that the literal or strict application of this code would create an unnecessary hardship due to size, shape or topography or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or conditions not caused by the applicant; 
c.  Relief, if granted would not cause a substantial detriment to the public good and surrounding properties; 
d.  Any relief from a metric authorized by an administrative variance shall be consistent with section 9.04 of the UDC, or as may be amended from time to time; and 
e.  That the public safety, health and welfare are secured, and that substantial justice is done. 
1.5.4 A Variance is any ruling on a deviation other than an administrative variance. A Variance shall be processed by the Mayor and City Council as described in Chapter 9 of the Unified Development Code. 
1.5.5 If an Administrative variance or Variance is requested in conjunction with an application for an update to the Official Regulating Plan, the Mayor and City Council shall process the requested Administrative variances and Variances as a concurrent Variance. 
1.5.6 With respect to the review of Variances, the City Planning Commission shall only make recommendations. 
1.5.7 No Administrative variances or Variances may be issued for the following standards and requirements: 
a.  The minimum Base Densities. (See Table 11 section a.) 
b.  The permission to build Accessory Buildings. 
c.  To address a violation of the footing survey requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
1.6 - Density Calculations 
1.6.1 The following Density calculations shall apply to all plans hereunder except Special Districts that are subject to the standards of any other City of Kennesaw zoning district as set forth in Section 1.4.3(b). 
1.6.2 All areas of a site shall be considered cumulatively the Gross Site Area. 
1.6.3 Development on a site shall be limited as follows: 
a.  The maximum amount of floor area shall be limited by the maximum building height and applicable setback and lot coverage regulations; and 
b.  The maximum number of housing units shall be further limited by the maximum number housing units per acre as specified for each Transect Zone by Table 11: Code Summary, item a Residential Density. 
1.6.4 The maximum residential density of a site shall be calculated by multiplying the Transect Zone's density identified in Table 11: Code Summary, item a Residential Density by the Net Site Area. Where a site includes multiple Transect Zones, each shall be calculated independently. The area of new Thoroughfares and Civic Spaces on the site shall be allocated to the closest Transect Zone(s) on the site. Where a Thoroughfare or Civic Space adjoins multiple Transect Zones, their area shall be proportionally allocated to the adjoining zones. 
1.6.5 Where a site is subdivided into lots, a lot's residential density may exceed the residential density of the Transect Zone within which it lies, provided that the maximum residential density of the Transect Zone for the site as whole as established in Section 1.6.3(b) is not exceeded. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
ARTICLE 2. - REGULATING PLANS 

2.1 - Alterations to the Regulating Plan 
2.1.1 The provisions of this article shall be utilized for sites being rezoned under this code. Alterations to the Official Regulating Plan shall be consistent with the requirements for Future Land Use map amendment as described in Chapter 10 of the Unified Development Code, or as may be amended from time to time. 
2.1.2 Regulating Plans shall consist of one or more maps showing the following: 
a.  Transect Zones and Civic Spaces: 
b.  Thoroughfare network, existing and planned: 
c.  A differentiation of Thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this code in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for Variances allowing automobile-oriented standards; 
d.  Special Districts, including an indication of the specific City zoning district, if applicable; 
e.  Mandatory Private Frontages; 
f.  Any special requirements; and 
g.  A record of any Variances. 
2.1.3 The owner(s) of a parcel, or abutting parcels, consisting of 15 acres or more of contiguous lots within an area subject to the Official Regulating Plan may apply to prepare a Special Area Plan. In consultation with the Planning and Zoning Department, a Special Area Plan may assign new Transect Zones, Civic Zones, Thoroughfares, Special Districts, architectural standards, signage standards, and/or Special Requirements as provided in this code, with appropriate transitions to abutting areas. Special Area Plans shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
2.1.4 The City of Kennesaw or the owner of a parcel or abutting parcels in the Official Regulating Plan may adjust the locations of proposed Thoroughfares from those shown by up to a total of 300 horizontal feet by Variance, provided that the interconnected network shown in the Official Regulating Plan is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
2.2 - Special Area Plan Requirements 
2.2.1 Special Area Plans shall include one or more maps described in Section 2.1.2., in compliance with the standards described in Article 2 of this code (Transect Zones and Civic Spaces): 
a.  Thoroughfare network, existing and planned; 
b.  A differentiation of Thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this code in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for MODIFICATIONS allowing automobile-oriented standards; 
c.  Special Districts, including an indication of the specific City zoning district, if applicable; 
d.  Mandatory Private Frontages; 
e.  Any special requirements; and 
f.  A record of any Variances and Administrative Variances. 
2.2.2 The following elements shall not deviate from those established in the Official Regulating Plan unless otherwise amended: 
a.  Mandatory Public Frontages along existing Thoroughfares; and 
b.  Greenways, although their exact locations may vary provided the connections to adjacent sites shown outside of the Regulating Plan are maintained. 
2.2.3 Each Special Area Plan for a site greater than 15 acres in area shall dedicate at least 5% of its total area to Civic Space. 
2.2.4 Civic Space shall be designed as generally described in Table 5: Civic Space and as allowed in the Transect Zones in accordance with Table 11: Code Summary, item d Civic Spaces. Greenways shall not be counted towards this requirement, except where they pass through a Civic Space meeting the requirements of Table 5: Civic Space. 
2.2.5 The Thoroughfare network for the Special Area Plan shall be designed to define Blocks not exceeding the size prescribed in Table 11: Code Summary, item b Block Size. The perimeter shall be measured as the sum of lot Frontage Lines of the Block. When one side of the Block perimeter is at the edge of a development parcel the maximum Block perimeter shall be subject to approval by Variance as described in Article 1.5. 
2.2.6 All Thoroughfares shall terminate at other Thoroughfares, forming an interconnected network. Internal Thoroughfares shall connect wherever possible to those on adjacent sites. Where adjacent sites are non-conforming with regards to the Thoroughfare network requirements of this code, stub-out streets shall be provided to provide future connectivity at such time as the adjacent sites are developed or redeveloped. All other dead-end streets and cul-de-sacs are allowed only by variance to accommodate specific site conditions including and limited to where said street would otherwise cross a state water, wetland, or existing slope exceeding 25%. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
2.3 - Required Buffers 
2.3.1 The requirements of Section 3.07.04 of the Unified Development Code that refers to required buffer zones shall not apply within the boundaries of the Official Regulating Plan between different parcels when both parcels are located within the boundaries of such Plan. 
2.3.2 Where a parcel located within the Official Regulating Plan is adjacent to a parcel outside of such Plan, there shall be a 20 foot mandatory planted buffer or an undisturbed natural buffer within the parcel located within the Official Regulating Plan, as may be determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator in order provide maximum visual screening and sound buffer. This requirement shall not preclude utility easements as may be reasonably required or deemed necessary by the City or other public utility. Said 20 foot buffer may be located within the area designated as setback. 
2.3.3 Unless otherwise varied Stream and waterway buffers must be provided as per Section 46-421 Buffer and setback requirements and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or other applicable State Law, and as one or more of these may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
ARTICLE 3. - PUBLIC STANDARDS 

3.1 - Article Applicability 
3.1.1 All sites, including those in Special Districts, shall incorporate Thoroughfares and Civic Spaces as established in an approved Regulating Plan or Special Area Plan. 
3.1.2 Where no approved Special Area Plan exists, excluding Special Districts in an approved Regulating Plan: 
a.  Additional Thoroughfares are only permitted when in accordance with Section 2.2.6; 
b.  Additional Civic Spaces are permitted; and 
c.  Sites of more than 4 acres shall be designed to define Blocks not exceeding the size prescribed in Table 11: Code Summary, item b Block Size. The perimeter shall be measured as the sum of lot Frontage Lines of the Block. When one side of the Block perimeter is at the edge of a development parcel the maximum Block perimeter shall be subject to approval by variance. 
3.1.3 Thoroughfares are intended for use by vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to adjacent lots and Civic Spaces. Thoroughfares shall generally consist of Vehicular Lanes and Public Frontages. Bicycle Facilities, where provided along a Thoroughfare, shall also be considered part of said Thoroughfare. 
3.1.4 Thoroughfares and Civic Spaces shall be designed according to their Transect Zone. The Public Frontages of Thoroughfares that pass from one Transect Zone to another shall be adjusted so that the newer Thoroughfare's vehicular lane and parking assemblies and Public Frontages shall taper to meet those of the existing Thoroughfare. 
3.1.5 Each lot shall Enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare or Civic Space, except that 20% of the lots within each Transect Zone may Enfront a Passage. 
3.1.6 Standards for Thoroughfares within Special Districts, except as identified in this Article, shall be consistent with Chapter 6 of the UDC, or and as amended from time to time, or as may be approved by Mayor and Council if the public health, safety, and welfare demand. 
3.1.7 Thoroughfares along a designated B-Grid may be exempted by Variance from one or more of the specified Public Frontage or Private Frontage requirements. See Table 8: Private Frontages. 
3.1.8 Rear Alleys and Rear Lanes shall be provided where required by Table 11: Code Summary, item c Thoroughfares. 
3.1.9 Rear Alleys shall be paved for their width that includes installation of curbs. 
3.1.10 Rear Lanes may be paved to driveway standards. Rear Lanes shall consist of bounded gravel or landscaped edges, and have no raised Curb. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
3.2 - Thoroughfares—Vehicular Lanes 
3.2.1 Thoroughfares may include vehicular lanes in a variety of widths for parked and moving vehicles, and Bicycle Lanes. The standards for vehicular lanes shall be as shown in Table 3A: Vehicular Lane Dimensions, subject to approval of the City of Kennesaw Public Works Director or other official as designated by the City Manager, who may present alternative standards for approval by the Mayor and City Council if the public health, safety, and welfare demand. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
3.3 - Thoroughfares—Bicycle Facilities 
3.3.1 A bicycle network consisting of Greenways, Bicycle Lanes, and other bicycle facilities shall be provided as specified in the approved Regulating Plan or Special Area Plan. The bicycle network shall be connected to existing or proposed city and regional networks wherever possible. 
3.3.2 Greenways shall include: 
a.  An open space corridor that is available for pedestrian access; 
b.  A Multi-Use Trail with a minimum width of 12 feet, which shall be located within open space corridor. 
3.4 - Thoroughfares—Public Frontages 
3.4.1 The standards for Public Frontages shall be as follows, subject to approval of the City of Kennesaw Public Works Director or other official as designated by the City Manager, who may, present alternative standards for approval by the Mayor and City Council if the public health, safety, and welfare demand. 
3.4.2 Design Standards General to zones T3, T4, T5 
a.  The Public Frontage contributes to the character of the Transect Zone and includes Sidewalk, Curb, Planter, and trees. If a Greenway is located in what would otherwise be part of the Public Frontage then it shall also be considered part of the Public Frontage. 
b.  Public Frontages shall be designed as shown in Table 4A: Public Frontages - General and Table 4B: Public Frontages - Specific and allocated within Transect Zones, where applicable, as specified in Table 11: Code Summary, item c Thoroughfares. 
c.  Retrofit of existing Thoroughfares 
i.  Retrofit of existing Thoroughfares which shall be defined as project improvements as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. shall be accomplished in the Public Frontage by widening Sidewalks, adding trees, adding public lighting, and adding any required Greenways. 
ii.  Retrofit of existing Thoroughfares may also be accomplished in the Public Frontage by adding on-street parking, or by adding one Slip Road along one or both sides of the Thoroughfare utilizing one of the Thoroughfares identified as suitable for a Slip Road in Table 3B: Vehicular Lane/Parking Assemblies. 
iii.  Where retrofit occurs and there is insufficient right-of-way for the required improvements, the right-of-way needed for such improvements may be expanded by mutual agreement between the property owner and the entity holding the right-of-way, or a public access easement may be provided to the City of Kennesaw to meet the required improvements. Where the latter occurs, the Frontage Line will not be congruent with the right-of-way line. 
iv.  Retrofits of existing Thoroughfares will be considered system improvements for the purposes of the Kennesaw Impact Fee Ordinance. 
d.  Public lighting shall be provided as established in Section 4.13 Lighting Standards. 
e.  Street trees shall be provided in the Public Frontage Planter and required Landscape Zone, subject to Chapter three of the Unified Development Code section 3.07.00 with the following alterations: 
i.  Along State Routes street trees shall be placed and sized in accordance with the standards established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
ii.  Along other Thoroughfares street trees shall be placed and sized in accordance with the current standards established by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
iii.  Permitted tree species within the Public Frontage shall be as established in the Tree Species Selection List in Chapter 3. The City of Kennesaw may establish additional requirements along specific Thoroughfares. 
3.4.3 Specific to zones T3, T4, T5 
a.  Street trees shall be spaced a minimum of 30 and a maximum of 60 feet on-center. 
b.  The introduced landscape shall consist of durable species tolerant of soil compaction. 
3.4.4 Specific to zone T3 
a.  The Public Frontage shall include trees of various species, naturalistically clustered. 
3.4.5 Specific to zone T4 
a.  Street trees shall be planted in a regularly-spaced Allee pattern of similarly shaped species with shade canopies of a height that, at maturity, clears at least one Story. 
3.4.6 Specific to zone T5 
a.  Street trees shall be planted in a regularly-spaced Allee pattern of similarly shaped species with shade canopies of a height that, at maturity, clears at least one Story. At Retail Frontages, the spacing of the trees may be irregular, to avoid visually obscuring the Shopfronts. 
3.4.7 Specific to State Routes in all Zones and Special Districts 
a.  The requirements of the Specific Transect Zones or Special Districts notwithstanding, along State Routes Sidewalk with a minimum width of 10 feet and a Planter having a width of 10 feet shall be provided. Street trees shall be located in the Planter and spaced a minimum of 30 and a maximum of 60 feet on-center. The spacing may be adjusted to accommodate specific site conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
3.5 - Civic Zones 
3.5.1 General 
a.  Civic Zones shall be designated on a Regulating Plan or Special Area Plan as Civic Building Sites or Civic Spaces. 
3.5.2 Civic Spaces 
a.  Civic Spaces shall be designed as described in Table 5: Civic Space and shall be accessible to the public during normal City of Kennesaw park hours or longer each day. 
b.  Each Civic Space, except for Playgrounds and Parks, shall have a minimum of 50% of its perimeter enfronting one or more Thoroughfares. There shall be no minimum requirement for Playgrounds and Parks. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
ARTICLE 4. - BUILDING SCALE PLANS 

4.1 - Article Applicability 
4.1.1 Lot and building plan approval for areas rezoned hereunder shall be subject to the following additional requirements of this Article. 
4.1.2 Building and site plans submitted under this code shall show compliance with the following standards described in this code: 
a.  For preliminary site and building approval: 
i.  Building Placement 
ii.  Building Form 
iii.  Building Function 
iv.  Public Frontages 
b.  Environmental Design Requirements For final approval, in addition to the above: 
i.  Landscaping 
ii.  Signage 
iii.  Special Requirements, if any 
iv.  Architecture 
v.  Environmental Design Requirements 
4.1.3 Special Districts that do not have provisions within this code as set forth in Table 13: Special Districts shall be governed by the applicable base zoning, including any zoning conditions, or by any other City of Kennesaw zoning district as indicated on the Official Regulating Plan or Special Area Plan. 
4.1.4 Civic Buildings shall not be subject to the requirements of this code. Buildings housing Civic Functions that do not meet the definition of a Civic Building shall be subject to the requirements of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.2 - Non-Conforming Properties 
4.2.1 Non-conforming properties shall be governed by section 9.01 Nonconforming Uses of the Unified Development Code, or as may be amended from time to time, except as indicated to the contrary below. 
4.2.2 A property existing at the date of adoption of this code or any amendments thereto, at which time the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall determine the provisions of this code that shall apply. The above shall not apply to any structures required to be phased out according to 9.01.00.C of the UDC, or as may be amended from time to time. 
4.2.3 Lots existing at the time of adoption of this code shall not be considered non-conforming with regard to width. 
4.2.4 Except for properties within any Historic District, the modification of existing buildings is permitted By Right if such changes do not increase the non-conformity with the specifications of this code (as illustrated in Table 2: Modifications to Non-Conforming Properties). 
4.2.5 In the event of a partial or full destruction by casualty or unintentional means such as fire, storm, or other hazards, developments that received approvals from the Kennesaw Downtown Development Authority, the Historic Preservation Commission, and the Mayor and City Council before the effective date of this ordinance may be fully reconstructed in accordance with such prior approvals and shall not be considered non-conforming. However this shall not limit any other applicable Central Business District zoning provision unless specifically varied. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.3 - Special Requirements 
4.3.1 To the extent that the Official Regulating Plan designates any of the following Special Requirements, these standards shall apply to said requirements: 
a.  A mandatory Retail Frontage designation requires that a building provide a Shopfront at Sidewalk level along the entire length of its Private Frontage. The Shopfront building wall area shall be no less than 70% glazed in clear glass and shaded by an awning overlapping the Sidewalk as illustrated in Table 8: Private Frontages. The first story shall be confined to Retail or Office Function through the depth of the Second Layer. 
b.  A mandatory Gallery Frontage designation requires that a building provide a permanent cover over the Sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns (as generally illustrated in Table 8: Private Frontages). A Gallery Frontage may be combined with a Retail Frontage. 
c.  A mandatory Arcade Frontage designation requires that a building overlap the Sidewalk such that the first floor Facade is a colonnade (as illustrated in Table 8: Private Frontages). The Arcade Frontage may be combined with a Retail Frontage. 
d.  A coordinated Frontage designation requires that the Public Frontage (Table 4A: Public Frontages - General) and Private Frontage (Table 8: Private Frontages) be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
e.  A cross Block Passage designation requires that a minimum 8 foot wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.4 - Building Placement 
4.4.1 Specific to zones T3, T4, T5 
a.  Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Table 11: Code Summary, item e Lot Occupation. 
b.  Building Placement types shall be as shown in Table 7: Building Placement and Table 11: Code Summary, item h Building Placement. 
c.  Buildings shall be placed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to Table 11: Code Summary and Table 14: Definitions Illustrated subject to the following: 
i.  Front Setbacks shall be measured from the Frontage Line. 
ii.  Side and Rear Setbacks shall be measured from the Lot Line. 
d.  At least One Principal Building at the Frontage, and one Outbuilding to the rear of the Principal Building, may be built on each Lot as shown in Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
e.  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that recorded in Table 11: Code Summary, item e Lot Occupation. 
f.  Facades shall be built parallel to a straight Principal Frontage Line or to the tangent of a curved Principal Frontage Line, and along the A-Grid to a minimum percentage of the Frontage width at the Setback, as specified as Frontage buildout on Table 11: Code Summary, item f Setbacks - Principal Building, provided that where a master planned site in Zone T5 is planned for subdivision into lots, compliance with this requirement may be calculated prior to subdivision. 
g.  Rear Setbacks for Outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from the centerline of a Rear Alley or Rear Lane easement. In the absence of Rear Alley or Rear Lane, the rear Setback shall be as shown in Table 11: Code Summary. 
4.4.2 Specific to zones T5 
a.  The Principal Entrance to all enfronting buildings shall be on a Frontage Line. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.5 - Building Form 
4.5.1 General to zones T3, T4, T5 
a.  The Private Frontage of buildings shall conform to Table 8: Private Frontages and Table 11: Code Summary. 
b.  Buildings on corner Lots shall have two Private Frontages as shown in Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. Prescriptions for the Second and Third Layers pertain only to the Principal Frontage. Prescriptions for the First Layer pertain to both Frontages. 
c.  Building heights and Setbacks shall conform to Table 6: Building Form. 
d.  Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for a first floor Commercial or Civic Function, which shall be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level exceeding 14 feet, or 25 feet at ground level, shall be counted as two stories. Mezzanines extending beyond 33% of the floor area shall be counted as an additional Story. 
e.  A first level Residential Function may be raised a maximum of 6 feet from average Sidewalk grade unless a greater height is approved by Variance. 
f.  In a Parking Structure or garage, each above-ground level counts as a single Story regardless of its relationship to habitable Stories. 
g.  Building height limits do not apply to attics, masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads. Attics shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
h.  The habitable area of an Accessory Unit within a Principal Building or an Outbuilding shall not exceed 440 square feet, excluding the parking area. 
4.5.2 Specific to zone T3 
a.  No portion of the Private Frontage may Encroach the Sidewalk. 
b.  Open porches may Encroach the First Layer for 50% of the layer's depth. 
c.  Balconies and bay windows may Encroach the First Layer for 25% of the layer's depth except that balconies on porch roofs may Encroach as does the porch. 
4.5.3 Specific to zone T4 
a.  Balconies, open porches and bay windows may Encroach the First Layer for 50% of the layer's depth. 
4.5.4 Specific to zones T5 
a.  Except where prohibited, Awnings, Arcades, and Galleries may Encroach the Sidewalk to within 2 feet of the Curb but must clear the Sidewalk vertically by at least 8 feet. 
b.  Stoops, Lightwells, balconies, bay windows, and terraces may Encroach the First Layer for 100% of the layer's depth. 
c.  A walkway with a minimum width of 4 feet shall connect rear buildings to the public Sidewalk. 
d.  A first level Residential or Lodging Function shall be raised a minimum of 2 feet from average Sidewalk grade unless a lesser height is necessary to allow wheelchair access. 
4.5.5 Specific to Special Districts 
a.  A walkway with a minimum width of 5 feet shall connect all buildings to the public Sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.6 - Building Function 
4.6.1 Nothing in this code shall be construed to provide relief from the provision of Section 4.04.00 Supplemental Standards for Specific Uses of the Kennesaw Code or Ordinances, which shall remain in full effect. 
4.6.2 Table 10: Specific Function and Use lists the uses that are permitted by Transect Zone. If a particular use is not listed but the Planning and Zoning Administrator can equate the proposed use to a similar use that is listed, then the use that is not listed may be allowed to locate in the Transect Zone where the equated use is permitted. The uses allowed are those that will benefit from close proximity of uses and foster a pedestrian-oriented environment. 
4.6.3 General to zones T3, T4, T5 
a.  A structure or parcel in each Transect Zone shall conform to the Functions on Table 9: Building Function, Table 10: Specific Function and Use and Table 11: Code Summary. 
b.  Specific uses identified in Table 9 shall apply regardless of whether the use is a permitted use or accessory use. A structure or parcel may contain more than one permitted or accessory use. 
c.  In addition to the accessory uses identified in Table 9, a structure or parcel may also be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
d.  Home Occupation shall be permitted as an accessory use in accordance with Section 4.04.00 of the UDC 
4.6.4 Specific to zone T3 
a.  Accessory Functions of Restricted Lodging or Restricted Office shall be permitted within an Accessory Building. See Table 9: Building Function. 
4.6.5 Specific to zones T5 
a.  Accessory Functions of Limited Lodging or Limited Office shall be permitted within an Accessory Building. See Table 9: Building Function. 
4.6.6 Specific to zone T4-Open 
a.  The Function standards of T5 shall apply. See Table 10. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.7 - Screening and Fencing 
4.7.1 Fences, walls and hedges shall be subject to the following: 
a.  General to zones T3, T4, T5 
i.  Electrical and barbed wire fencing are prohibited. 
ii.  Chain link fencing is prohibited from view from a public Thoroughfare and shall be black or hunter green vinyl clad. 
iii.  Retaining walls shall be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, or decorative concrete modular block. Retaining walls above three feet high shall have a continuous planting of evergreens in front of them. Retaining walls in Historic Areas are subject to the requirements of the Historic District Design Standards. 
b.  Specific to zones T3, T4 
i.  Where permitted within the First Layer, fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed 48 inches in height. Retaining walls are excluded from this requirement. 
ii.  Fences shall be a maximum of 50% opaque in the First Layer. 
iii.  In all other locations fences and walls shall not exceed 6 feet in height and shall be at maximum of 50% opaque above 48 inches in height. This requirement shall not apply to fences and walls screening refuse areas or loading docks. 
c.  Specific to zones T5, and Special Districts 
i.  Within the first Layer, fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed 54 inches in height. Retaining walls are excluded from this requirement. 
ii.  Fences shall be a maximum of 50% opaque in the First Layer. 
iii.  In all other locations fences and walls shall not exceed 6 feet in height and may be 100% opaque. 
iv.  Chain link fencing is prohibited. 
4.7.2 The following elements shall be screened from view of any A-Grid or Civic Space as set forth below. To comply with the maximum height requirements above, any screening that exceeds the maximum requirements for the First Layer shall not be located within it. 
a.  Loading docks and service areas shall be screened by either: 
i.  A minimum 6 foot high 100% opaque fence matching the material of the building; or 
ii.  An 8 foot wide landscape strip planted with a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. Shrubs shall be moderately growing, be a minimum height of 42 inches at time of planting, reach a minimum height of 6 feet within two years of planting, and all plant materials shall be equal to or surpass specifications as defined in the current issue of "American Standards for Nursery Stock," published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. 
b.  Open Parking or gas fueling bays shall be screened by a continuous screen of evergreen plantings. Said screen shall be 3 feet in height at planting and 4 feet minimum height at maturity and 3 to 8 feet in width at maturity. 
4.7.3 Refuse areas (dumpsters) shall be placed in the least visible location from Thoroughfares, and shall be enclosed with vertically enclosed opaque walls one foot higher than the dumpster. Where wall enclosures are provided they shall be faced in a material compatible with the exterior wall material of the Principal Building. 
4.7.4 Mechanical features such as HVAC condensers, electrical transformers, heat pumps, and similar features shall not be placed in the First Layer and shall be screened from view of any Thoroughfare, Civic Space, or any property zoned, used, or developed for Residential Functions, by one of the following means: 
a.  Placement behind the building; 
b.  100% opaque fencing which shall be constructed of the same type of exterior material used for the Principal Building; or 
c.  By a berm or vegetative screening. The screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs, be a minimum of 42 inches in height at time of planting, and reach a minimum height of 6 feet within two years of planting. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.8 - Off-Street Parking and Loading 
4.8.1 Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 6.06 Off-Street Parking Facilities of this ordinance except where alternate standards have been approved by the Mayor and City Council within a Regulating Plan or Special Area Plan, or as set forth below. 
4.8.2 The parking requirements of Section 6.06 may be satisfied off-site subject to the following: 
a.  Said off-site parking shall be located within 600 feet of the Principal Entrance of the use it serves, as measured along the pedestrian walkway; 
b.  Said off-site parking shall be located within this zoning district; 
c.  Applicants shall submit an executed and court recorded parking agreement from the off-site parking property owner granting the applicant the right of sole use of the specific number of parking spaces to be utilized; and 
d.  All off-site parking spaces shall be clearly marked and signed. 
4.8.3 A reduction of the parking requirements of Section 6.06 may be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  Applicants for shared parking shall submit the following to the Director of Community Development: 
i.  A shared parking analysis using the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Model (latest edition); 
ii.  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed shared parking spaces; and 
iii.  Written consent of property owners and businesses agreeing to the shared parking arrangement, including copies of executed and court recorded agreements for off-site parking, as applicable. 
b.  Uses providing shared parking must have either mutually exclusive or compatibly overlapping normal hours of operations. 
c.  Reductions in the total number of required spaces for shared parking are not permitted unless the Planning and Zoning Administrator determines a reduction is appropriate on a case-by-case basis through use of the ULI Shared Parking Model. 
d.  Renewed parking agreements shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Lapse of a required lease agreement shall terminate the shared parking reduction. 
e.  All shared parking spaces shall be clearly marked and signed as reserved during specified hours. 
f.  Off-site shared parking shall also comply with the requirements of Section 4.8.2. 
4.8.4 On-street parking along the parking lane corresponding to the Lot Frontage shall be used to satisfy parking requirements. 
4.8.5 All Office, Lodging, Retail, Civic, and education Functions, shall provide a minimum of one bicycle or scooter rack to accommodate a minimum of one bicycle or scooter space for every 5,000 square feet of net floor space. Multiple family dwellings shall provide a minimum of one bicycle or scooter rack to accommodate a minimum of one bicycle or scooter space for every 20 units. Said rack(s) shall be located either: 
a.  Within the Public or Private Frontage, or 
b.  Closer than the closest off-street vehicular parking space provided. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.9 - Parking Location Standards 
4.9.1 General to zones T3, T4, T5 
a.  Parking shall be accessed by Rear Alleys or Rear Lanes, when such are available or required. 
b.  Rear Alleys, Rear Lanes, and Driveways on adjacent sites shall connect to provide inter-parcel access to minimize curb cuts and improve street traffic flow. 
4.9.2 Specific to zones T3 
a.  Open Parking areas shall be located at the Second and Third Layers, except that Driveways, drop-offs and unpaved parking areas may be located at the First Layer. 
b.  Garages shall be located at the Third Layer. 
4.9.3 Specific to zones T3, T4 
a.  Driveways at Frontages shall be no wider than 10 feet in the First Layer. (Table 3B: Vehicular Lane/Parking Assemblies, item f Parking Access) 
4.9.4 Specific to zone T4 
a.  All parking areas and garages shall be located at the Second or Third Layer. 
4.9.5 Specific to zones T5 
a.  All Open Parking and Parking Structures shall be located at the Second or Third Layer. 
b.  Vehicular entrances to Open Parking, drive-throughs, and Parking Structures shall be no wider than 12 feet for one-way access and 24 feet for two-way access at the Frontage. 
c.  Pedestrian exits from all Open Parking and Parking Structures shall be directly to a Frontage Line (i.e., not directly into a building) except underground levels which may exit directly into a building. 
d.  Parking Structures on the A-Grid shall have Liner Buildings lining the first and second Stories. 
4.9.6 Specific to Special Districts 
a.  All Open Parking and Parking Structures shall be located at the Second or Third Layer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.10 - Landscape Standards 
4.10.1 General to Zones T3, T4, T5, and Special Districts 
a.  Permitted tree species and caliper within the Private Frontage shall be as established in Chapter 3: Tree Species Selection List. Trees in the Private Frontage shall also comply with the following: 
i.  No more than 33 percent of the trees shall be the same species, and 
ii  At least 70 percent of the trees shall be listed as trees with a medium or large canopy. 
b.  The property owner is responsible for maintaining all required landscaping in good health and condition. Any dead, unhealthy, damaged or missing landscaping and screening shall be replaced with landscaping that conforms to this code within 90 days, or within 180 days where weather concerns would jeopardize the health of plant materials. The standards of 3.07.07 still apply to trees as part of the landscaping. 
4.10.2 General to zones T3, T4, T5 
a.  Impervious surface shall be confined to the ratio of Lot coverage specified in Table 11: Code Summary, item e Lot Occupation. 
4.10.3 Specific to zones T3, T4 
a.  The First Layer shall be landscaped with live grass, trees, shrubs, hedges and other landscaping materials approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and shall not be paved, with the exception of Driveways as specified in Section 4.9.2 and Section 4.9.3. Species selected should be ecologically compatible with the site, and non-living materials should be consistent with the historic character of the area. 
b.  On-site stormwater management is required; however, connection to a city regional stormwater management facility, if available in the basin, is mandatory. 
4.10.4 Specific to zone T3 
a.  A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the First Layer for each 30 feet of Frontage Line or portion thereof. 
b.  Trees shall be naturalistically clustered. 
4.10.5 Specific to zone T4 
a.  A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the first Layer for each 30 feet of Frontage Line or portion thereof. 
b.  Trees shall be a single species to match the species of Street Trees on the Public Frontage. 
4.10.6 Specific to zone T5 and Special Districts 
a.  Adjacent to Open Parking 
i.  The First Layer shall be landscaped with live grass, shrubs, hedges, and other landscaping materials approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Species selected should be ecologically compatible with the site, and non-living materials should be consistent with the historic character of the area. 
ii.  The First Layer shall be planted with trees spaced a minimum of 30 and a maximum of 60 feet on-center. The spacing may be adjusted to accommodate specific site conditions. 
iii.  The First Layer shall not be paved, with the exception of walkways and Driveways as specified in Section 4.9.2 and Section 4.9.3, the sum of which shall not occupy more than 50% of the area of the First Layer. 
b.  Not adjacent to Open Parking: 
i.  Trees and landscaping shall not be required in the First Layer. 
ii.  The First Layer may be paved to match the pavement of the Public Frontage. 
c.  Open detention or open retention facilities are prohibited. On-site underground stormwater management is required; however, connection to a city regional stormwater management facility, if available in the basin, is mandatory 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.11 - Drive-Through Standards 
4.11.1 Specific to Special Districts 
a.  Drive-through service canopies shall be pitched at an angle and use materials matching the roof of the Principal Building. 
b.  Drive-through facilities and all associated vehicular queuing shall be located at the rear of the Principal Building if feasible, but shall be located at the side if not feasible. 
c.  Vehicular access to a drive-through should be from mid-block or from a Rear Alley to avoid disrupting pedestrian traffic. If a Driveway is necessary it shall be no more than 24 feet wide. 
d.  Drive-through facilities shall be considered accessory structures to a building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.12 - Automobile Fuel Station Standards 
4.12.1 Specific to Special Districts 
a.  Lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare onto the lot where the gas/fueling station is located. 
b.  Gasoline station canopies and pumps: 
i.  Shall be located to the side, or rear of the Principal Building. 
ii.  Pump canopies shall be located at least 50 feet from any interior side or rear property line that adjoins a Residential Function. 
iii.  Shall be buffered from adjoining Residential Functions with an opaque wall between 3.5 and 8 feet in height. Said wall shall be faced in a material compatible with the same exterior wall material of the Principal Building. 
c.  A conforming Principal Building is required and shall be a minimum floor area of 1,600 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.13 - Lighting Standards 
4.13.1 The following lighting standards shall apply in areas regulated by this code except where alternate standards have been approved by the Mayor and City Council within a Special Area Plan. 
4.13.2 Any lighting fixture shall be a cutoff luminary whose source is completely concealed with an opaque housing. Fixtures shall be recessed in the opaque housing. Drop dish refractors are prohibited. This provision includes lights on mounted poles as well as architectural display and decorative lighting visible from a Thoroughfare or Civic Space. Wall pack lighting shall be cut-off down directional. Canopy lighting shall be cut-off down directional. 
4.13.3 All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective for fully shielded fixtures. 
4.13.4 Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 
4.13.5 Mounting fixtures must be modified in such a manner that the cone of the light is not directed at any property line. The minimum mounting height for a pole is 12 feet. The maximum mounting for a pole is 28 feet. Any fixture and pole located within 20 feet of a single family residential district, T3 Zone, or a T4 Zone shall be a Type Four (enclosures that are intended for outdoor use primarily to provide a degree of protection against windblown dust and rain, splashing water, and hose directed water; undamaged by the formation of ice on the enclosure) and forward throw distribution. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.14 - Sign Standards 
4.14.1 The provisions of Section 5.03 Signs shall apply in areas regulated by this code with the following additional standards. 
4.14.2 Freestanding Signs 
a.  All permanent freestanding signs must be ground-based monument signs. 
b.  No sign may exceed 10 feet in height. 
c.  Signs must be setback at least 3 feet from the right-of-way. The Public Works Director or their designee may require additional setback distances based upon site conditions for traffic safety. 
d.  Signs must use materials that match the primary building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
4.15 - Architectural Standards 
4.15.1 The following architectural standards shall apply to all buildings in areas regulated by this code. 
4.15.2 Properties listed within a historic district are subject to the architectural requirements spelled out in the Historic Kennesaw Design Standards and are not subject to 4.15.3, 4.15.4, or 4.15.5. 
4.15.3 General to Zones T3, T4, T5, and Special Districts 
a.  Exterior materials for all buildings may be combined only horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. 
4.15.4 Specific to buildings with a Detached Single Family Home use in Zones T3, T4, T5, and Special Districts. 
a.  Materials. 
i.  The exterior finish material on all Facades shall be limited to brick, manufactured stone, natural stone, wood siding, and/or cementitious siding. 
ii.  Foundations shall be constructed as a distinct building element that contrasts with Facade materials. Exposed above-ground foundations shall be coated or faced in brick, manufactured stone, or natural stone to contrast with façade materials. 
iii.  Synthetic stucco exterior insulation finishing systems are prohibited. 
iv.  Other materials not mentioned above will be reviewed by the plan review committee for appropriateness during the normal application process. If the plan review committee finds the material is inappropriate, the decision can be appealed through a variance process as described in Chapter 9 of the Unified Development Code. 
b.  Windows and Doors along Frontages. 
i.  Where used, shutters shall match one-half the width of the window opening to which they are adjacent. 
ii.  Windows shall provide glass that is clear, unpainted, and not tinted so as to obstruct views into the building. 
iii.  Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited. 
iv.  Windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width. The top of said windows shall generally be in alignment with the top of the adjacent door frame. 
v.  Windows shall have True or Simulated Divided Lights or be one-over-one lights. 
vi.  Windows shall include sills of wood, masonry, stone, cast stone, or terra cotta. 
vii.  Window frames shall be recessed a minimum of 1.5 inches from the exterior façade. 
c.  Roofs. 
i.  Pitched roofs are required and shall be symmetrically sloped no less than 6:12, except that roofs for porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. 
ii.  All roofs shall have a minimum 25-year roof life and no visible roll roofing. 
iii.  Chimneys, where provided, shall extend to the ground and shall be faced in brick or stacked stone. Chimneys shall extend between 3 and 6 feet above the roof line. 
d.  No more than three adjacent row house units shall have the same façade design. Differentiation between adjacent façades may be accomplished by a change in materials, building height, color, roof form or setbacks, provided that the appearance of a separate building is achieved. 
e.  Stoops and porches: 
i.  Porches and stoops along a Frontage shall not be enclosed with screen, wire, or glass. 
ii.  Entry steps leading to porches and stoops along a Frontage shall have enclosed risers. 
4.15.5 General to all other buildings in Zones T3, T4, T5, and Special Districts 
a.  The design of buildings shall conform to Section 4.08.01 City-Wide Architectural Design Standards and to the requirements below. Where the standards do not agree, the standards below shall govern. 
b.  Buildings less than 3,000 sf may elect to follow the standards of 4.15.4 or 4.15.5 
c.  Materials. 
i.  The exterior finish material on all Facades shall be limited to brick, manufactured stone, natural stone, wood siding, and/or cementitious siding. 
ii.  Synthetic stucco exterior insulation finishing systems, concrete masonry, and vinyl siding are prohibited as finish materials. 
iii.  Other materials not mentioned above will be reviewed by the plan review committee for appropriateness during the normal application process. If the plan review committee finds the material is inappropriate, the decision can be appealed through a variance process as described in Chapter 9. 
iv.  All four facades of the building must continue the design attributes and combination of materials. 
d.  Windows and Doors along Frontages. 
i.  Windows shall provide glass that is clear, unpainted, and not tinted so as to obstruct views into the building. 
ii.  Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited 
iii.  Windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width. The top of said windows shall generally be in alignment with the top of the adjacent door frame. 
iv.  Not more than 20 feet of building frontage shall be provided without a door or window. 
e.  Roofs. 
i.  Pitched roofs, if provided, shall be symmetrically sloped no less than 6:12, except that roofs for porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. 
ii.  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 42 inches high, or as required to conceal mechanical equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
[ARTICLE 5. - STANDARDS AND TABLES] 
Table 1: Transect Zone Descriptions. This tables provides descriptions of the character of each Transect Zone. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 2: Modification to Non-Conforming Properties. This table provides descriptions of changes to non-conforming properties that result in conformance with the specifications of this code. Other changes to decrease the degree of non-conformity are also possible. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 3A: Vehicular Lane Dimensions. This table assigns lane widths to Transect Zones. The Design ADT (Average Daily Traffic) is the determinant for each of these sections. The most typical assemblies are shown in Table 3B: Vehicular Lane/Parking Assemblies. Specific requirements for truck and transit bus routes and truck loading shall be decided by the City of Kennesaw Public Works Director or other official as designated by the City Manager. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 3B: Vehicular Lane/Parking Assemblies. The projected design speeds determine the dimensions of the vehicular lanes and Turning Radii assembled for Thoroughfares. Use of standards in this table are subject to approval by the City of Kennesaw Public Works Director or other official as designated by the City Manager. Where on-street Bicycle Lanes or similar bicycle facilities are provided, the paved width shall be increased a corresponding amount. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 4A: Public Frontages - General: The Public Frontage is the area between the private Lot Line and the edge of the vehicular lanes. Dimensions are given in Table 4B: Public Frontages - Specific. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 4B: Public Frontages - Specific. This table assembles prescriptions and dimensions for the Public Frontage elements - Curbs, walkways and Planters - relative to specific Thoroughfare types within Transect Zones. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 4C: Thoroughfare Assemblies: These Thoroughfares are assembled from the elements that appear in Tables 3A: Vehicular Lane Dimensions and 3B: Vehicular Lane/Parking Assemblies and incorporate the Public Frontages of table 4A: Public Frontages - General. The key gives the Thoroughfare type followed by the right-of-way width, followed by the pavement width, and in some instances followed by specialized transportation capability. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 5: Civic Space 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 6: Building Form - Height. This table shows the configurations for different building heights for each Transect Zone. N = maximum height in stories as specified in Table 11: Code Summary. 

TABLE 7: Building Placement. This table approximates the location of the structure relative to the boundaries of each individual Lot, establishing suitable basic building types for each Transect Zone. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 8: Private Frontages. The Private Frontage is the areas between the building Facades and the lot lines. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 9: Building Function. This table categorizes Building functions within Transect Zones. For Specific Function and Use permitted By Right or by Conditional Use Permit, see Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 10: Specific Function and Use. Specific Function and Use. This table expands the categories of Table 9: Building Function to delegate specific principle uses within Function categories by Transect Zone. Uses that are not included or left blank are prohibited. 
P: PERMITTED BY RIGHT  SE: ALLOWED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT  SL: ALLOWED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 11: Code Summary 

1. Minimum setbacks and building separations shall be subject to fire and building code restrictions. 
2. Transect Zone notwithstanding, along State Routes the mininum required frontage buildout shall be 50%. 
3. Additional stories allowed by approved variance in T5 zone. HPC review required, as applicable. 
3.[4.] In T4-Limited and T4-Open different Building Function requirements apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 11A: Code Graphics - T3 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 11B: Code Graphics - T4 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 11C: Code Graphics - T5 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 12: Special Districts. The metrics for each column of this table (SD1, SD2, etc.) are to be filled in for each Special district as they are permitted pursuant to a Regulating Plan or Special Area Plan. Functions may be specifically listed or may reference an existing City of Kennesaw zoning district. More pages can be added. Special Districts that do not have provisions noted herein shall be governed by the standards of any other City of Kennesaw zoning district as set forth in Sections 1.4.4 (c) or (d), as applicable. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
TABLE 13: Definitions Illustrated 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Drive-through facilities are considered accessory to a Retail or Automotive Function. 
 --- (6) --- 
or 15 feet from center line of alley 
 --- () --- 
* In T4-Limited and T4-Open different Building Function requirements apply. 
 --- () --- 
** or 15 feet from center line of alley. 
 --- () --- 
*HPC review required, as applicable. 
 --- () --- 
** or 15 feet from center line of alley. 

ARTICLE 6. - DEFINITION OF TERMS 
DEFINITIONS 
This Article provides definitions for terms in this code that are technical in nature or that otherwise may not reflect a common usage of the term. If a term is not defined in this Article or in Section 1.09.02 Definitions of the Unified Development Code, then the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall determine the correct definition. Items in italics refer to Articles, Sections, or Tables in the code. 
A-Grid : cumulatively, those Thoroughfares that by virtue of their pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, or their future importance to pedestrian connectivity, are held to the highest standards prescribed by this code. See B-Grid. 
Accessory Building: an Outbuilding with an Accessory Unit. 
Accessory Unit: a small apartment sharing ownership and utility connections with a Principal Building; it may or may not be within an Outbuilding. (Syn: ancillary unit) 
Allee: a regularly spaced and aligned row of trees usually planted along both sides of a Thoroughfare or Path. 
Arcade: a Private Frontage conventional for Retail use wherein the Facade is a colonnade supporting habitable space that overlaps the Sidewalk, while the Facade at Sidewalk level remains at the Frontage Line. 
Auto and Vehicle sales: a business selling motorized vehicles including but not limited to automobile and truck sales and service facilities; boat sales and service establishments; Motorcycle, ATV, and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities; Trailer salesrooms and sales lots. Auto and Vehicle sales does not include any other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Avenue (AV): a Thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers, and usually equipped with a landscaped median. 
B-Grid : cumulatively, those Thoroughfares that by virtue of their use, location, or absence of pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, may meet a standard lower than that of the A-Grid. B-Grid Thoroughfares are often privately-owned. See A-Grid. 
Backbuilding: a single-Story structure connecting a Principal Building to an Outbuilding. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Banks/financial institutions: a business dedicated to banking and lending of money including but not limited to Banks/financial institutions and/or automated transfer machines. Banks/financial institutions does include drive-in establishments, check cashing, title loan or any other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Bicycle Lane (BL): a dedicated lane for cycling within a moderate-speed vehicular Thoroughfare, demarcated by striping and having a minimum width of 5 feet. 
Bicycle Route (BR): a Thoroughfare suitable for the shared use of bicycles and automobiles moving at low speeds. 
Block: the aggregate of private Lots, Passages, Rear Alleys and Rear Lanes, circumscribed by Thoroughfares. 
Block Face: the aggregate of all the building Facades on one side of a Block. 
Boulevard (BV): a Thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed, traversing an Urbanized area. Boulevards are usually equipped with Slip Roads buffering Sidewalks and buildings. 
Building Form: the shape of a building, based on its massing, Private Frontage, and height. 
Building Placement: the arrangement of a building on its lot. 
By Right: characterizing a proposal or component of a proposal for a Building Scale Plan (Article 4) that complies with the code and is permitted and processed administratively, without public hearing. See Variance. 
Civic: the term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking. 
Civic Building: a building operated by a city, county, state, or federal government. 
Civic Building Sites: a parcel containing a Civic Building. 
Civic Space: an outdoor area dedicated for public use, but which may be under public or private ownership. Civic Space types are defined by the combination of certain physical constants including the relationships among their intended use, their size, their landscaping and their Enfronting buildings. See Table 5: Civic Space. 
Civic Zone: designation for sites dedicated for Civic Building Sites and Civic Spaces. 
Commercial: the term collectively defining workplace, Office, Retail, and Lodging Functions. 
Commercial Recreation Facility : a facility that provides opportunities for indoor recreation including but not limited to amusement centers, arcades, billiards and pool halls, commercial indoor recreation uses, and nightclubs. Outdoor recreation facilities are considered part of Commercial Recreation Facility, Outdoors. Commercial Recreation Facility does not include Sexually Oriented Business or any other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Commercial Recreation Facility Outdoor : a facility that provides opportunities for outdoor recreation including but not limited to commercial outdoor recreation uses, executive golf courses, golf courses (18-hole regulation; private and public), golf courses (par 3), nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes, nonprofit riding stables, outdoor golf driving ranges, private parks, recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses, and zoos. Commercial Recreation Facility does not include any uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Common Yard: a planted Private Frontage wherein the Facade is set back from the Frontage line. It is visually continuous with adjacent yards. See Table 8: Private Frontages . 
Community Meeting Facility : a facility that can host public meetings including but not limited to assembly halls; clubs or lodges (noncommercial); and private community centers. Community Meeting Facility does not include any uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Cottage: an Edgeyard Building type containing a single-family dwelling, on its own Lot, often shared with an Accessory Building in the back yard. 
Courtyard Building: a building that occupies the boundaries of its Lot while internally defining one or more private patios. See Table 8: Private Frontages. 
Curb: the edge of the vehicular pavement that may be raised or flush to a swale. It usually incorporates the drainage system. See Table 4A: Public Frontages - General and Table 4B: Public Frontages - Specific. 
Design Speed: is the velocity at which a Thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement. There are three ranges of speed: Low: (25 MPH); Moderate: (25-35 MPH); High: (above 35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired Design Speed. See Table 3A: Vehicular Lane Dimensions. 
Dooryard: a Private Frontage type with a shallow Setback and front garden or patio, usually with a low wall at the Frontage Line. See Table 8: Private Frontages. (Variant: Lightwell ) 
Downtown Activity Center: land use designation for the downtown Kennesaw area as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan. 
Drive: a Thoroughfare along the boundary between an Urbanized and a natural condition, usually along a waterfront, Park, or promontory. One side has the urban character of a Thoroughfare, with Sidewalk and building, while the other has the qualities of a Road or parkway, with naturalistic planting and rural details. 
Drive-Through Facilities: any structure which permits a vehicle to drive to and conduct a transaction while remaining in the vehicle including but not limited to drive-in theaters, drive-thru ATMs or tellers, and drive-thru restaurants. Drive-Through Facilities does not include any uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use . 
Edgeyard Building: a building that occupies the center of its Lot with Setbacks on all sides. See Table 7: Building Placement. 
Effective Turning Radius: the measurement of the inside Turning Radius taking parked cars into account. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Elevation: an exterior wall of a building not along a Frontage Line. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. See: Facade. 
Encroach: to break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a Setback, into the Public Frontage, or above a height limit. 
Encroachment: any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a Setback, into the Public Frontage, or above a height limit. 
Enfront: to place an element along a Frontage, as in "porches Enfront the street." 
Facade: the exterior wall of a building that is set along a Frontage Line. See Elevation. 
First Layer: the privately held Layer between the Frontage Line and the Principal Building front Setback shown in Table 11: Code Summary. Where both a minimum and maximum Setback exists, the First Layer shall extend to the maximum. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Fitness/Health Facility : Any facility that promotes healthy living through exercise including athletic and health clubs and gyms. Fitness/Health Facility does not include any Medical uses or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use . 
Forecourt: a Private Frontage wherein a portion of the Facade is close to the Frontage Line and the central portion is set back. See Table 8: Private Frontages. 
Frontage: the area between a building Facade and the vehicular lanes, inclusive of its built and planted components. Frontage is divided into Private Frontage and Public Frontage. See Table 4A: Public Frontages - General and Table 8: Private Frontages. 
Frontage Line: a line bordering a Public Frontage that may or not be congruent with the Lot Line. Facades facing Frontage Lines define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the Elevations facing other Lot Lines. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Function: the use or uses accommodated by a building and its Lot, categorized as Restricted, Limited, or Open , according to the intensity of the use. See Table 9: Building Function and Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Gallery: a Private Frontage conventional for Retail use wherein the Facade is aligned close to the Frontage Line with an attached cantilevered shed or lightweight colonnade overlapping the Sidewalk. See Table 8: Private Frontages. 
Gardening: any use which allows for the non-commercial growing of plants including but not limited to home gardens; community gardens; and the growing of fruit trees, nuts, and vegetables. Gardening does not include commercial operations or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use. 
Gas station : any use which sells gasoline or diesel fuel from pumps including Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales; Full service gasoline stations. Gas station does not include convenience stores without gasoline or diesel pumps or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use. 
General Retail: a business whose primary use is the sale of merchandise to consumers, specifically including, but not limited to agricultural produce stands; community retail uses; farm and garden supply stores; farmers markets (fully enclosed); fruit stores, markets; neighborhood retail uses; office service and supply establishments; and millinery or similar trade whenever products are sold retail, exclusively on the site where produced. General Retail does not include cigar, smoke shops, tobacco stores; flea markets; growler sales; pawn shops, regional shopping centers; restaurants and cafes; sexually oriented businesses; or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use. 
General Service: a business whose primary use is to provide a service, specifically including, but not limited to, film developing and printing facilities; laundry and dry cleaning pick-up establishments; linen and diaper services; massage therapy; nonautomotive repair service establishments; self-service laundry facilities, spas and salons. General Service does not include financial establishments, banks, check cashing establishments, tattoo businesses, or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use . 
Green: a Civic Space type for structured or unstructured recreation, spatially defined by landscaping rather than building Frontages. See Table 5. 
Greenway: an open space corridor which includes a continuous Multi-Use Trail. 
Gross Site Area: all land within a site's boundaries. 
Highway: a rural and suburban Thoroughfare of high vehicular speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural Transect Zones (T-2, and T-3). 
Home Occupation: Non-Retail Commercial enterprises. The work quarters should be invisible from the Frontage, located either within the house or in an Outbuilding. Permitted activities are defined by the Restricted Office category. See Table 9: Building Function. 
House : an Edgeyard Building type containing a single-family dwelling on a large Lot, often shared with an Accessory Building in the back yard. (Syn: single.) 
Industrial: for the purpose of uses, Industrial means any use which can generate a significant amount of noise, vibration, smells, or other emissions this includes but is not limited to major appliance repair; dry cleaning plants; fuel and ice dealers; mining or other extractive industries; newspaper publishing facilities; railroad car classification yards; temporary sawmills; self-service storage facilities; shooting ranges; and vending machine sales, service, rental, or repair establishments. Industrial does not include truck or freight terminals or scrap and dismantling yards or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use . 
Layer: a range of depth of a Lot within which certain elements are permitted. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Lightwell: A Private Frontage type that is a below-grade entrance or recess designed to allow light into basements. See Table 8: Private Frontages. 
Liner Building: a building specifically designed to mask a parking lot or a Parking Structure from a Frontage. 
Live-Work: Nonresidential activity conducted wholly within a residential dwelling that allows employees, customers, clients or patrons to visit. 
Lodging: premises available for daily renting of guest rooms. See Table 9: Building Function and Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Lot Line: the boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a lot. 
Lot Width: the length of the Principal Frontage Line of a lot. 
Manufacturing: premises available for the creation, assemblage and/or repair of objects, using table-mounted electrical machinery or artisanal equipment, and including their Retail sale. 
Medical: for the purposes of uses, medical is any organization that provides medical care or support including but not limited to ambulance services; clinics; massage therapy; medical and dental laboratories (provided that no chemicals are manufactured on site); medical research centers; pain management clinic; research testing laboratories; and sports/medical physical therapy. Medical does not include hospitals or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use . 
Mixed Use: multiple Functions within the same building through superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency. 
Multi-Family Housing: a residential facility that provides long-term housing including but not limited to condominiums; and multifamily dwelling units. Multi-Family Housing does not include Lodging or uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use . 
Multi-Use Trail (MT): a shared paved pedestrian and bicycle way running independent of a vehicular Thoroughfare and having a minimum width of 12 feet and a maximum width of 20 feet. 
Net Site Area: all land within a site's boundaries except any part or parts of rivers, streams, floodplains, and natural lakes. 
Office: premises available for the transaction of general business but excluding Retail, Service, and Industrial Functions. For the purposes of uses office includes but is not limited to corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses; photography studios; professional offices; wholesale sales offices; and wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms. Office does not include Live/Work Units or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and use . 
Open Parking: an uncovered parking area not within a Parking Structure. (Syn: parking lot) 
Outbuilding: an Accessory Building, usually located toward the rear of the same Lot as a Principal Building, and sometimes connected to the Principal Building by a Backbuilding. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Park: a Civic Space type that is a natural preserve available for structured or unstructured recreation. See Table 5. 
Parking Structure: a building containing either two or more levels of above ground parking or one or more level of basement parking. 
Passage (PS): a pedestrian connector, open or roofed, that passes between buildings to provide shortcuts through long Blocks and connect rear parking areas to Frontages. 
Path (PT): a pedestrian way traversing a Park or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space, ideally connecting directly with the urban Sidewalk network. 
Planter: the element of the Public Frontage which usually accommodates street trees, whether continuous or individual. The Planter shall be located between the Sidewalk and the Curb. 
Plaza: a Civic Space type designed for Civic purposes and Commercial activities in the more urban Transect Zones, generally paved and spatially defined by building Frontages. 
Principal Building: the main building on a Lot, usually located toward the Frontage. A Lot may contain more than one Principal Building. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Principal Entrance: the main point of access for pedestrians into a building. 
Principal Frontage: On corner Lots, the Private Frontage designated to bear the address and Principal Entrance to the building, and the measure of minimum Lot width. Prescriptions for the parking Layers pertain only to the Principal Frontage. Prescriptions for the First Layer pertain to both Frontages of a corner Lot. See Frontage. 
Private Frontage: the privately held Layer between the Frontage Line and the Principal Building Facade that bears the Principal Entrance to the building. See Table 8: Private Frontages and Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Public Frontage: the area between the Curb of the vehicular lanes and the Frontage Line. See Table 4A: Public Frontages - General and Table 4B: Public Frontages - Specific. 
Rear Alley (RA): a privately owned and maintained vehicular way located to the rear of Lots providing access to service areas, parking, and Outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear Alleys should be paved from building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll Curbs at the edges. 
Rear Lane (RL): a privately owned and maintained vehicular way located to the rear of Lots providing access to service areas, parking, and Outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear Lanes may be paved lightly to Driveway standards. The streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges, has no raised Curb, and is drained by percolation. 
Rearyard Building: a building that occupies the full Frontage Line, leaving the rear of the Lot as the sole yard. See Table 7: Building Placement. (Var: Rowhouse, Townhouse line prescribed for the full width of a Facade, above which there is a Stepback of a minimum distance, such that the height to this line (not the overall building height) effectively defines the enclosure of the enfronting public space.) See Table 6: Building Form - Height. 
Regulating Plan: a Zoning Map or set of maps that shows the Transect Zones, Civic Zones, Special Districts if any, Thoroughfares, and Special Requirements if any, of areas subject to regulation by this code. 
Residential: characterizing premises available for long-term human dwelling. 
Restaurants and Cafes: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, such place seating a minimum of 40 or more people, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating; and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. Restaurants and Cafes includes but is not limited to commercial recreation restaurants, eating and drinking establishments, hookah bars, mobile food vending units, and sit down dining restaurants. Restaurants and Cafes does not include drive-in restaurants or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Retail: characterizing premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service. See Table 10: Specific Function and Use and Table 11: Code Summary. 
Retail Frontage: Frontage designated on a Regulating Plan that requires or recommends the provision of a Shopfront, encouraging the ground level to be available for Retail use. See Special Requirements. 
Road (RD): a local, rural and suburban Thoroughfare of low-to-moderate vehicular speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural Transect Zones (T2-T3). 
Rowhouse: a single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another of the same type, is located in a row of at least three and not more than eight dwellings of the same type, and occupies the full Frontage Line. See Rearyard Building. (Syn: Townhouse ) 
Scrap and Dismantling Yards: for the purpose of uses, a facility that stores and dismantles large pieces of equipment including but not limited to automotive storage yards and wrecker service. Scrap and Dismantling Yards does not include uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Secondary Frontage: on corner Lots, the Private Frontage that is not the Principal Frontage. As it affects the public realm, its First Layer is regulated. See Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Setback: the area of a Lot measured from the Frontage Line or, in the absence of Frontage Line, the Lot line, to a building Facade or Elevation that is maintained clear of permanent structures, with the exception of Encroachments listed in Section 4.5. See Table 11: Code Summary, item f. 
Shopfront: a Private Frontage conventional for Retail use, with substantial glazing and an awning, wherein the Facade is aligned close to the Frontage Line with the building entrance at Sidewalk grade. See Table 8: Private Frontages. 
Sidewalk: the paved section of the Public Frontage dedicated exclusively to pedestrian activity. 
Sideyard Building: a building that occupies one side of the Lot with a Setback on the other side. This type can be a Single or Twin depending on whether it abuts the neighboring house. See Table 7: Building Placement. 
Simulated Divided Lights: a method of constructing windows in which muntins are affixed to the inside and outside of a panel of insulating glass to simulate the look of true divided light. 
Slip Road: an outer vehicular lane or lanes of a Thoroughfare, designed for slow speeds while inner lanes carry higher speed traffic, and separated from them by a planted median. (Syn: access lane, service lane) 
Special Area Plan: an area of 15 acres or more of contiguous lots within an area subject to a Regulating Plan which, because of its size, may establish unique requirements upon approval of the Mayor and City Council. 
Special District (SD): an area that, by its intrinsic Function, Building Placement, or Building Form, cannot or should not conform to one or more of the Transect Zones specified by this code. 
Specialized Building: a building that is not subject to Residential, Commercial, or Lodging classification. See Table 6: Building Form - Height. 
Special Requirements: provisions of Section 4.3 of this code and/or the associated designations on a Regulating Plan. 
Sports and Entertainment Assembly Facility: any venue which hosts large assemblies for the purposes of entertainment including but not limited to amphitheaters, coliseums, stadiums, and convention centers (privately owned). Sports and Entertainment Assembly Facility does not include uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Square: a Civic Space type designed for structured or unstructured recreation and Civic purposes, spatially defined by building Frontages and consisting of Paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. S ee Table 5. 
State Route: a Thoroughfare under the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Stepback: a building Setback of at least 10 feet that occurs at a prescribed number of Stories above the ground. See Table 6: Building Form - Height. 
Stoop: a Private Frontage wherein the Facade is aligned close to the Frontage Line with the first Story elevated from the Sidewalk for privacy, with an exterior stair and landing at the entrance. See Table 7: Building Placement. 
Story: a habitable level within a building, excluding an attic. A basement shall be considered as a story if subdivided or used for dwelling or business purposes. See Table 6: Building Form - Height. 
Street (ST): a local urban Thoroughfare of low speed and capacity. 
Substantial Modification: alteration to an existing building that is valued at more than 60% of the replacement cost of the entire building, if built new according to current standards. 
Swale: a low or slightly depressed natural area for drainage. 
T-zone: Transect Zone. 
Temporary Use: any use that is expect to last for less than 30 days including but not limited to community fairs and other temporary uses. Temporary use does not include uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Thoroughfare: a public or private way for use by vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to Lots and Open Spaces, consisting of Vehicular Lanes and the Public Frontage. See Table 3A: Vehicular Lane Dimensions, Table 3B: Vehicular Lane/Parking Assemblies, and Table 14: Definitions Illustrated, item a. 
Townhouse: See Rearyard Building. (Syn: Rowhouse ) 
Transect: a cross-section of the environment showing a range of different habitats. The rural-urban Transect of the human environment is divided into six Transect Zones. These zones describe the physical form and character of a place, according to the Density and intensity of its land use and Urbanism. 
Transect Zone (T-zone): one of several geographic areas regulated by this code. Transect Zones are administratively similar to the land use zones in conventional codes, except that in addition to the usual building use, Density, height, and Setback requirements, other elements of the intended habitat are integrated, including those of the private Lot and building and Public Frontage. See Table 1. 
Transit Station or Terminal: a facility that can accommodate two or more transit vehicles for the purposes of loading and unloading passengers including but not limited to bus stations, commuter rail stations, taxi stands and dispatching agencies. Transit Station or Terminal does not include Truck or Freight Terminals or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Truck or Freight Terminal: a facility that can accommodate two or more transit vehicles or trucks for the purpose of loading and unloading freight including but not limited to bus stations for freight, railroad stations for freight, transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities, and truck terminals. Truck or Freight terminals does not include loading docks associated with a retail facility or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
True Divided Lights: A term that refers to windows in which multiple individual panes of glass or lights are assembled in the sash using muntins. 
Turning Radius: the curved edge of a Thoroughfare at an intersection, measured at the inside edge of the vehicular tracking. The smaller the Turning Radius, the smaller the pedestrian crossing distance, and the more slowly the vehicle is forced to make the turn. See Table 3B: Vehicular Lane/Parking Assemblies and Table 14: Definitions Illustrated. 
Urbanism: collective term for the condition of a compact, Mixed Use settlement, including the physical form of its development and its environmental, functional, economic, and sociocultural aspects. 
Urbanized: generally, developed. Specific to this code, developed at T3 (Sub-Urban) Density or higher. 
Vehicular Service: the repair, servicing, alteration, restoration, painting, cleaning, or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. Vehicular services includes but is not limited to automotive paint and body repair shops, automotive repair and maintenance facilities, automotive upholstery shops, car washes, emissions/inspection stations, and heavy automotive repair. Vehicular Service does not include automobile service and repair that is part of an automotive sales dealership on the same site, automobile wrecking, automobile junkyards, or salvage yards or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Wholesale and Distribution: any use that sells merchandise primarily to retailers or specific trades or which transports retail or wholesale goods including but not limited to wholesale building materials stores; contractors including general, heavy, and special office/warehouse space; plumbing and/or heating equipment dealers; and electrical supply stores. Wholesale and Distribution does not include Truck or Freight terminals or other uses specifically set forth in Table 10: Specific Function and Use. 
Yield: characterizing a Thoroughfare that has two-way traffic but only one effective travel lane because of parked cars, necessitating slow movement and driver negotiation. Also, characterizing parking on such a Thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 

(Ord. No. 2016-03, Att., 3-7-16) 
Chapter 5 - STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES 
5.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The provisions of Chapter 5 apply to accessory uses, accessory structures, and temporary uses. Standards pertaining to accessory structures are set forth in Section 5.01.00. Standards for Temporary Structures and Uses are set forth in Section 5.02.00. Standards for Signs, which may be either accessory structures, or the principal use on a parcel, are provided in Section 5.03.00. Standards for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, which may be located on a lot or parcel with a principal use, or which may be the principal use, are provided in Section 5.04.00. 
5.01.00 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 

5.01.01 - Generally 
An accessory structure is defined as a structure on the same lot with, and of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
5.01.02 - Standards for Accessory Uses 
A.  Any accessory building or structure in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross space: 
1.  Shall be located to the rear of the primary structure at least 100 feet from any property line; 
2.  Must have the approval of the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee as to the location, architectural design, and size prior to construction; and 
3.  Shall be required to submit for plan review through the inspections department or receive approval from the building official or his/her designee. 
B.  Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Maximum height of two (2) stories or 35 feet; 
2.  Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds; 
3.  All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads which may be located on the side or rear; 
4.  The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings; 
5.  Architectural style and design to be approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee; 
6.  Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal subject to the limitations below; 
7.  No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced; 
8.  On a corner lot no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building; 
9.  No garage or other accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers whichever is greater; 
10.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. This shall not apply to decks. 
11.  Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material is incidental to the permitted use (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee) and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed, principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure; 
12.  Car washes accessory to convenience stores with self-service fuel are permitted; 
13.  Freestanding parking garages are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Maximum height of 55 feet with no more than four stories; 
b.  When abutting any residential property line, freestanding parking garages shall not be located within any required buffers; and 
c.  When abutting any other nonresidential district, no freestanding garage shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
14.  Heating and air conditioning units are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers; 
b.  When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating [and] air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line; 
c.  Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated herein and they are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view; and 
d.  No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
5.01.03 - Charitable Collection Receptacle Registration and Standards 
A.  Definitions. 
Charitable Collection Receptacle: Any unattended receptacle or container made of metal, steel, or any other material designed or intended for the collection and temporary storage of charitable donations of clothing, books, personal or household items of other goods, which shall not include containers for the purpose of collecting monetary donations. 
Person: Any individual, sole proprietor, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, general partnership or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
B.  Registration Required. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall place, use or employ a charitable collection receptacle, within the City of Kennesaw, for gathering or solicitation purposes, unless the person has registered with the Secretary of State and registered with the City of Kennesaw. 
2.  Owners of charitable collection receptacles must be registered and in good standing with the Secretary of State for the State of Georgia under the Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 17, and as may be amended from time to time. 
D.  Registration Requirements. The registration information shall include: 
1.  A diagram illustrating the precise location where the charitable collection receptacle would be positioned on the property; 
2.  Disclosures prominently displayed as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-8.1, and as may be amended from time to time. 
3.  Written permission of the property owner or his/her authorized representative consenting to the placement, maintenance and associated liabilities of the charitable collection receptacle. 
4.  The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the person which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the receptacle, which can be reached during normal business hours. For the purposes of this ordinance, an answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office. 
E.  Renewal Registration Requirements. An expiring registration may be renewed upon application and payment of a renewal fee in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the office of the City Clerk as established by the Mayor and City Council. In addition to the above application requirements, renewal registrations must include: 
1.  Proof of registration or exemption from such registration with the Secretary of State for the State of Georgia under the Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 17, et seq. 
2.  The name and telephone of the bona fide office of any person which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected via the collection receptacle; and 
F.  Placement of Collection Receptacles. 
1.  The City of Kennesaw shall not grant registration to place, use, or employ a charitable collection receptacle if it determines that the placement of the receptacle could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a charitable collection receptacle within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases; or the placement of a collection receptacle where it interferes with vehicular or pedestrian circulation or presents a fire safety hazard. 
2.  Charitable receptacles shall be permitted only as an accessory use to the principal use on an established lot of record. 
3.  Charitable collection receptacles shall not be located in the Central Business zoning district (CBD) or any residential zoning district classification. 
4.  When located in other districts zoned for commercial, industrial, or office uses, there shall not be more than one charitable receptacle on properties less than one (1) acre in size and no more than two (2) collection receptacles on properties greater than one (1) acre in size. 
5.  The location of the receptacle(s) shall not cause a reduction of the minimum parking requirements or be placed within the landscaped buffers of the hosting lot. 
6.  Designated recycling collection centers, as defined by the City of Kennesaw Unified Development Code, shall be governed by the terms of the Unified Development Code and any applicable state law. 
7.  The person placing the charitable collection receptacle shall keep the area around the charitable collection receptacle free of litter at all times. Graffiti shall be removed from the receptacle within 48 hours of discovery. The collection receptacle shall be maintained, painted or otherwise un-rusted and un-dented and in good repair. 
8.  The charitable collection receptacle(s) must be cleared of contents at least once per week. 
9.  The charitable collection receptacle(s) shall not exceed a capacity of 512 cubic feet. 
10.  All charitable collection receptacle(s) must be safely designed or secured in a manner that prevents tipping over and prevents children from entering the collection receptacle. 
G.  Display of State Registration. The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the charitable collection receptacle: 
1.  The registration number and its date of expiration stating that a copy of the registration information is on file with the City of Kennesaw. 
2.  Each charitable collection receptacle must bear the information required by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-8.1. 
H.  Receipt, investigation of complaints relative to charitable collection receptacle. 
1.  Code Enforcement shall receive and investigate any complaints from the public regarding a charitable collection receptacle and shall report said findings to the Secretary of State for disposition and clean-up., or, may undertake such steps as may be provided by State Law prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 43-17-8 et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-22, Exh. A, 10-15-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-22, Exh. A, adopted Oct. 15, 2018, amended § 5.01.03 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.01.03 pertained to charitable donation bin standards and derived from Ord. No. 2013-13, adopted July 15, 2013. 
5.02.00 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES 

5.02.01 - Mobile Food Vendor Ordinance 
5.02.02 - Definition 
Hours of Operation: Hours of Operation shall mean the time period from 7:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. each day. 
Mobile Food Vending Unit: Mobile food vending unit shall mean any motorized vehicle designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is peddled, vended, sold for sale or given away. 
Permitted Locations: Mobile Food Vending Units are allowed to operate on improved private property only within the following specific locations and zoning districts: 
1.  Private property in the following zoning districts: general commercial; highway general business; neighborhood retail commercial; light industrial and, central business district. 
2.  The following specific locations: 
a.  Property containing three (3) acres or more currently under new building construction with a current City building and development permits. The project site must be in active status as verified by the City building official. 
b.  On property owned or leased by the City and the food is served during an event that is sanctioned and/or approved by the City. 
c.  Residential locations in the following zoning districts - R-30, R-20, R-15, R-12, R-10, PUD-R, RA-4, FST and subject to the residential standards in section 5.02.03.2 c. 
The City of Kennesaw Planning and Zoning Department will verify all proposed locations for vendor units meet the standards for the zoning district under the Unified Development Code. All permitted locations approved for the placement and operation of any mobile food vending units must maintain a minimum distance of one hundred feet (100') from any building housing an established licensed eating and drinking establishment as defined under the Code of Ordinances, City of Kennesaw. 
Permitted Signage: Permitted signage shall mean any signage marketing and/or advertising for any mobile vending unit that meet the following requirements: 
1.  Sandwich board signage located on the premises of where the mobile vending unit is operating while the mobile vending unit is actually operating. 
2.  Wall signage that is safely affixed to the mobile food vending unit so as to be flat against the surface of that mobile vending unit. 
Prohibited Signage: Prohibited signage shall mean any signage of any type, that is erected or maintained on a right-of-way owned or maintained by the City, Cobb County, or the State; and, any and all signage located off the premises where the mobile vending unit is operating. 
Signage: Signage shall mean any type of design or artwork that advertises the use of a mobile vending unit or which contains the name of a mobile vending unit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15) 
5.02.03 - Business License Requirement. 
1.  The person or business entity owning or operating a mobile vending unit shall not operate those mobile vending units within the City at any permitted location unless and until such person or business entity has obtained a mobile food vending permit from the City. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of a City mobile vending permit, the person applying for a mobile food vending permit under this article must show compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  Each mobile food vending unit which will be engaged in the selling of cooked or prepared food must be licensed by the State of Georgia Health Department. A copy of the license of each mobile vending unit to be operated within the City must be submitted with the mobile food vending permit application. 
b.  Each mobile food vending unit that will be operated in the City must have a current inspection by the health department which must be conspicuously posted on the mobile vending unit. A copy of the current inspection of each mobile vending unit to be operated within the City must be submitted with the mobile food vending permit application. 
c.  Each mobile food vending permit must have a business license from the jurisdiction of the mobile food vendor. A copy of the business license must be submitted with the mobile food vending permit application. 
d.  Mobile Food Vendors located in residential zoning districts as defined in Section 5.02.02 c shall possess and maintain the following: 
i.  Health department certificates for each of the vendors. 
ii.  Business license of the home jurisdiction of the mobile food vendors. A copy of the business license must be submitted with the mobile vending permit application. 
iii.  Location map of mobile food vendor location on subject property. 
iv.  Letter of approval from adjacent property owners, property owners of subject property, Home Owners Associations and all other parties that have authority over subject property location. 
v.  Residential mobile food vendor applications must be submitted at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the event. 
3.  That a mobile vending unit is licensed by the health department does not guarantee that the City will issue a permit for the mobile food vending unit or that the City will approve the mobile food vending unit for any permitted locations. 
4.  All mobile food vending permit applications submitted under this article must be reviewed and approved by the following departments of the City: 
a.  The Business License Department which will verify that all State licensing requirements have been satisfied and that the application is complete. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Department which will review the application to assure the location and district standard requirements are met; 
c.  The Police Department which will review the application to verify if any existing safety violations for the applicant are pending. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15) 
5.02.04 - Permitted Location Application 
1.  Either after receipt of a business license from the City or contemporaneously with the application for a business license, each mobile vending unit must obtain approval for each permitted location at which it intends to operate. To obtain such approval, the owner or operator of each such mobile vending unit to be operated in the City must submit an application for permitted location which requires the following information: 
a.  The applicant shall complete and submit all information required by the application form supplied by the City. 
b.  A copy of either the business license issued by the City or a pending application for a business license with the City. If a copy of the application is submitted, copies of all attachments must also be submitted. 
c.  A list of all locations at which the applicant wants to operate a mobile vending unit. 
d.  A location plan of each permitted location at which the mobile vending unit wants to operate that has been prepared by a surveyor licensed by the State of Georgia. That location plan must identify where the mobile food vending unit will be located. Each such plan shall be no smaller than 8 ½" x 11". Each such plan shall illustrate the distance measured from the mobile vendor unit to the building location of the nearest established eating and drinking establishments. 
e.  A written approval from the property owner of record for such occupancy. 
f.  A written statement that the location contains hardened treated surface and designated parking spaces for unit and patrons or customers. 
g.  A signed affidavit from the applicant that the mobile vending unit will not transport alcoholic beverages to the permitted location and will not sell or give alcoholic beverages at the permitted location to any of its patrons or customers. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
5.02.05 - Requirements and Restrictions 
Failure of an owner or operator of a mobile vending unit to abide by the following requirements and restrictions shall constitute a violation of this article: 
1.  A mobile vending unit shall operate only during the hours of operation. Operation of a mobile vending unit outside of the hours of operation shall be a violation of this article. 
2.  A mobile vending unit shall not operate at any location that is considered to be a permitted location unless and until that mobile vending unit is approved to operate at that location by the City. To be approved for any permitted location, each mobile vending unit must submit an application on forms provided by the City. 
3.  Any mobile vending unit which begins operating at a permitted location without securing all permits shall be in violation of this article. 
4.  A mobile vending unit shall not arrive to operate at a permitted location more than thirty (30) minutes prior to the time it intends to operate or prior to 6:30 a.m., whichever is later. 
5.  A mobile vending unit shall not stay at a permitted location more than thirty (30) minutes after it is done operating or later than 12:30 a.m. on any day, whichever is earlier. 
6.  Any semi-permanent structure used and/or associated with the mobile vending operation shall also be removed from the site during hours of non-operation. 
7.  A vending unit shall use only permitted signage and shall not use any prohibited signage. 
8.  Mobile vending units shall not utilize any temporary connections to potable water. All water used by a mobile vending unit shall be provided an internal tank within that mobile vending unit. The mobile vending unit shall also not replenish that internal tank at the permitted location. 
9.  All electricity to the mobile vending unit shall be from a generator or a main power supply via a portable cord that is in conformance with the Electrical Code of the City. 
10.  A mobile vending unit shall not make use of any outdoor cooking facilities. To the extent that cooking is done at a permitted location, it shall be done within the confines of the mobile vending unit. 
11.  A mobile vending unit shall not, at any time, utilize outdoor storage or devices to warm or refrigerate food with the exception of storage for disposable tableware. 
12.  A drive through shall not be used at any mobile vending unit. 
13.  A person operating a mobile vending unit shall not conduct business with or accept orders from any patrons or customers while such patrons or customers are in their motor vehicles. 
14.  The area within which a mobile vending unit is operating shall, at all times, be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubble and debris. To that end, each mobile vending unit must provide a trash or garbage receptacle in which patrons or customers may place their litter or garbage. The receptacle shall be within ten feet (10') of the mobile vending unit. The operator of the mobile vending unit must remove this litter or garbage from the permitted location when he or she leaves the permitted location. 
15.  A mobile vending unit shall not use amplified music of any type. This restriction shall not apply to the operation of a vehicle operated solely as an ice cream truck and which does not sell any other type of food. 
16.  A mobile vending unit shall not use temporary or portable lighting outside of that necessary to illuminate the inside of the unit and the serving area of the unit. 
17.  All of the following shall be posted on each mobile vending unit in a conspicuous place: 
a.  The current business license; 
b.  A list of the locations at which the City is the mobile vending unit is permitted to operate; 
c.  A copy of the mobile food vending permit issued by the City of Kennesaw. 
18.  A mobile vending unit operating at or participating in any event sponsored, authorized, or approved by the City shall pay the registration fees set forth or required by the Code of Ordinances, City of Kennesaw. Such fees shall be paid prior to the event. 
19.  A person who operates a mobile food establishment shall not go into a park owned or operated by the City, the County, or the United States of America to sell, offer for sale, or display a food item, unless the person's activity is authorized by a rental agreement or written permission of the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department of the City. 
20.  Parking requirements and restrictions: 
a.  Mobile food vendors shall secure a minimum of two (2) dedicated parking spaces for customers utilizing their services. 
b.  Parking spaces shall be marked as required by zoning regulations. 
c.  Parking spaces shall meet the size requirements established by the City. 
d.  Mobile food vendors shall not sell to customers parked in areas designated as public rights-of-way. 
21.  Residential mobile food vendor permit approvals will be valid for thirty days from issuance. Maximum per location per calendar year is sixty days for each location. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15) 
5.02.06 - Enforcement 
The provisions of this article may be enforced through the City's code enforcement procedures or as otherwise authorized in this Code and may be pursued by appropriate remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction. The remedies that the City may pursue for a violation of this article include: 
1.  Any violation of this article may be punished as provided for in section 1-11 of article 1 of the Code of Ordinances, Kennesaw, Georgia; 
2.  Revocation of the business license of the owner or operator of the mobile vending unit found in violation of this article; 
3.  Refusal of the City to renew the business license of the owner or operator of the mobile vending unit found in violation of this article; 
4.  If code enforcement is utilized to enforce this article, a resulting code enforcement lien may be assessed against the private property upon which the mobile vending operation operates or operated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
5.03.00 - SIGNS 

5.03.01 - Findings and Purpose 
A.  The Mayor and Council finds as follows: 
1.  The regulations set out in this article are necessary to the fundamental goal of protecting the health, safety and welfare of residents, visitors and businesses in the city. 
2.  A sign by its very nature is designed to draw an individual's attention to that sign. This characteristic makes signs a valuable medium of communication; however, this same characteristic can distract motorists and pedestrians, thus creating traffic hazards. 
3.  The clutter created by an excess in number, size and height of signs creates a distraction to travelers and negatively impacts the general appearance of an area. Signs may lessen the aesthetic qualities and intrude upon the residential character of an area. 
4.  Signs must be regulated to ensure that they are structurally safe and sound. Electrical hazards must be eliminated. 
B.  Proper regulation is necessary to limit the negative impact of signs while encouraging the positive and constructive uses of signs. 
C.  This article regulates signs by zoning district, size, height, location on a lot, number, method of construction, maintenance, illumination and in other ways. The Mayor and Council finds that such controls will improve the general appearance of the city; protect the lives and health of residents and visitors; protect property values and the public investment in roads; have a positive impact upon the economy of the city; and enhance the attractiveness of the city as a place to live, recreate and do business. 
D.  Signs are a valuable means of commercial advertising and noncommercial speech. It is intended for this article to reasonably regulate signs in the City of Kennesaw while showing full deference to the right to engage in constitutionally protected speech. 
5.03.02 - General Regulations 
A.  Applicability. Unless specifically excluded in this article, this article shall govern any sign erected, maintained or located in the City. Signs wholly located within a structure or building and which are intended to be viewed from the interior of the building are not regulated by this article. 
B.  Definitions And Specific Provisions. The names of sign types and other words have special meanings in this UDC. Refer to Chapter One to determine the meaning of words and terms that apply to each type of sign. 
C.  Signs Requiring A Permit. All signs require a permit unless specifically exempted by this article. By way of example and not by limitation, the following types of signs require a permit prior to erection: canopy signs, freestanding signs, wall signs, electronic signs, residential subdivision/development signs, signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones, temporary on-premises signs, semi-permanent directional signs, temporary commercial produce and agricultural product stand signs, temporary residential agricultural farm and wood products and livestock, poultry sale signs and directional signs. Signs which do not require a permit are referenced primarily under Chapter 5.03.15, but may also be referenced in other sections, such as Chapter 5.03.05 
D.  Compliance With Other Laws. All signs shall comply with all federal, state and county laws, municipal ordinances, codes and rules. Compliance with the terms of this article shall not operate to relieve any individual, corporation or other entity of any other duty imposed by law. 
E.  Rights Arising From Permits. A permit issued under this article constitutes a revocable license to maintain a sign. Relocation of a permitted sign may be required in the interest of the public for such causes as road improvements. If the city or any other lawfully constituted state or federal governmental authority, agency, body or utility having the authority of eminent domain condemns property which, as a sole result of such condemnation, creates nonconformity and relocation of a sign is required, enforcement personnel may administratively approve the relocation of the sign outside of the right-of-way without the necessity of a variance. Whenever the sign owner has been fully or partially compensated for the signs during property acquisition or eminent domain proceedings, the relocation shall be treated as a new permit. In determining the point of relocation, enforcement personnel shall consider the following factors: 
1.  Safety. 
2.  Size of sign. 
3.  Shape of sign. 
4.  Height. 
5.  Amount of remaining property. 
6.  Amount of property acquired. 
7.  Topography. A permit issued by the city, that is issued in violation of this article, is void. A permit does not create a vested right to maintain any sign which violates any of the terms of this or any other ordinance or law. 
F.  Protection of Property Rights. Issuance of a permit pursuant to this article shall not serve to waive any applicable protective covenants or private rights of property ownership. 
G.  Zoning District Regulations. A sign can only be erected in a zoning district that allows that type of sign. See the specific provisions for each type of sign. If a new zoning district is created after the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived without signage designation or authority, signs shall be allowed under this article in accordance with the next more restrictive zoning district unless specific criteria are specified within the new zoning district at the time of adoption. Signs not otherwise requiring a permit shall be allowed in any newly adopted zoning districts. 
H.  Size. Size shall be governed by sign type. See specific provisions relating to each sign type. 
I.  Location. All signs must be located on private property, except signs erected on public property by any authorized governmental unit. No sign can be erected on or encroach on any public right-of-way, except as authorized by the governmental unit which controls the right-of-way. 
1.  Unless a specific exception is stated in this article, no sign shall be located within the minimum yard requirement adjacent to an interstate highway, within sixty-two (62) feet of the centerline of an arterial road right-of-way, within fifty-two (52) feet of the centerline of a major collector road right-of-way or within forty-two (42) feet of the centerline of any other road right-of-way. For the purposes of this subsection, the classification of roads shall be determined by the City of Kennesaw Development Standards as most recently approved by the Mayor and Council at the time of application for a sign permit or at the time of erection of any sign not requiring a permit. 
2.  Unless a specific exception is stated in this article, no sign shall be located within one (1) foot of a public right-of-way. 
3.  Unless a specific exception is stated in this article, all signs shall meet the side and rear yard setback requirements of this chapter. 
4.  No canopy sign, freestanding sign, wall sign, sign for nonresidential use in a residential zone or off-premises outdoor advertising sign can be located upon any lot that is smaller than the minimum lot area for its zoning district. 
J.  Height. Height shall be governed by sign type. See specific provisions relating to each type. The ground elevation shall not be altered to provide additional sign height. 
K.  Roadway Safety; Obstruction Of Vision At Intersections. 
1.  Safety must be exercised in erecting signs near a road. No sign shall obstruct or impair the vision of any vehicle operator at the intersection of any public rights-of-way, at any entrance onto or exit from a public road or any other location where such obstruction could create a hazard to life or property. 
2.  At a minimum, no sign or other obstruction of vision, including but not limited to poles or other support structures, with a height greater than three (3) feet, shall be permitted within the mitered corner, defined as an area beginning at the intersection of any right-of-way lines of any streets, roads, highways, driveways, curb cuts or railroads and extending twenty (20) feet along each such right-of-way, and closed by a straight line connecting the end points of the twenty (20) foot sections of the right-of-way lines. However, a sign with a height of fifteen (15) feet or greater may be erected outside the area designated in this subsection and allowed to overhang in the designated area. In no event shall a sign or other obstruction of vision greater in height than three (3) feet or less than fifteen (15) feet in height be permitted within the designated area or overhang within the designated area. 
L.  Interference With Or Similarity To Traffic Control Devices. No sign or illumination shall be used, constructed, maintained or located at any location where it may interfere with or obstruct the view of an authorized traffic control device, nor shall any sign be used, constructed, maintained or located where it, by reason of its position, shape, wording or color, may be confused with an authorized traffic control device or emergency vehicle device or markings. 
M.  Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or from interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way and adjoining property. No flashing or animated illumination or effects shall be allowed, except as otherwise allowed in this article. No lighted sign shall cast light directly on streets, roads or neighboring property. 
N.  Electrical and Structural Safety. All electrical signs and all electrical devices that illuminate signs or otherwise operate signs are subject to approval of the City building inspections division or its successor. All such signs and electrical devices shall only be allowed if listed by an approved testing laboratory or agency and installed in conformance with that listing. All signs shall be built in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
O.  Electronic Signs. 
1.  The City Council has determined that a very limited number of electronic signs will serve the important needs for advertisement of local business, the display of messages on behalf of non-profit organizations, and the broadcast of emergency messages. These benefits must be weighed against the negative impact that large electronic signs have on distracting motorists causing the possibility of an increase in automobile accidents in the vicinity of such signs. Electronic signs will be allowed only in accordance with the restrictions contained in this section. 
2.  Any sign containing an electronic display which is seventy (70) square feet or larger in size shall only be allowed as conversions of existing sign faces on parcels adjacent to the right-of-way of Cobb Parkway and I-75 as located within the city limits of Kennesaw. The electronic portion of any such sign shall not be larger than the square footage of the sign being converted. Each such conversion must comply with all of the following conditions: 
a.  The electronic sign must be located on a parcel zoned for commercial or industrial use and no portion of the sign is to be located within three hundred (300) feet of a single family residence. 
b.  No sign having an electronic display which is seventy (70) square feet or larger shall be located within five thousand (5,000) feet of another sign having an electronic display of seventy (70) square feet or larger which is on the same side of the roadway. Additionally, no sign having an electronic display which is seventy (70) square feet or larger shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other electronic sign facing the same direction. 
c.  The sign shall comply with all provisions of subsection (4) of this section below. 
3.  Any sign containing an electronic display smaller than seventy (70) square feet shall be allowed on any parcel that is adjacent to a non-Interstate roadway which has four (4) or more lanes of traffic if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Each such sign must be located on a parcel zoned for commercial or industrial use and no portion of such sign is to be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a single family residence. 
b.  Each such sign must be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any other sign containing an electronic display. 
4.  All signs containing an electronic display shall comply with the following operating limitations: 
a.  No electronic message may be displayed for less than ten (10) seconds. 
b.  No electronic message shall flash, scroll the entire display from one side of the sign to the other whether from top to bottom or from one side of the sign to the other, or give the illusion of movement. Only static electronic messages shall be allowed. The electronic display shall not have varying light intensity during the display of any single message. 
c.  The electronic portion of each sign may not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.30 foot candles above ambient light levels as measured at the following distances: 

 
d.  Notwithstanding the above mentioned subsection, if the electronic sign is located in the line of sight of a single family residence on a residentially zoned property, such electronic sign shall not operate, regardless of the square footage of the electronic display of the sign, at brightness levels of more than 0.10 foot candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at the portion of the residential structure nearest the electronic sign. 
e.  Upon erection of a sign containing an electronic display, the owner shall provide written proof from an independent contractor that the sign complies with this section concerning brightness measurements, as appropriate. Such proof shall contain measurements taken both during daytime and nighttime hours. Such measurements and proof shall be provided no less than yearly each year within thirty (30) calendar days of anniversary of the erection of the electronic portion of the sign. Additionally, if there is a complaint that the sign is brighter than specified under this section, as appropriate, the owner must take such measurements and provide another written certification, at the owner's cost, if requested to do so by the City of Kennesaw. If any of the certifications indicates that the electronic portion of the sign exceeds the brightness levels stated in this section, as appropriate, the owner of the sign, within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the City of Kennesaw, shall turn off the electronic portion of the sign until the brightness of the sign is corrected, at the owner's expense, to comply with this section, as appropriate. 
f.  Each sign must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change. 
g.  The owner of any electronic sign should coordinate with the local authorities to display emergency information important to motorists including, but not limited to, Amber Alerts or alerts concerning emergency management information. The owner will assure that someone is available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, to the City of Kennesaw to discuss the display of such emergency messages. 
h.  The owner of any electronic sign shall provide to the City of Kennesaw information for a contact who is available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, and able to turn off the electronic sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. If, at any time, more than fifty (50) percent of the digital display lights malfunction or are no longer working, the owner of the sign containing an electronic display shall turn off the electronic display until repairs are made. 
i.  Each sign containing an electronic display must comply with all Georgia Department of Transportation rules and regulations were not in conflict with this article. 
j.  Each sign containing an electronic display shall contain a default design that will freeze the design in one position should a malfunction occur. 
k.  Any sign containing an electronic display installed within one hundred (100) feet of an existing traffic signal shall be non-flashing and shall not contain any of the following colors: red, green, or amber. 
l.  No electronic sign shall utilize, house, or contain any interactive features or components, or function as an interactive sign. 
m.  No traveling message may travel at a rate slower than sixteen (16) lights columns per second or faster than thirty-two (32) light columns per second. 
n.  Electronic signs may not have sequential messages, i.e., more than one message to form a single advertisement. Each message of an electronic sign must be self-contained in that it provides all of the information in one screen to communicate the message intended. 
o.  In addition to the requirements imposed by this section, electronic signs shall meet the same installation and permitting requirements as set out for electrical signs and all other signs. The final permit shall provide that except for the replacement of the sign face(s) with the electronic sign panel, and any associated structural improvements or reconstruction required by current building codes for such signs, the designated sign shall not be moved to another portion of the property, increased in size or height, or otherwise modified in a manner which increases the nonconformity of the structure unless a variance is first obtained to permit such modification. The building official of the City of Kennesaw will be authorized to make determination if structural improvements to existing structure will be necessary to accommodate the conversion to LED technology. Structural data and site data will be required to make assessment for the need of structural modifications. 
5.  Any measurement of distance between signs required by this section shall be measured pole to pole. 
P.  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in any zoning district in the city: 
1.  Banners and streamers, except as specifically allowed under this article. 
2.  Signs that contain audio speakers or produce noise or sounds capable of being heard even though those sounds are not understandable sounds. This subsection does not prohibit radio transmissions used in conjunction with any sign. 
3.  Signs which use pyrotechnics of any type, or emit smoke, vapor, particles, or odors of any type. 
4.  Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees, utility poles or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
5.  Permanent window signs which collectively cover more than thirty (30) percent of the window glass surface area. 
6.  Transportation shelter advertising signs other than as authorized by Cobb Community Transit or the City of Kennesaw. 
7.  Flashing signs, except electronic signs as allowed in this article. 
8.  Signs which advertise illegal activity or depict nudity, sexual conduct, obscene or pornographic material as defined in the United States and state codes such as O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 and O.C.G.A. § 16-12-8,1, and relevant case law, as may be amended from time to time, or which contain fighting words as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
9.  Roof signs, except as otherwise allowed in this article. 
10.  Rotating signs. 
11.  Wind activated devices, including flags, except as specifically allowed under this article. 
12.  Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under the laws of the state, federal laws or regulations, or any county or city ordinance. 
13.  Signs or advertising devices attached to any vehicle or trailer parked so as to be visible from a public right-of-way for the purpose of providing advertisements of products, services or events or directing people to a business or activity, except for a common carrier or other vehicle which is used for daily transportation with a valid license plate. Any allowable vehicle or common carrier having a sign attached thereto as a part of the operational structure of the vehicle is to be parked in a legal parking space belonging to the business or on the property to which the sign makes reference. No signs on trailers or other non-motorized vehicles will be allowed under this subsection. 
14.  Signs placed in parking spaces which are required to meet the minimum parking requirements. 
15.  Signs not in good repair, specifically including any sign which is in a state of disassembly or any sign which has its internal lighting exposed to view. 
16.  Abandoned signs, which advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted or available. 
17.  Off-premises outdoor advertising signs as defined in Chapter One. 
18.  Laser images, except as allowed by specific actions by the City Council as a temporary activity. 
19.  Sign copy on litter receptacles, vending machines or like structures, except for copy indicating products sold, dispensed or distributed from within the structure upon which the sign copy appears, e.g., sign copy on vending machines shall be permitted if restricted to products sold, dispensed or distributed from the machine. 
20.  Portable signs. 
21.  Nonconforming, unused sign structure(s) that are not utilized for six months time period. 
Q.  Content of Sign. Except as provided at subsection 5.03.02(p)(8), this article shall not regulate the specific content of signs. Any sign, display or device allowed under this article may contain commercial or noncommercial copy. 
R.  Time limit For Commencing And Completing Construction. A sign permit for a sign shall expire twelve (12) months after the issuance of the permit if construction of the sign has not commenced within that time. A sign permit shall expire eighteen (18) months after the issuance of the permit if construction of the sign is not completed within that time. If construction has not begun or been completed as required by this subsection, then a new application must be submitted and the permitting process commenced anew. 
S.  Structural And Safety Requirements. Any sign within this article attached to a building must meet the city building inspections safety, electrical and structural code requirements. 
T.  Cleanup. The person or entity holding the permit shall be required to remove or have removed from premises discarded or unusable paper, sign faces, parts and debris resulting from the changing of the advertising copy or message or maintenance of any approved sign or sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-13, 7-15-13) 
5.03.03 - On-Premises Signs 
A.  Generally. 
1.  All on-premises signs under this section require a permit, and may contain a noncommercial message in any zoning district where an on-premises sign is allowed as provided in this section, and the Historic District including Historic Preservation Guidelines, and Chapter 4.02.03, Central Business District. 
2.  Table 5.03.03A. This chart applies to freestanding signs and canopy signs located outside the buildable area of the lot, unless otherwise provided. 
TABLE 5.03.03A: 

 
* Sign structure area shall be computed as including the entire area of structure surrounding the actual advertising display area, including the advertising display. 
** For the purpose of this section, one-half acre shall mean 20,000 square feet and one acre shall mean 40,000 square feet. Any lot size above 43,560 square feet shall be calculated on its actual square footage. 
*** No single sign area (advertising display area) may exceed 300 square feet on any size lot. 
B.  Freestanding signs. In addition to the other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall apply to freestanding signs. Freestanding signs located in areas zoned NRC, CRC, NS, PSC, GC, LI, HI, O&I, UVC, or PVC or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the following regulations and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
1.  Sign area. 
a.  The sign area of a freestanding sign shall be the area within a single, continuous rectangular perimeter measured from the extreme lowest point of the sign to the extreme highest point of the sign and from the extreme left edge to the extreme right edge of the sign face or faces and shall not include the support structure. For double-faced signs, only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing sign area when the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is sixty (60) degrees or less and attached to a common structure. If the two (2) faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the larger of the two (2) faces shall be the area used for calculations. 
b.  Within the low rise office (LRO) district, the maximum square footage shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet if property is contiguous to a single-family residence. For this section only, contiguous shall apply only to the properties with the same road frontage or the major side yard where the signage is to be located. In all other circumstances the square footage of the sign shall be regulated by Table 5.03.03A in subsection (A) of this section. 
c.  On any lot, the sum of the sign areas of all freestanding signs, including those canopy signs outside the buildable area of the lot, shall not exceed the maximum established for the size of the lot as set forth in Table 5.03.03A in subsection (A) of this section. 
d.  The official street number shall be displayed on all freestanding signs for emergency notification purposes. The minimum height of the number is four (4) inches. The maximum height of the number shall not exceed one (1) foot in height or width. The official street numbers will not be counted against the maximum allowable sign area. 
2.  Number. The maximum number of on-premises freestanding signs allowed on any lot shall be determined by road frontage. However, the total number of such signs shall be governed by the regulation most restrictive of signage. The maximum number of signs shall be calculated as follows: 
a.  On each road frontage, one (1) sign is allowed for each complete 200 feet of public road frontage; provided that on any frontage of less than 200 feet, one (1) sign shall be allowed on that public road frontage. This shall not apply to residential subdivision development signs. 
b.  No more than four (4) freestanding signs shall be allowed on any platted, recorded or deeded lot of record. Each freestanding sign must be at least 150 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same lot. 
c.  If the lot fronts on more than one (1) road, the calculation shall be completed separately for each road frontage. 
3.  Type/design. All signs must be ground based monument, unless within 660 feet of the nearest edge of right-of-way of an interstate highway. In the event that the original and final grade have a topographical difference of ten (10) feet below road grade, a pole sign can be considered through the variance process. No applications for variances will be accepted for existing pole signs unless done so in accordance with the above. By way of example, and without limitation, the ground based monument sign cannot be attached to, resting upon, or supported by any pillars, columns, or pylons which allow for open spaces of direct line of sight from one (1) side of the sign to the other beneath the widest area of the sign face in a direct vertical plane to the ground. No portable signs will be allowed. 
4.  Location. All signs must be located on private property, except signs erected on public property by any authorized governmental unit. No sign can be erected on or encroach on any public right-of-way. No sign shall be located within sixty-two (62) feet of the center line of an arterial road right-of-way, within fifty-two (52) feet of the centerline of a major collector road right-of-way or within forty-two (42) feet of the centerline of any other road right-of-way, and no closer than one foot behind the public right-of-way. All signs shall conform to the side yard setback: per zoning classification. In no event shall signs be placed in the mitered corner as set out in Chapter 5.03.00. No off-premise advertising shall be allowed in any easement, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Conservation easement. 
b.  Dedicated Greenspace. 
c.  Facility easements (i.e. sanitary sewer, drainage, access/egress). 
d.  City/county, or any other government authority that has control over eminent domain, controlled easement. 
5.  Height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet, except that those freestanding signs located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of an interstate or federal primary highway and visible from the main traveled way of the interstate or federal primary highway may be up to a height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
C.  Canopy signs. In addition to the other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall apply to canopy signs. Canopy signs located in areas zoned NRC, CRC, NS, PSC, GC, O&I, LI, HI, UVC or PVC or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the following regulations and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
1.  Sign area. 
a.  The maximum sign area for a canopy sign shall be calculated as follows: for each one linear foot of canopy along each face of the canopy, two square feet of sign area is allowed on that face. 
i.  If the canopy is not entirely within the buildable area of the lot as defined in this chapter and as amended from time to time, the canopy sign shall be included in the calculations of maximum total sign area under Table 5.03.03A of this section, which establishes a maximum total sign area for freestanding signs and canopy signs outside the buildable area of the lot, as if the canopy sign were a freestanding sign. The maximum square footage allowed per single sign shall apply. 
ii.  If the canopy is entirely within the buildable area of the lot, the square footage is not included in the calculations of the maximum total sign area under Table 5.03.03A of this section. 
b.  The support structure of the canopy shall not be included in the computation of sign area, provided that it contains no commercial message. It may contain warning and public service messages. 
2.  Height. No canopy sign shall be less than eight feet above the ground at its lowest extremity. 
3.  Location. Canopy signs shall only be located on a lot with a minimum road frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
D.  Wall Signs/Awning Signs. In addition to the other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall apply to wall signs, including awning signs. Wall signs and awning signs located in areas zoned NRC, CRC, NS, PSC, GC, RRC, O&I, LI, HI, UVC or PVC or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the following regulations and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
1.  Sign area. 
a.  Wall sign. The sign area of a wall sign shall be the area within a continuous rectangular perimeter enclosing the limits of each separate writing, representation, emblem message or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate this sign from the background against which it is placed; provided, however, that any open space contained within the rectangular perimeter, such as between letters in a word, or between any component panel, strip or figure of any kind comprising the sign shall be included in the computation of the sign area, whether this open space be enclosed or not by a frame or border. For double-faced or projecting signs, only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing sign area when the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is sixty (60) degrees or less, provided that it is a common attached structure. If the two (2) faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the sign area shall be the area of the larger face. 
b.  Awning sign. Awnings with no script or identification will not be counted against the maximum allowable sign area. When calculating the sign area of an awning sign, the limits of each separate writing, emblem, representation, message or similar character, including any open space between words or letters, shall be included in computing the sign area, but not any other portion of any lighted or unlighted awning. See graphics illustrations in Chapter 5. The maximum sign area for a wall sign/awning sign shall be calculated as follows: for each one (1) linear foot of the wall or building along each face of the building, two (2) square feet of sign area is allowed on that face. 
c.  Height. No wall sign that projects more than four (4) inches from the building surface on which it is attached shall be less than eight (8) feet above the finished elevation at its lowest extremity. A wall sign shall not project above the vertical wall to which it is attached. 
d.  Miscellaneous. No wall sign shall project more than twenty-four (24) inches from the building surface on which it is attached. 
E.  Residential subdivision/development signs. In addition to the other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall apply to residential subdivision/development signs. 
1.  Zoning districts. Residential subdivision/development signs shall be allowed in all applicable zoning districts. 
2.  Sign area. The total sign area of residential subdivision/development signs, exclusive of any wall, fence or supporting structure, shall not exceed Sixty-four (64) square feet in area. 
3.  Height. The topmost portion of a residential subdivision/development sign shall not exceed a maximum height of eight (8) feet. Any supporting fence or wall shall conform to the height provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Location. Residential subdivision/development signs shall be adjacent to a public road within the boundary of the property, except when such sign is a directional sign. Residential subdivision/development signs may be placed not less than one (1) foot from any right-of-way. However, such signs shall be subject to all safety regulations. In no event will any signs be placed within the mitered corner as set out in this article. 
5.  Number. No more than two (2) permanent residential subdivision/development signs are allowed per entrance. At each subdivision entrance, one (1) additional temporary sixteen (16) square foot marketing/informational sign for the development will be allowed. 
6.  Illumination. Residential subdivision/development signs shall use only indirect lighting. 
7.  Type/design. 
a.  All residential subdivision/development signs shall be ground based signs or attached to or a part of a supporting wall or fence. Temporary marketing informational signs may be pole mounted. 
b.  Residential subdivision/development signs shall be designed as permanent signs. 
F.  On-premises signs for nonresidential uses in residential districts. In addition to the other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall apply to signs for nonresidential uses in residential districts: 
1.  Zoning districts. Signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall only be located on property zoned for residential use on which these non-residential uses are legally being conducted: religious assembly, county club, golf course, school, cemetery, mausoleum, and private community center. 
2.  Sign area. Sign area for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall be calculated pursuant to table 2, as follows: 
TABLE 5.03.03B 

 
* For the purpose of this subsection one-half acre shall mean 20,000 square feet and one acre shall mean 40,000 square feet. Any lot size above 43,560 square feet shall be calculated on its actual square footage. 
3.  Height. Signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet, except that signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones that are attached to a building shall be subject to the height provisions applicable to wall signs unless otherwise specifically regulated under other provisions within this article. 
4.  Location. Any sign for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall be located at least 150 feet from any other such sign on the same lot. 
5.  Number. The maximum number of freestanding signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones allowed on any lot shall be determined by road frontage. The maximum number of signs shall be calculated as follows: 
a.  One (1) sign for each complete 200 feet of the lot's public road frontage. 
b.  Any lot with less than 200 feet of public road frontage shall be allowed one (1) sign. 
c.  If the lot fronts on more than one (1) public road, then the calculation shall be performed for each public road frontage separately. 
6.  Illumination. Illuminated signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones located on arterials, or major or minor collectors, as determined by the City of Kennesaw Development Standards, may use indirect or internal lighting. On all other road classifications, only indirect lighting shall be allowed. 
7.  Miscellaneous. 
a.  Signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall be designed as permanent signs. 
b.  Temporary use permit: Permits to allow a temporary use sign in residential zones may be issued for a period of thirty (30) days. A sign permitted pursuant to this article shall be removed no later than the date of expiration of the temporary use permit, or upon the discontinuance of the temporary use, or maximum time allowed under this chapter, whichever is the shortest time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 8, 4-20-15) 
5.03.04 - Signs in Residential Zoning Districts 
A.  Generally. All signs under this section require a permit unless specifically exempted from a permit elsewhere within this chapter. Cost of a permit is governed under Chapter 5.03.17. No sign in a residential zone shall contain a commercial message unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this article. 
B.  All signs not exempt from a permit and not located in areas zoned NRC, CRC, NS, PSC, GC, O&I, LI, HI, UVC or PVC or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the regulations within this section unless specifically exempted under another section of this chapter, and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
1.  Sign area. Total sign area per lot in residential zones shall be calculated pursuant to table 3, as follows: 
TABLE 5.04.04A: 

 
* For the purpose of this subsection one-half acre shall mean 20,000 square feet and one acre shall mean 40,000 square feet. Any lot size above 43,560 square feet shall be calculated on its actual square footage. 
2.  Height. Signs for use in residential zones shall not exceed a height of eight feet, except that signs for use in residential zones that are attached to a building shall be subject to the height provisions applicable to wall signs unless otherwise specifically regulated under other provisions within this article. 
3.  Location. Any sign for use in residential zones shall be located at least seventy-five (75) feet from any other such sign on the same lot. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Illumination. Illuminated signs for use in residential zones located on arterials, or major or minor collectors, as determined by the City of Kennesaw Development Standards, may use indirect or internal lighting. On all other road classifications, only indirect lighting shall be allowed. 
5.03.05 - Temporary Signs 
A.  Temporary on-premises signs and advertising devices. Temporary on-premises signs located within areas zoned NRC, CRC, CBD, NS, GC, LI, HI, O&I, PVC, UVC, or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, (inflatables) permitted on no less than four (4) lane roadways and only on properties recommended for community activity center or regional activity center on the City future land use map, as may be amended from time to time) be governed by the regulations within this section and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
1.  The following types of signs or advertising devices may be displayed on-premises upon the issuance of a temporary permit: 
a.  Searchlights. 
b.  Banners. 
c.  Inflatables. 
2.  Only one (1) temporary on-premises sign or advertising device may be displayed on a lot at a time. Each occupant or tenant of a multi-occupant building or multi-tenant lot may display one (1) banner flush with a wall during the permit period without regard to the usage of other occupants or tenants and without regard to the prior usage of temporary on-premises signs by others on the lot. Banners can be displayed on existing free standing signs in a secure fashion. Banners to be weather resistant and cannot obscure sight visibility for pedestrian and motorists. 
3.  A temporary on-premises sign or advertising device (searchlight or banner) shall require a permit which allows for a display period as follows: Banners - 30 day period, with a maximum of four (4) permits per year, per business. There must be at least a thirty (30) day break between any permitted periods. Searchlights - 30 day period, with a maximum of two (2) permits per year, per lot. There must be at least a thirty (30) day break between any permitted periods. Inflatables - 30 day period, with a maximum of two (2) permits per year, per business. There must be at least a thirty (30) day break between any permitted periods. A one-time waiver of the permit fee for the temporary on-premises sign will be allowed for all new businesses for the first sixty (60) day period. All approved permits issued will require applicant to post expiration date of banner permit on the banner for visual recognition by public and city staff. Permit expiration date will be located at either corner of banner signage so as to visible by staff and public. 
4.  It shall be unlawful to display any temporary sign or advertising device without a permit or outside of the term of a permit or otherwise in violation of this section or article. 
5.  The temporary permit shall be acquired prior to the display of any temporary sign or advertising device. 
6.  The permit shall specify the first and last day of the period in which display of the temporary sign or advertising device is permitted. Display of the temporary sign or advertising device (searchlight or banner) shall be allowed beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day specified on the permit. The permit shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on the last day specified on the permit. Violations of Chapter 5.03.05(a) would authorize staff to terminate the permit. 
7.  Top of inflatable devices cannot be any higher than twenty (20) feet above the roofline and thirty-five (35) feet from ground level. 
8.  Signs placed pursuant to temporary permits shall be removed on or before the last day or time limit of the permit. 
9.  A-Frame-temporary signage is allowed without permit in the Central Business District. 
B.  Weekend directional signs (WEDS). 
1.  Findings and purposes. Many people travel to, from and through the City on a daily basis. During weekday rush hours when the majority of people on the roads are commuting to or from work, roads are often nearly beyond their capacity. Traffic hazards and distractions must be minimized. The clutter created by an excess in number, size and height of signs negatively impacts the general appearances of an area, lessens the aesthetic qualities of an area and intrudes upon the residential character of an area. However, people at times need the benefit of directional signs to help them find their destinations. Properly regulated, such directional signs may actually aid the flow of traffic while limiting the negative impact of such signs on the aesthetic qualities of an area. The following regulations recognize the difference in weekday and weekend traffic and are intended to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents, visitors and businesses of the city, including the aesthetics of the community. Improperly located WEDS, or prohibited WEDS advertising businesses, services or products, etc., located on private property, are hereby determined to pose an immediate safety threat and traffic hazard to members of the public traveling on city roadways. 
2.  Definition. WEDS shall convey directions through the use of words, symbols, arrows or otherwise to a specific place, wherein the sign provides direction and attention to a temporary or non-permanent event or happening, such as the sale or lease of real property, to a religious assembly or community gathering, yard sales, moving sales or estate sales. 
3.  Zoning districts. WEDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
4.  Time allowed. WEDS shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to remove all WEDS, including all stakes, anchoring or pole devices, etc., prior to 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. 
5.  No permit required. WEDS do not require a permit or a permit fee. Any person or entity which installs WEDS must have a city or county business license and must acknowledge (via form provided by code enforcement division) that WEDS will be installed per the terms of this code section. This requirement shall not apply to any person or entity which installs an exempted sign as specified in Chapter 5.03.15. After acknowledgement, any person or entity which installs WEDS will be given an identification number by the code enforcement division. 
6.  Identification on sign. Each WEDS shall be legibly marked with the name and phone number of the person responsible for the sign (i.e. sign owner/installer). This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint upon at least one (1) face of the WEDS and in letters of at least one-half inch in height. 
7.  Construction. WEDS shall not exceed four (4) square feet of sign area and three (3) feet in height and may be double-faced. WEDS shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. WEDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, other signs or other sign structures. WEDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be made of paper. 
8.  Location. There shall be only one WEDS for any given place, activity or event per 300 feet of road frontage within a five (5) mile radius of the ultimate location to which it provides direction. No WEDS shall be located closer than fourteen (14) feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, or one (1) foot behind the right-of-way, whichever ensures that the WEDS is not within the right-of-way. WEDS may be located along any frontage except local roads within platted subdivisions. All WEDS must be placed on private property with the property owner's permission. 
9.  WEDS advertising businesses, services or products, etc. are prohibited. 
C.  Semi-permanent Directional Signs (SPDS). 
1.  Definition. SPDS are signs which convey directions to a specific place under construction or to specific real estate for sale or to a noncommercial event, and are not intended to be permanent but rather are intended to provide direction to a place or event for a limited period of time. 
2.  Zoning districts. SPDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. However, SPDS in residential zones shall only provide direction to residential real estate for sale or to a noncommercial place or event. 
3.  Permit required. SPDS require a permit on an annual basis, based on date of issue as per Chapter 5.03.17 
4.  Sign area. SPDS may have one (1) face on each side of the sign. Each face may be up to sixteen (16) square feet. 
5.  Height. SPDS shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height above the elevation of the nearest rights-of-way. In the event of multiple road frontages, the highest elevation shall be used for measuring height. 
6.  Construction. SPDS shall be mounted on single or double poles of sufficient strength to safely support the sign. SPDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, federal, state or county signs or poles or other permanent sign structures. SPDS shall be made of a durable and waterproof material. 
7.  Location. No SPDS shall be located closer than twenty-six (26) feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, or twelve (12) feet behind the right-of-way, whichever ensures that the WEDS is not within the right-of-way. All SPDS must be placed on private property with the property owner's written permission. SPDS shall be located at intersections and at other places along roads to provide directional information. No SPDS shall obstruct or interfere with the sight visibility requirements or violate any safety provisions of this article. 
8.  Number. A maximum of five (5) SPDS are allowed in an intersection area, and each SPDS must be at least 150 feet from any other SPDS. An intersection area includes the areas on all corners of an intersection bounded by the right-of-way lines and within 200 feet of the intersection of right-of-way lines at the intersection, but no closer than twenty (20) feet from such intersection of right-of-way lines. Only one (1) SPDS advertising for any given place, activity or event shall be allowed within any intersection area. Outside of an intersection area, one (1) SPDS is allowed per lot. 
9.  Removal. SPDS used to convey directions to a noncommercial event or a specific place under construction shall be removed within ten (10) days after the event is over or the project is completed. SPDS providing direction to a subdivision or other real estate for sale shall be removed within ten days after the closing of the sale of that property or the closing of the last lot of the subdivision. SPDS providing direction to multifamily rental property shall be removed within one (1) year of the issuance of a permit under this article, or renewed with approval by the board of zoning appeals. 
D.  Temporary-local Directional Signs (T-LDS). 
1.  Definition. T-LDS are short-term signs which convey directions to a specific place or event. 
2.  Zoning districts. T-LDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. However, T-LDS in residential zones shall only provide direction to residential real estate for sale or to a noncommercial place or event. 
3.  No permit required. T-LDS do not require a permit or a permit fee. 
4.  Sign area. T-LDS may be single or double faced. Each face may be up to four (4) square feet. 
5.  Height. T-LDS shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
6.  Construction. T-LDS shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. T-LDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, federal, state or county signs or poles, or other permanent signs or sign structures. T-LDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No such sign shall be made of paper. 
7.  Location. No T-LDS shall be located closer than one (1) foot from the right-of-way. T-LDS must be on private property with permission of the owner. No T-LDS shall be located beyond a one (1) mile radius of the ultimate location to which it provides direction. 
8.  Number. A maximum of four (4) T-LDS are allowed for any location to which the T-LDS provide direction. A maximum of one (1) T-LDS per event or property for sale may be located upon any one (1) lot. There must be a minimum of 100 feet between each T-LDS. 
9.  Identification on sign. Each T-LDS shall be legibly marked with the name and telephone number of the sign owner. This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint upon at least one (1) face of the T-LDS and in letters of at least one-half inch in height. All T-LDS shall display legibly the date and address of the activity and/or event. Any T-LDS which does not contain the above information shall be subject to immediate removal by code enforcement personnel and/or other such remedies provided by this article. 
10.  Removal. A T-LDS shall be removed within ten (10) days after the event to which it provided direction is over. It shall be the sign owner's responsibility to remove the sign. This provision shall require removal of any real estate T-LDS providing direction to a subdivision or other real estate for sale within ten (10) days of the closing of the sale of that property, or the last lot of the subdivision. 
E.  Temporary Commercial Produce and Agricultural Product Stands Signs. 
1.  Zoning districts. Temporary commercial produce and agricultural product stand signs shall be allowed in NRC, UVC, PVC, CRC, NS, GC, LI and HI or any other district where such stands or businesses are allowed as specifically permitted in this chapter. 
2.  Number. One (1) permitted sign shall be allowed per temporary vendor. 
3.  Sign area. Signs shall be no greater than sixteen (16) square feet. 
4.  Construction. No manufactured portable signs shall be allowed. 
5.  Height. The height of signs shall not exceed four (4) feet. 
6.  Permit required. All signage requires a sign permit. Cost of the permit is governed under the adopted City Wide Master Fee Schedule. 
F.  Temporary Residential Agricultural, Farm And Wood Products And Livestock And Poultry Sales Signs. 
1.  Zoning districts. Signs shall be allowed in single-family residential districts. 
2.  Number. Only one (1) permitted sign is allowed per property. 
3.  Sign area. Signs shall be no greater than sixteen (16) square feet. 
4.  Construction. No manufactured portable signs shall be allowed. 
5.  Height. The height of signs shall not exceed four (4) feet. 
6.  Permit required. All signage requires a sign permit. Cost of the permit is governed under the adopted City Wide Master Fee Schedule 
G.  Olympic Signs. Signs for Olympic or like events are permitted within a two (2) year period prior to and running through the conclusion of the event. 
H.  Temporary signs not located within areas zoned NRC, CRC, NS, GC, LI, HI, O&I, PVC, UVC, or all other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the regulations of signs under Chapter 5 except that no permit shall be required. 
I.  Business Announcement Signs. 
Business announcement signs are permitted within areas zoned NRC, CRC, CBD, NS, GC, LI, HI, O&I, PVC and UVC as well as all other commercial or industrial zoning districts. 
1.  Only one business announcement sign can be displayed on a lot at a time. In the case of multi-tenant occupancy in buildings or lots, each occupant may display one wall mounted business announcement sign to be located either on the building façade or on the allowed freestanding signs on the lot. 
2.  Business announcement signs shall require a permit which allows for a maximum display period of six months prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy and Business License by the City of Kennesaw. Upon the issuance of Certificate of Occupancy and Business License the temporary business announcement sign must be removed. 
3.  Wall mounted business announcement signs will comply with the design standards for wall mounted signs as per section 5.03.03 D (1) (a-d). 
4.  Freestanding business announcement sign will comply with the design standards as per section 5.03.03(b) (1-5). 
5.  Business announcement sign will convey the business name, type of business and estimated date of occupancy of the proposed business to be located at subject property. 


Graphic for signs Allowed/Not Allowed 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2013-13, 7-15-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 9, 4-20-15) 
5.03.06 - Off-Premises Outdoor Advertising Signs 
A.  Effective the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, off-premises outdoor advertising signs are prohibited. 
B.  Off-premises outdoor advertising signs legally existing on such date may be continued, even though such signs do not conform to this section. Such nonconforming signs shall not be expanded, relocated or replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution of interchangeable poster panels painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be allowed. 
C.  No such nonconforming sign shall continue after the discontinuance of the nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months. 
D.  Unless a specific exception is stated in this article, no sign shall be located on or within 100 feet of a lot used for a religious assembly, school, park, cemetery or any lot zoned for residential use. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall be erected or maintained if any part of the sign or sign structure is visible from the main traveled way of Cherokee Street, Old Highway 41 (Main Street/Hwy. 293), or any other roadway within the historic district. This subsection shall also apply to any other road declared historic, scenic or natural after the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 10, 4-20-15) 
5.03.07 - Compliance with other Laws; Conflicting Provisions 
The provisions of all other applicable city, county, state and federal laws shall apply. This article shall not be construed to create a right to maintain a sign in violation of any other law, in violation of any protective covenant or in violation of the property rights or other rights of any person or entity. If any provision of this article regulates the same activity, conduct or any aspect of signage that is also regulated by city, county, state or federal law, then the provision most restrictive of signage shall govern. If any provision of this article is in genuine conflict with any state or federal law or requirement, the conflict shall be resolved in accordance with law. 
5.03.08 - Enforcement and Penalties 
A.  Enforcement personnel. Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the Mayor and Council, the enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the city's code enforcement personnel, including the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator's designees and all law and code enforcement personnel of the city. The enforcement personnel shall have such powers as are to enforce and give effect to this article. With regard to any provision of this article relating to traffic safety or public rights-of-way, the City Department of Public Works shall also be deemed to be enforcement personnel. 
B.  Violation Deemed Public Nuisance. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
C.  Removal Of Signs In Violation. 
1.  The enforcement personnel may order the removal of any sign in violation of this article by written notice, registered mail return receipt requested, to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and property owner and/or any other party that procured the erection of the sign. The removal order shall be issued only after the appropriate party fails to comply with the terms of this article within five (5) after the receipt of written notice of noncompliance by the city or within ten (10) from the mailing of such notice if no receipt indicating acceptance is returned. 
2.  An aggrieved party may appeal the removal order within ten (10) days from the date that the notice was received. Such appeal shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of the City of Kennesaw UDC, appeals from decisions of the code enforcement officer, or any successor provisions. If the sign is not removed within thirty (30) days after the order of removal or thirty (30) days after the date any appeal becomes final, the enforcement personnel are authorized to remove or cause to be removed the sign and to collect the costs thereof as provided in this section. 
D.  Removal Without Notice. The enforcement personnel or any other agent of the City having jurisdiction under the circumstances may remove or direct the removal of any sign in violation of this article, without giving notice to any party, if such sign: 
1.  Is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
2.  Poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. Improperly located WEDS, or prohibited WEDS advertising businesses, services or products, etc., located on private property, are hereby determined to pose an immediate safety threat and traffic hazard to members of the public traveling on city roadways. 
3.  Following such removal or repair, the city may collect the costs as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
E.  Costs of Removal. Removal of any sign as provided for in this section shall be without liability to the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees. The permit holder shall be primarily responsible for the costs of removal. If there is no permit holder, then the sign owner shall be responsible. If the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then the costs of removal shall be the responsibility of the sign erector and/or property owner or any other party that procured the erection of the sign. If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within sixty (60) days after the receipt of such statement, the code enforcement personnel shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the city attorney. If signs that are removed remain unclaimed for more than 120 days from the date of impound, the signs shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
F.  Invalid Permits. The enforcement personnel may issue a removal order when it has been determined that a permit was improperly issued, that the permit was issued on the basis of misstatement of fact or fraud, that the sign has not been constructed in compliance with this article or with the specifications of the application or site plans, that the sign permit has expired or that the sign is otherwise not in compliance with this article. If a sign is not removed after receipt of a removal order by the owner of such sign or property, enforcement personnel may institute legal proceedings pursuant to this article against the property owner, sign owner, lessee, sign erector or a combination thereof. 
G.  Civil Actions. The enforcement personnel or any individual or entity whose property interests are directly affected may bring a civil action to seek injunctive and other relief to enforce this article. 
H.  Citations. Any violation of this article may be tried upon citations issued by the enforcement personnel pursuant to O.C.G.A. 15-10-63 and any successor statute. Without limitation, sign erectors, sign owners and such other parties responsible for the violation may be cited for violation of any provisions of this article. 
I.  Penalties. All remedies and penalties will be as per Chapter 10 of the UDC. 
5.03.09 - Reserved 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-07, adopted April 17, 2017, repealed App. A, § 5.03.09, which pertained to bonds and insurance. 
5.03.10 - Indemnification of City 
By accepting any permit or other permission to erect and maintain a sign or by acting in the erection or maintenance of a sign pursuant to such permit or other permission pursuant to this article, the permit holder, property owner, lessee (if any), sign erector, their agents, servants, employees, and assignees agree to hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees from any and all claims for damages, including death; including but not limited to those resulting from the erection, alteration, relocation, construction or maintenance of a sign permitted or authorized under this article, to the extent allowed by law. 
5.03.11 - Variances 
A.  There shall be no deviation from the terms of this article unless a variance has been granted as specified in Chapter 9 that regulates requirements for making variance applications. Variances from the provisions of this article may be applied for and granted in the same procedural manner as variances from this chapter. For a variance to be granted from this article, each of the following must be shown: 
1.  No characteristics contrary to the public interest will be promoted. No resulting variance shall create an effect or condition contrary to the public safety and welfare. Relief shall not impair the purposes of this article. 
2.  A unique hardship is existing because of an extraordinary and exceptional condition pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of a characteristic of its size, shape, topography or like characteristic. In the absence of the factors listed in the preceding sentence, economic or financial hardship alone may not be sufficient to support the grant of a variance. 
3.  The condition causing the hardship is unique and is not common to the region in general. 
B.  Request for variances regarding any part of this article or enforcement thereof shall specifically include reasons why the application should be granted. 
C.  Variance procedures shall apply both to signs which are nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and to new signs erected thereafter. 
D.  Decisions of the Mayor and Council shall be final, subject to such legal remedies an aggrieved party may have. 
E.  An appeal from the Mayor and Council must be made within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision by the Mayor and Council and shall be to the superior court of Cobb County. 
5.03.12 - Nonconforming Signs 
A.  Signs lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which do not conform to the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be nonconforming signs and may remain, except as otherwise specifically qualified in this article. Such signs shall not be enlarged, extended, structurally reconstructed, replaced or altered in any manner; except a sign face may be changed so long as the new sign face does not increase either height or sign area. This provision shall not have the effect of excusing any violation of any other ordinance, nor shall this provision have the effect of permitting the continued existence of any unsafe sign or any sign that is not in a good state of repair. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign. No repairs other than normal maintenance and upkeep of nonconforming signs shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. For any sign that is declared to be unsafe due to changed conditions beyond the control of the sign owner, such sign shall be promptly repaired, rebuilt or restored to the same dimensions, type and size of the original nonconforming sign. The failure to promptly repair, rebuild or restore such a sign within six months of the city declaring, in writing, the sign to be unsafe shall be deemed abandonment of the sign and any re-erection of such sign shall conform in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
C.  A nonconforming sign shall not be moved to any other location on the same lot or to another lot unless such change in location will make the sign conform to the provisions of this article, and meet permit requirements of this article. 
D.  If a nonconforming sign is removed or discontinued for six months the subsequent erection of a sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
E.  A nonconforming sign which is changed to or replaced by a conforming sign shall no longer be deemed nonconforming, and thereafter such sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
F.  All nonconforming temporary signs shall be brought into compliance with this article or removed within 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this article, the city may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the property owner, sign owner, permit holder and/or sign erector. The city shall have the right to maintain an action at law for the recovery of the costs of such removal. If the owner is unknown and cannot be found upon reasonable investigation, the city may cause the removal of such sign without liability. 
G.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, all signs which were illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior sign ordinances shall be removed by the owner of the sign within 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this article, the city may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the property owner, sign owner, permit holder and/or sign erector. The city shall have the right to maintain an action at law for the recovery of the costs of such removal. If the owner is unknown and cannot be found upon reasonable investigation, the city may cause the removal of such sign without liability. 
H.  The purpose of this article's nonconforming treatment is to mitigate detrimental impact of new ordinances on existing previously legally conforming signage. Over time, it is anticipated that nonconforming usages shall eventually be eliminated. As a consequence, when a nonconforming sign is damaged by nature or an act of God, such sign may be promptly repaired, rebuilt or restored to the same dimensions, type, shape, location, and size and at the same height as the original nonconforming sign. The failure to repair, rebuild or restore such a sign within six months of the date of damage shall be deemed to be abandonment of the sign and any re-erection of such sign shall conform in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
I.  Except for the condition that renders a sign nonconforming, nonconforming signs must otherwise comply with all provisions of this article. 
5.03.13 - Inspections 
A.  The Building Official and Code Enforcement personnel are hereby empowered to enter into or inspect any building, structure or premises upon which a sign subject to this article is located for the purpose of inspecting the sign, its structural and electrical connections and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances. Inspections shall be carried out during reasonable business hours, unless an emergency exists. 
B.  This provision is in addition to and without prejudice to the rights of other inspectors and regulators to enter into and inspect premises. 
5.03.14 - Permits 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this article no sign shall be used, constructed, maintained, located, replaced, expanded or relocated unless a sign permit has been issued by the city. 
B.  A new sign permit shall be required for any structural alterations, other than normal maintenance and repair as defined in this article. 
C.  No permit issued for a sign under the provisions of this article shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain any sign that violates any provision of this article, any other ordinance, state law or federal law. 
D.  Any sign requiring a permit for which a permit has not been secured shall be removed immediately. Removal shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the sign owner, the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. 
E.  Permits for off-premises outdoor advertising signs are transferable upon proper application to the city under the following conditions: 
1.  Application must be made within 30 days of the change in ownership of the sign or of assignment of any lease; 
2.  Renewal fees, if any, are current; and 
3.  The application must be on forms prescribed by the City, and such forms shall require: 
a.  That the transferee agree to the terms and conditions of the permit and any variance, stipulation, special use permit or zoning decision associated with such sign; and 
b.  A statement of the date of sale attested to by both seller and purchaser. Failure to timely and properly comply with this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
5.03.15 - Exemptions 
A.  The following operations shall not be considered as creating a new sign, and therefore shall not require a sign permit: 
1.  The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved painted or printed sign, billboard, theater marquee or similar approved sign which is specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. 
2.  The changing of the tenant panels on a freestanding, multiuse tenant board. 
3.  Normal maintenance or repair of an approved sign or sign structure. 
B.  No sign permit shall be required for any of the following signs to be displayed in any zoning district; provided, however, that all other applicable regulations shall apply to such signs and that no such sign in a residential zoning district shall be illuminated. Certain temporary signs not listed here and that do not require a permit are included in Chapter 5.03.05. 
1.  Official governmental signs. Signs of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority or entity in its exercise of power of eminent domain, including but not limited to traffic signs, signals or similar regulatory devices or warnings, official flags, emblems, official public notices, official instruments, signs of historical interest or other similar signs or devices. 
2.  Identification signs. Identification signs indicating the name and street number of owner or occupant, provided that no such sign shall exceed three (3) square feet in sign area or contain any advertising display. Signs may be wall or building mounted or freestanding, provided, that if freestanding, the sign shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet. One (1) sign shall be allowed per road frontage. 
3.  Parking area signs. Signs identifying parking areas in commercial lots, so long as the primary purpose of the signs is to facilitate parking. No commercial message of any kind, except the name of a center, may be displayed and no sign shall exceed twenty-one (21) square feet per structure. These signs may be permanent or temporary and banners are allowed. All signs must be securely attached to the structure, be in good condition and not discolored, have no tears, rips or frays and must comply with safety standards of this and other ordinances and laws. This subsection has enhanced the ability to erect signs identifying parking areas. As a result, it is not contemplated that variances, as to size or number shall be granted without specific extenuating circumstances. These may include: 
a.  Number of parking spaces. 
b.  Height of structure. 
c.  Whether increased size would obscure visibility to motorists. 
d.  Size of tract, etc. 
4.  Entrance/exit signs. Signs erected for the purpose of giving directions or instructions into and from the property; provided, however, no such sign shall exceed three (3) feet in height above the pavement and no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in sign area. No such sign shall be located closer than one (1) foot from the public right-of-way and no such sign shall contain advertising displays. Location of the sign shall not obstruct sight distance from driveways or intersections. 
5.  Construction-related signs. Signs placed upon a site under construction, alteration or removal denoting the name of the project under construction, the bank, the architect, engineer or contractor involved; provided, however, that such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area in residential districts or thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area in other zoning districts and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. All signs shall be removed from the site within seven (7) days after final inspection or completion or abandonment of the project. 
6.  Noncommercial signs. Signs bearing a noncommercial message are allowed without a permit. Such signs shall be located a minimum of one (1) foot from any publicly maintained right-of-way or easement, shall not be located in any medians and must be with proper authorization of the property owners. Such signs shall be limited to a copy area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet each, except that a rider/add-on not exceeding twelve (12) inches high to the bottom and/or top of a thirty-two (32) square foot sign and running the entire width of the sign is allowed; further except that, on a residential lot larger than five (5) acres, oversized signs (signs exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet each) are allowed so long as the total of oversized signs on said lot do not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet total copy area; and further except that, in areas zoned for commercial or industrial usage, noncommercial signs are subject to the size limitations as set forth in Chapter 5.03.03 for commercial signs. Nothing herein shall be deemed to disallow the use of grandfathered off-premise outdoor advertising signs to display noncommercial messages. All noncommercial signs are subject to subsections Chapter 5.03.02(f), (k), (l) and (m) and subject to Chapter 5.03.08 of this UDC. 
7.  Special event or seasonal signs. Sign displays that include any message, insignia or depiction traditionally associated with the holiday or event celebrated or observed; including state, national or international events. It is envisioned that depictions traditionally associated with a holiday be allowed. These include, by way of example and not by limitation, Santa Claus, Nativity scenes, menorahs, Easter bunnies, pumpkins, "Happy New Year" flags and July 4th celebrations. However, no commercial message or copy shall be permitted in conjunction with an allowed seasonal or special event sign or display. Each allowed special event or seasonal display may continue for a fifteen (15) day period in any one year, except: 
a.  Thanksgiving through New Year's season, when a forty (40) day period of display will be allowed; and 
b.  Seasonal displays may include signs, banners and ornamental objects which would not ordinarily be allowed under this article. 
8.  Official flags or insignias. Flags or insignias of the United States, the state or any other nation, state or government. Such flags or insignias shall be flown in compliance with the standards applicable under state and federal law. Flags or insignias of the United States, the state or any other nation, state or government shall not be used for the purpose of advertising, selling or promoting the sale of any goods or service. 
9.  Other flags or insignias. Flags or insignias other than the flag or insignia of the United States, the state or any other nation, state or government, shall be limited to one (1) per lot and shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area, and shall be displayed from a flag staff not to exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
10.  Occupational and professional signs. Wall mounted or soffit-type nameplates or signs denoting only name, address, telephone number and occupation or profession. Such signs shall be attached to buildings, shall be limited to one (1) per tenant or subdivided occupant, and shall not exceed three (3) square feet in sign area. 
11.  Architecture. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings and structures. 
12.  Memorials. Memorial signs or tablets, including but not limited to building cornerstones and other similar signs which indicate the names of buildings, dates of erection or other historical data. 
13.  Temporary window displays. Temporary window displays of merchandise sold on premises. 
14.  Scoreboards. Scoreboards on athletic fields, including advertising on school athletic fields, fences or walls. 
15.  Real estate signs. Signs advertising the lease or sale of the property on which the sign is located are allowed without a permit subject to the following restrictions. 
a.  Residential. In residential zoning districts signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
b.  Nonresidential. In all other zoning districts signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. One (1) sign is allowed for each complete 200 feet of the lot's frontage along any one public road. All real estate signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the sale or lease of the last property advertised. 
16.  No trespassing signs. Signs of less than two (2) square feet in sign area, placed near property lines, identifying private property or instructing the public not to enter. 
17.  Warning or regulatory signs. Signs such as danger, no hunting, no smoking, no dumping, etc. 
18.  Gas pumps/vending machines. Signs forming an integral part of a gasoline-pump, service appliance or vending machine. 
19.  State emission station signs. Each official station shall be allowed to display "authorized station" signs indicating such status. Signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches by forty-eight (48) inches. Wording shall include "state approved emissions inspection," with letters of a minimum of four and one-half (4½) inches high, and shall specify if the station is "full-time" or "appointment." If the station is a full-time station the hours and days of inspection shall be displayed. Such signs shall be displayed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 57-21-08, as amended from time to time. Such signs shall be mounted as a wall sign or shall be located as a freestanding sign. All provisions of the Georgia Motor Vehicle Emission Inspection and Maintenance Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-40 et seq., shall be complied with. 
20.  Interior signs. Signs intended to be viewed from the interior of the building. 
21.  Political signs, whereby the public is to be informed regarding a specific political event or candidate or issue, are treated the same as other noncommercial signs. 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Political signs shall be located a minimum of one (1) foot from any publicly maintained right-of-way or easement, shall not be located in any medians and must be with proper authorization of the property owners. 
c.  Political signs shall be limited to a copy area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; however, this shall not be deemed to disallow the use of general outdoor advertising signs. Candidates may place a rifer/add-on not exceeding twelve (12) inches high to the bottom and/or top of a thirty-two (32) square foot sign and running the entire width of the sign. 
d.  Political signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
e.  Political signs shall further be subject to Chapter 5.03.02 F., K., L. and M. and Chapter 5.03.08 of this UDC. 
f.  Prior to removal of signs in violation, except for signs on the right-of-way or those signs creating a traffic or safety hazard, violators, whether erector or user, shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours notice to remedy their violation. 
5.03.16 - Application; Issuance or Denial 
A.  Who may apply. Permits shall be issued only to: 
1.  The owner of the real property where the sign is to be located; 
2.  A lessee who has the right to install or maintain a sign on the real property where the sign is to be located; or 
3.  The erector of the sign. 
4.  An applicant who is a lessee shall produce a copy of the lease or a written statement from the owner of the real property that the applicant has the right to maintain a sign on the property. A sign erector shall produce a copy of a current business license and proof of a code compliance bond as required by Chapter 5.03.09. Application may be made by the owner, lessee or agent of the owner or lessee. 
B.  Permit Holder Generally. All notices and communications regarding notification of sign permit renewals or violations shall be sufficiently given for all purposes of this article if mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to the permit holder at the address given in the application or any subsequent notification of change of address. A change in return address on an envelope or on a letterhead shall not be deemed as notification of change of address unless correspondence clearly calls this change to the addressee's attention. Notice shall be effective at the time of receipt or ten days from the date of mailing if no receipt indicating acceptance is returned. All other general notices and communication may be made by depositing the same in the United States mail with sufficient postage affixed thereto. 
C.  Application. Application for a sign permit shall be filed with the city on forms furnished by the city. The application for a permit shall contain the identification and address of the property on which the sign is to be erected; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the sign owner, sign erector, property owner, lessee, if applicable, and the agent making the application, if applicable; the type of sign as classified by this article; and such other pertinent information as the city may require to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances of the city. The city may require that the application be accompanied by two copies of the following: site plans showing location of structures upon the property on which the sign is to be located and the location of the sign in relation to the structures, property lines, public rights-of-way and other signs; plans, specifications and structural details showing the type and manner of construction, attachment to buildings or in ground erection; and a visual representation of the completed sign. The city may require such plans to bear the signature and seal of a registered land surveyor, professional engineer, architect or land planner. Each application shall include a signed statement from the landowner or possessor of the property giving consent to entry into the property for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of this article. If classification of the road on which the property fronts is of importance to the permit process, the city may require the applicant to submit certified documents from the State Department of Transportation or the United States Department of Transportation or their successors regarding the classification of the road. 
D.  Processing of Application. Upon receipt of a properly completed application for a sign as permitted under the provisions of this article, the city, through its enforcement personnel, shall examine and process the application, and either grant or deny the application within five business days or else the application shall be deemed granted on the sixth business day. A permit may be denied if the applicant, landowner or lessee is presently maintaining any sign in violation of this article. 
E.  Procedure Upon Denial. Upon denial of the application of a permit, the applicant shall be given written notice stating the reason for the denial within fifteen (15) days of the decision to deny the permit. Upon denial of the application for a permit, the applicant may appeal to the Mayor and Council as provided by Chapter 10 of the UDC appeals from decisions of the code enforcement officer, within thirty (30) days of the receipt of notice of the final decision of the administrative officer. The hearing before the Mayor and Council shall take place within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the appeal with the city clerk. The Mayor and Council shall render a decision on the appeal. An appeal must be filed by an aggrieved party within thirty (30) days of a decision of the Mayor and Council or the decision shall become final. Such appeal shall be filed with the Superior Court of Cobb County. 
F.  Expiration. Any permit which is required to be renewed or transferred and is not renewed or transferred within twelve (12) months will be deemed expired and cannot be renewed or reinstated. If the permit expires, the sign shall be removed as specified under Section 5.03.08. 
5.03.17 - Fees 
A.  Renewal of off-premises outdoor advertising, sign permit. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate permit fee as established by the Mayor and Council from time to time. The Mayor and Council may by amendment to this article establish any other fees, or amend fees set by this article. Renewal: 
1.  A sign permit for an off-premises outdoor advertising sign shall be renewed annually. 
2.  The fee for off-premises outdoor advertising signs annual renewal shall be as set by the Mayor and Council from time to time. 
3.  Renewal fees for off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall be due January 1 of each year. Fees not received by April 1 shall be subject to a monthly penalty equal to the amount of the renewal fee each month the renewal is delinquent. 
4.  Should a renewal fee remain delinquent in excess of one (1) year, the permit shall thereafter expire. If a sign is erected and the permit expires under the provisions of this section; sign enforcement personnel shall be authorized to institute proceedings to remove such sign. 
B.  Until such time as the governing authority establishes otherwise by separate resolution, permit fees and renewal fees are established as follows: 
1.  On-premises sign permit: $25.00 plus one (1) percent of construction costs exceeding $1,000.00. 
2.  Temporary on-premises sign permit: $25.00 per sign per event. 
3.  Semi-permanent directional sign permit: $50.00 to be renewed annually. 
4.  Off-premises outdoor advertising sign: $100.00 to be renewed annually. 
C.  The governing authority may amend this ordinance and establish any other fees as well as amend fees set by the ordinance. 
5.03.18 - Interpretation, Construction of Ordinance, and Severability. 
A.  Interpretation. The words used in this chapter in the present tense shall include the future tense. Singular words include the plural, and plural words include the singular. For the sake of brevity, masculine and feminine pronouns shall be mutually inclusive and shall also include the neuter (e.g., corporations). Sub-headings and/or examples are inserted for the convenience of the reader and shall not operate to limit the effect of any provision of this chapter. 
B.  Construction of Chapter. The provisions of all other applicable City, State, and Federal laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations shall continue to apply. This chapter shall not be construed to create a right to maintain a sign in violation of any other statute, law, rule, or regulation; in violation of any protective covenant; or, in violation of the property rights or other rights of any person or entity. In the event that any provision of this chapter regulates the same activity, conduct, or any other aspect of signage that is also by any other City, State, or Federal law, ordinance, statute, rule or regulation, then the provision that is most restrictive of the signage in question shall govern. In the event that any provision of this chapter is in genuine conflict with any State or Federal law, statute, or requirement, the conflict shall be resolved in accordance with the State or Federal law, statute, or requirement. 
C.  Severability. The provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, and terms of this chapter are severable. In the event that any portion or any specific application of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other portions or other applications of this chapter. 
5.04.00 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

5.04.01 - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless communications towers and antennas that will encourage the development of a competitive wireless communications marketplace while protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public and maintaining the aesthetic integrity of the community. The goals of this ordinance are: 
A.  To comply with 47 U.S.C.A. § 332 Federal Telecommunications Act; 
B.  To protect residential areas and land uses from the potential adverse impact of telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities; 
C.  To minimize the total number of towers and antennas within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents and businesses of the City of Kennesaw; 
D.  To promote and encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; 
E.  To locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; 
F.  To encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; 
G.  To avoid potential damage to property caused by wireless communications facilities by insuring that such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or when determined to be structurally unsound; 
H.  To enhance the ability of the providers of wireless communications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently; and 
I.  To preserve those areas of significant scenic or historic merit. 
5.04.02 - Applicability 
All new towers and antennas shall be subject to the regulations contained within this article except as provided in subsections A., B., and C. of this section: 
A.  Public Property. Nothing in this article shall be read to prohibit a government-owned tower from being located at a specific site when the tower is required to protect the public welfare or safety. 
B.  Amateur Radio; Receive-Only Antennas. This ordinance shall not govern any amateur radio tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
C.  Preexisting Towers and Antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to meet the provisions of this ordinance, other than the requirements of Chapter 5.04.07 of this UDC "Maintenance of Facilities." Any such towers or antenna shall be referred to in this ordinance as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antenna." If additional antennas are co-located upon a preexisting tower after adoption of this ordinance, then fencing and landscaping requirements shall be met as part of the permitting process. 
5.04.03 - General Requirements 
A.  An application shall be required for the construction or placement of all new wireless transmission facilities, whether alternative or non-alternative structures, within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Kennesaw. Approval of any application for the construction of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
1.  The proposed height of any component of the facility in relation to the height of buildings, trees or other structures in the area; 
2.  Proximity to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
3.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
4.  Surrounding topography, tree coverage and foliage; 
5.  Design of the facility, with particular reference to design characteristics which have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
6.  Proposed ingress and egress; 
7.  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies (microcells) not requiring the use of towers or structures; 
8.  Demonstrated need for the telecommunications facility at the specified site; 
9.  Capability of co-location on existing wireless facilities; 
10.  Proposed landscaping necessary to ensure that the visual obtrusiveness of all accessory structures will be virtually eliminated; 
11.  Proximity to historic districts or structures; 
12.  Historic and/or scenic views when non alternative structures are proposed. 
B.  All applications submitted to the community development department shall include a complete inventory of the applicant's existing wireless transmission facilities including towers and receivers/transmitters located within the City of Kennesaw and within one and one-half (1½) miles surrounding the city limits, including each asset's location (plane coordinates), height and co-location usage or capabilities, as well as the nature of any alternative structure or designed being utilized. The community development department shall utilize such information to promote co-location alternatives for other applicants. 
C.  At the time of filing the application for construction or placement of a wireless transmission facility, the applicant shall provide a site plan and information regarding the tower, accessory structure location, neighboring uses, proposed architectural design and proposed landscaping. Additional documentation to be submitted with the site plan and certified by an experienced radio frequency engineer licensed to do business in the State of Georgia shall delineate coverage and propagation zones, identify types of antenna and mounting location, specify the type of band currently in use and state co-location capabilities. 
1.  The scaled site plan shall clearly indicate the location, type and height of the proposed tower or accessory structure to be utilized, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning including proximity to historic or scenic view corridors, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, accessory structure and any other structures, topography, parking and other information deemed necessary by the director of community development or his/her designee to assess compliance with this ordinance. 
2.  Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable). 
3.  A definition of the area of coverage and radio frequency goals to be served by the antenna or tower and the extent to which such antenna or tower is needed for coverage and/or capacity. 
4.  The setback distance between the proposed wireless transmission facility and the nearest residential unit or residentially used structure if less than 500 feet. 
5.  Structural integrity analysis where antennas and equipment will be attached to an existing structure. 
6.  Landscaping shall be designed in such a way as to preserve existing mature growth and to provide in the determination of the Mayor and Council, a suitable buffer of plant materials that mitigates the view of the telecommunications facility and accessory structures from surrounding property. 
D.  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, determined by the Mayor and Council, to offset the costs associated with processing such application. In addition, applicants shall be responsible for any fees commonly charged for a rezoning if one is required, or for any other required permit fees. 
E.  The director of community development may elect to retain outside consultants or professional services to review an application for any wireless communication facility and to make recommendations on relevant issues including, but not limited to, verification of the applicant's due diligence, analysis of alternatives, conditions of approval and compliance with state and federal rules and regulations, at the applicants expense. An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant had posted a $5,000.00 cash bond, or other security satisfactory to the city guaranteeing payment of such expenses. 
F.  Landscaping plans and the design and placement of the wireless transmission facility on an approved site plan shall require the review and approval of the Mayor and Council prior to issuance of a building permit to insure compliance with this ordinance. 
G.  Prior to issuance of the permit, compliance with section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, 16 U.S.C. § 461 et. seq. shall be demonstrated. In addition wireless communications facilities proposed to be located within the downtown Kennesaw Historic District shall receive a certificate of approval from the Historic Preservation Commission and said certificate shall be submitted with the permit application. 
H.  In approving any application, the Mayor and Council may impose additional conditions to the extent determined necessary to minimize adverse effects on adjoining properties. 
I.  The City of Kennesaw reserves the right to conduct a height trial to identify the visual impact of the proposed facility upon the surrounding area. 
J.  Prior to the issuance of the permit that applicant shall post a $25,000.00 per tower and $5,000.00 per antenna cash bond or other security satisfactory to the city to guarantee the removal of the permitted wireless communication facility upon its abandonment. 
5.04.04 - Development Requirements for Non-Alternative Wireless Communications Facilities and Towers 
A.  Wireless communication facilities are permitted on top of buildings and other existing structures that do not require an increase in height to accommodate the facility. Parapet walls may be required in order to conceal such facilities from view. 
B.  These facilities, when mounted on a building or other existing structure, shall be flush mounted against the side of the building or structure and camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the surface on which they are mounted. 
C.  In those instances where simulated trees are proposed within residential zoning districts, said trees shall be located within an existing stand of trees and set back from neighboring property boundaries a distance of twice the full height of the proposed simulated tree. In addition, the height of said trees shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the vegetative canopy in the immediate vicinity of the structure. 
5.04.05 - Development Requirements for Alternative Wireless Communications Facilities and Towers 
A.  Non-alternative towers shall be located only in the following zoning districts as shown in the following table subject to the restrictions and standards contained herein. Wireless transmission facilities in any other zoning districts shall be accessory uses or alternative tower structures only; provided however, non-alternative towers may be allowed on publicly owned property regardless of zoning district. 
TABLE 5.04.05A: 

 
B.  Separation. Except in cases of co-location on the same tower or accessory structure, no wireless transmission facilities shall be located within 2,500 feet of any preexisting tower or preexisting antenna within the City of Kennesaw unless such facility or preexisting tower or antenna is concealed through use of alternative tower structures or otherwise camouflaged in such a way that the presence of telecommunications equipment is virtually undetectable from any adjoining property. 
C.  All applicants seeking to erect a tower must demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna(s). Evidence of an engineering nature shall be documented by the submission of a certification by an engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. Such evidence may consist of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.  No existing structure is of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  No existing tower or structure has sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment. 
4.  Applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing tower or structure. 
5.  That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
6.  Such other limiting factor(s) as may be demonstrated by the applicant. 
7.  All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate professionals or qualified industry experts licensed in the State of Georgia. Such evidence shall be subject to independent verification by an engineer of the city's choosing. The cost of such independent verification shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
D.  Setbacks: Setbacks for towers and above-ground transmission facilities shall be as follows: 
1.  All transmission facilities, except buried portions, shall be set back from all adjoining properties the distance required for the zoning district in which the wireless communications facility is located. 
2.  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, the tower and entire transmission facility must be set back from the nearest residentially zoned lot line a distance equal to the twice the height of the tower. 
E.  Unless otherwise specified by the director of community development or his/her designee, towers shall be enclosed by vinyl chain link security fencing or other approved alternative not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
F.  All new towers that do not incorporate alternative design features must be designed and built in a manner that allows other entities to co-locate on the structures. The maximum allowable height of all non-alternative towers in any zoning district shall be 125 feet. 
G.  Co-located wireless communication facilities shall be designed to meet the following standards: 
1.  Use of dual band/multi band antenna (to allow sharing of antennas or antenna arrays by wireless providers using different frequency bands) or by using combiners (to allow antenna sharing by users of the same frequency band) is encouraged in order to minimize the height of support structures and the visual impact of multiple co-located antennas or antenna arrays. 
2.  Antenna associated with a co-located wireless communication facility shall be mounted so as to present the smallest possible silhouette, profile, or cross section. Preferred antenna mounting scenarios are, in order of descending preference: 
a.  Compact dual polarized antennas in a cylindrical unicell arrangement extending less than two (2) feet from the structure, and mounted atop the tower; 
b.  Panel antennas flush mounted against the tower; and 
c.  Antennas mounted at the end of a straight or curved davit arms or brackets extending from the sides of the tower. 
3.  No co-located wireless communication facility located on a non-alternative tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, triangular framework, or like structures or equipment, except during periods of construction or repair. Curved or straight davit arms or brackets used for antenna mounting shall be connected to the tower at the base of the arms or brackets only and such arms and brackets (and any antennas or hardware mounted thereon) shall not be physically interconnected with any similar arm or bracket. 
4.  Where economically and technically feasible and viable, Chapter 5.04.05 shall also be construed to regulate co-locations that may occur on preexisting non-alternative wireless communication facilities and towers. 
H.  All towers and their related facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower and accessory facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built environment and to provide a visual barrier between the accessory equipment and adjacent properties. Where appropriate, towers shall be painted so as to reduce their visual obtrusiveness, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
I.  If upon receipt of an application for the erection of any tower or alternative tower structure governed by this ordinance, the director of community development or his/her designee deems that the proposed structure may interfere with the use of the airways of the City of Kennesaw by the public or interfere with the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities, a copy of the application shall be submitted by the community development department to the aviation division of the Cobb County Department of Transportation for review and recommendation. 
J.  Any parcel of property proposed to be the location of a new non-alternative tower that directly abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 100 ft. landscaped buffer with a solid fence or wall no less than six (6) feet in height. 
K.  A registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia shall prepare all landscaping plans. The property shall be landscaped in accordance with city standards. 
L.  All non-alternative towers shall be monopole in design except those located in heavy industrial zoning districts that are greater than 150 feet in height. 
M.  All towers shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
5.04.06 - Approval Process 
A.  Uses subject to administrative approval. Subject to certification by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee of compliance with the general requirements, development requirements and standards enumerated above, the following uses may be administratively approved by staff without further review by the Planning Commission or Mayor and Council after receipt of a complete application, supporting engineering certification and lease approval, if any, without the necessity of public hearing. 
1.  Placement of additional transmission equipment on existing, permitted towers by additional users shall be exempted from special land use permits, advertising, posting and hearing requirements and shall not require placement of signs or any other such public notice, so long as the structure or height of such existing tower is not altered. Additional users and equipment are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Application for such approval must be made to the community development department staff at least five working days prior to the last date by which a request can be made to the Planning Commission (i.e. second Friday of each month). 
b.  Applications for such approval must include all information normally required by the special land use permit process including site plan amendments necessitated by the placement of such additional equipment. All other applicable requirements of this ordinance shall apply to any site plan so amended. The community development director or his/her designee shall be authorized to grant administrative approval for such plans. 
c.  An application fee equivalent to that normally assessed for a special land use permit application shall be required. 
2.  If the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee determine that any application for an administratively approved use does not meet the general application requirements, development requirements and/or standards enumerated herein, administrative approval of the application shall be denied provided substantial evidence exists to support such denial. Such evidence shall be summarized in writing for the applicant along with a recommendation as to whether the applicant should pursue a variance or proceed to a public hearing as specified in subsection (B) below. Applicants may appeal the administrative denial to the Mayor and Council of the City of Kennesaw. Any other party aggrieved by the decision of the director of community development or his/her designee may file an appeal to the Mayor and Council. For purposes of this section an aggrieved party is one who demonstrates that his or her property will suffer special damage as a result of the decision complained of rather than merely some damage that is common to all property owners and citizens similarly situated. The Mayor and Council shall dispense with the appeal by either: 
a.  A determination the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria for an administratively approved use under this ordinance, which shall result in the issuance of a permit. 
b.  A determination the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria for an approved administratively approved use under this ordinance, but, owing to special conditions, a variance as to separation or setback requirements: 
i.  Will not be contrary to the public interest; 
ii.  Will relieve unnecessary hardship; and 
iii.  Shall preserve the intent and spirit of this ordinance. 
c.  A determination the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria for an administratively approved use under this ordinance and the deficiencies cannot, subject to the conditions listed above, properly be cured by a variance. 
3.  Applications that do not satisfy all applicable criteria must, as a result, apply for a public hearing before the Mayor and Council as specified in subsection (B) below. 
B.  Other uses—Special land use permit required. 
1.  If the proposed tower or antenna is not included under the above described administratively approved uses, or the application does not on its face satisfy the development standards and other criteria specified herein, then a special land use permit as outlined in Chapter 4.04.06, Standards for SLUP, shall be required for the approval of the construction of any wireless transmission facility in all zoning districts. Applicants shall apply for a special land use permit through the community development department and pay the required fee at such time. Applications, when complete, shall be placed on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission. Once the Planning Commission has held a hearing they shall make a recommendation on the application to the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall then conduct their own public hearing and based on evidence presented at that hearing, the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the recommendations of staff approve or deny the application. At least thirty (30) days prior to any scheduled hearing, the Planning and Zoning Department shall follow the public notification procedure as outlined in Chapter 10. 
2.  When approving an application for a use for which a special land use permit is required the Mayor and Council may impose conditions to the extent necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. The factors considered in granting such a permit include those enumerated in Chapter 5. The Mayor and Council may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria, if, in their discretion doing so will advance the goals of this article as stated in Chapter 5. 
5.04.07 - Maintenance of Facilities 
A.  All wireless transmission facilities and related landscaping shall be maintained by the facility owner in good condition, order, and repair so that they shall not endanger the life of property of any person, nor shall they be a blight upon the property. 
B.  To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the applicant of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the director of community development of the City of Kennesaw concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the applicant, said applicant shall have fifteen (15) days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. If the applicant fails to bring the tower into compliance within the fifteen (15) days, the City of Kennesaw may remove the tower at the applicant's expense. Prior to removal of any tower, the director of community development may consider detailed plans submitted by the applicant for repair of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above referenced compliance period. Any such removal by the City of Kennesaw shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17. 
C.  All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17. 
D.  All maintenance or construction on wireless transmission facilities shall be performed by persons employed by or under contract to the owner between the hours of 6:00 AM and 6:00 PM Monday through Friday except in cases of emergency. Access to facilities on city owned property shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the city department responsible for such property. The hours of access to city sites shall not exceed those specified above. Persons may not be present on site unless performing construction or maintenance at such site. 
E.  The owner or user of any telecommunications facility shall be required to submit a "facility in use certification" annually to the license and permits department. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or is not properly maintained shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same and any structures housing supporting equipment within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the governing authority of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed or returned to good condition within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
5.04.08 - Waiver of Requirements 
No exception, waiver or variance to the conditions and requirements contained herein shall be granted unless expressly provided for in this ordinance, or the Mayor and Council find that the proposed tower or wireless transmission facility is necessary and essential to providing the applicant's service. 
5.04.09 - Reserved 
5.04.10 - Reserved 
5.04.11 - Facilities Lease 
A.  The Mayor and Council may, in its sole discretion, which is hereby reserved, approve facilities leases for the location of wireless transmission facilities and other telecommunications facilities upon city owned property. Neither this section, nor any other provision of this article shall be construed to create an entitlement or vested right in any person or entity of any type. 
B.  All such leases shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13. 
5.04.12 - Lease Application 
Any person that desires to solicit the Mayor and Council's approval of a facilities lease pursuant to this article shall file a lease proposal with the city's community development department which, in addition to the information required by Chapter 5.04.03 shall include the following: 
A.  A description of the wireless transmission facilities or other equipment proposed to be located upon City of Kennesaw property; 
B.  A description of the city property upon which the applicant proposes to locate wireless transmission facilities or other equipment; 
C.  Preliminary plans and specifications in sufficient detail to identify; 
1.  The location(s) of existing wireless transmission or telecommunications facilities or other equipment upon the city's property, whether publicly or privately owned. 
2.  The location and source of electric and other utilities required for the installation and operation of the proposed facilities. 
D.  Accurate scaled conceptual drawings and diagrams of sufficient specificity to analyze the aesthetic impacts of the proposed wireless transmission facilities or other equipment; 
E.  Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service from the facility, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising; 
F.  An accurate map showing the location of any wireless transmission or telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease; 
G.  Such other and further information as may be requested by the city; and 
H.  An application fee for lease negotiation in the amount consistent with fee schedule adopted by the Mayor and Council. 
5.04.13 - Determination by Mayor and Council 
Recognizing that the Mayor and Council is under no obligation to grant a facilities lease for the use of city property, the Mayor and Council shall strive to consider and take action on application for facilities leases within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application for such a lease. When such action is taken, the Mayor and Council or their designee shall issue a written determination granting or denying the lease in whole or in part, applying the standards set forth below, or any other such criteria as the Mayor and Council may choose to apply. If the lease application is denied, the determination shall include the reason for denial following review of these factors: 
A.  The capacity of the city property and public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities. 
B.  The capacity of the city property and public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility and wireless transmission or telecommunications facilities if the lease is granted. 
C.  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the lease is granted. 
D.  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction upon city property and within the public ways. 
E.  The service that applicant will provide to the community and region. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the lease requested is approved. The availability of alternate locations for the proposed facilities. 
F.  Whether the applicant is in compliance with applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies, including, but not limited to, the registration requirements administered by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
G.  The potential for radio frequency and other interference with existing public and private telecommunications or other facilities located upon the city property. 
H.  The potential for radio frequency and other interference or impact upon residential, commercial and other uses located within the vicinity of the city property. 
I.  Recommendations of the recreation department with respect to impact on park and recreation activities. 
J.  Recommendations of the Public Works Department with respect to maintenance and security of water towers. Such other factors, such as aesthetics, as may demonstrate that the lease to use the city property will serve the community interest. 
K.  The maximization of co-location opportunities with other similar uses. 
5.04.14 - Agreement 
No facilities lease shall be deemed to have been granted hereunder until the applicant and the Mayor and Council have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the lessee has been granted the right to occupy and use the city property. 
5.04.15 - Nonexclusive Lease 
No facilities lease granted under this ordinance shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use city property for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes nor shall approval of a lease entitle the applicant to a permit to construct or place a wireless transmission facility. 
5.04.16 - Term of Facilities Lease 
Unless otherwise specified in a lease agreement, a facilities lease granted hereunder shall be valid for an initial term of one (1) year, with the lessee granted a maximum of four (4) one-year renewal options which options shall also be subject to approval of the Mayor and Council. The term of any such agreement shall not exceed five (5) years unless approved by the Mayor and Council on a case-by-case basis. 
5.04.17 - Rights Granted 
No facilities lease granted under this ordinance shall convey any right, title or interest in the city property, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the city property for the limited purposes and term stated in the lease agreement. Further, no facilities lease shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
5.04.18 - Interference with Other Users 
A.  No facilities lease shall be granted under this ordinance unless it contains a provision that is substantially similar to the following: 
1.  The Mayor and Council has previously entered into leases with other tenants for their equipment and wireless transmission facilities. Lessee acknowledges that the Mayor and Council is also leasing the city property for the purposes of transmitting and receiving telecommunications signals from the city property. The Mayor and Council, however, is not in any way responsible or liable for any interference with lessee's use of the city property that may be caused by the use and operation of any other tenant's equipment, even if caused by new technology. In the event that any other tenant's activities interfere with the lessee's use of the city property, and the lessee cannot work out this interference with the other tenants, the lessee may, upon thirty (30) days notice to the Mayor and Council, terminate this lease and restore the city property to its original condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. The lessee shall cooperate with all other tenants to identify the causes of and work towards the resolution of any electronic interference problem. In addition, the lessee agrees to eliminate any radio or television interference caused to city-owned facilities or surrounding residences at lessee's own expense and without installation of extra filters on city-owned equipment. Lessee further agrees to accept such interference as may be received from city operated telecommunications or other facilities located upon the city property subject to this lease. 
5.04.19 - Ownership and Removal of Improvements 
No facilities lease shall be granted under this ordinance unless it contains a provision that states that all buildings, landscaping and all other improvements, except telecommunications equipment, shall become the property of the City of Kennesaw upon expiration or termination of the lease. In the event that the Mayor and Council requires removal of such improvements, such removal shall be accomplished at the sole expense of the lessee and completed within ninety (90) days after receiving notice from the city manager requiring removal of the improvements. In the event that wireless transmission facilities or other equipment are left upon city property after expiration or termination of the lease, they shall become the property of the City of Kennesaw, unless otherwise notified. The Mayor and Council may require removal of wireless transmission facilities or other equipment by the lessee upon thirty (30) days written notice from the city manager. 
5.04.20 - Compensation to the City of Kennesaw 
A.  Each facilities lease granted under this ordinance is subject to the Mayor and Council's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the rights granted to the lessee; provided, nothing in these sections shall prohibit the Mayor and Council and a lessee agreeing to the compensation to be paid. Such compensation shall be payable in advance of the effective date of the lease and on or before January 31 of each calendar year. Any payments received after the due date shall include a late payment penalty of two (2) percent of the annual rental fee for each day or part thereof past the due date. The compensation shall be negotiated by the city manager or designee, subject to the Mayor and Council's final approval, based on the following criteria: 
1.  Comparable lease rates for other public or private property. 
2.  In the case land is leased, an appraisal opinion upon which the land and airspace is rented. 
3.  If structure of another user is involved, any amount needed to reimburse that user, in addition to the above. 
4.  A yearly escalator rate commonly used in comparable leases. 
5.  The additional rent such structure may generate if leased to additional users. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to accept telecommunications services in lieu of cash rental payment; however, such services must constitute substantial benefit to the City of Kennesaw over retail purchases of said telecommunications services under any applicable government rates offered by the wireless services provider. 
C.  Additional fees or charges may be established by the Mayor and Council to cover actual costs of processing the application, including engineering review, inspection and appraisal cost, legal, administration of the agreement, providing on-site services and/or other direct or indirect costs. 
5.04.21 - Amendment of Facilities Lease 
Except as provided within an existing lease agreement, a new lease application and lease agreement shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or other entity that desires to significantly expand, modify or relocate its telecommunications facilities or other equipment located upon city property. If ordered by the Mayor and Council to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities or other equipment on the city property, the Mayor and Council shall grant a lease amendment without further application. 
5.04.22 - Renewal Application 
A lessee that desires to exercise a renewal option in its facilities lease under this ordinance shall, not more than ninety (90) days nor less than sixty (60) days before expiration of the current facilities lease term, file an application with the Mayor and Council for renewal of its facilities lease which shall include the following: 
A.  The information required pursuant to Chapter 5.04.11 of this UDC; 
B.  Any information required pursuant to the facilities lease agreement between the Mayor and Council and the lessee; 
C.  A report certified by a radio frequency engineer that the site is in compliance with current FCC radio emission standards; 
D.  All deposits or charges required pursuant to the ordinance; and 
E.  An application fee that shall be set by the Mayor and Council by resolution. 
5.04.23 - Renewal Determination 
Recognizing that the Mayor and Council is under no obligation to grant a renewal of a facilities lease for the use of city property, the Mayor and Council shall strive to consider and take action on applications for renewal of such leases within thirty (30) days after receiving a complete application for such a lease renewal. When such action is taken, the city manager shall issue a written determination granting or denying the lease renewal in whole or in part, applying the standards set forth below, or any other such criteria as the Mayor and Council may choose to apply. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reason for denial, if any after review of these factors: 
A.  The financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
B.  The legal ability of the applicant. 
C.  The continuing capacity of the city property to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities. 
D.  The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the lease agreement. 
E.  Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies. 
F.  Continued need for the facility in light of technological advances and current industry standards. 
G.  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the city property will serve the community interest. 
5.04.24 - Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal 
No facilities lease shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the lessee's performance of the lease agreement, or of the requirements of these sections, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the lessee has been approved by the director of community development or his/her designee. 
5.04.25 - Legal Status Provisions 
A.  Conflict with other laws. Whenever the regulations of this ordinance require a greater width, depth or size of yard or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statue or covenants, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. 
B.  Severability. In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The Mayor and Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
C.  Repeal of conflicting resolutions. All resolutions and ordinances or portions thereof in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Chapter 6 - INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
Engineering Technical Standards 

 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.00.00 - STREETS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 15, 2018, amended § 6.00.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6.00.00 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-03, adopted May 7, 2012. 

6.00.01 - General 
The character, width, grade, and location of all public streets shall conform to the standards in these Regulations and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Construction and material specifications for streets shall conform to the standard specifications of the city, Cobb Department of Transportation (CDOT) and Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) in use at the time for roads, except as may otherwise be stated herein. Specifications and design criteria stated herein are for planning purposes. Design exceptions will be considered on a case-by-case basis and it is the responsibility of the developer and his engineer to identify the exceptions in the concept and preliminary design stages. Exceptions/variances will be subject to approval by the Public Works Director or designee. 
A.  Thoroughfares in developments shall be planned in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, and the Major Thoroughfare Plan. These streets classified, or designated to be classified, as an arterial, major collector, or minor collector shall be developed per Section 6.04.00. 
B.  The proposed development's street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area or with plans for streets in said area on file with the City, if any. 
C.  If the developer desires to provide for street access to an adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a temporary paved turn-around provided. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18) 
6.00.02 - Permits Required; Obstructions 
A.  No person, partnership, corporation, or their agents or employees or contractors shall remove, cut, dig into, tear up or make or cause to be made any opening or excavation in any public street, public road, public alley, public way, public ground, public sidewalk or City-owned easement or fill or alter any culvert or construct or install additions or extensions to its existing facilities within the City without a permit issued by the Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
B.  The applicant or applicant's contractor shall submit to the City a written request for a construction/street excavation permit and a plan of the proposed alteration, extension, or addition showing its location and details of construction, including specified depth, method of excavation, open cut or boring, provisions of restoration and whatever the City would deem necessary for review and consideration. 
C.  It shall be unlawful to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, in any of the streets or in any of the easements, or on any of the public sidewalks of the City, any obstruction of any kind or character whatever, except by the consent of the Mayor and Council or a designated officer of the City. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to construct, establish, open, grade or cause to have constructed, or in any manner to form or use a driveway or other opening from private property into any street, highway or thoroughfare in the city or entered upon across any sidewalk in the city, without first obtaining a permit for such work from the mayor and council or designated city officer. When such permit is issued, the owner, lessee, tenant or other constructing party shall conform to all requirements of the standard specifications of the city in use at the time for that portion of the driveway from the curb or gutter line to the property line, and such constructing party shall conform to all grades established and other special requirements in effect at the time. In no event, however, shall any driveway be constructed in the city so as to prevent or obstruct the free flow or passage of water in the gutters of any streets in the city, or in any streets themselves having no gutters constructed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18) 
6.00.03 - Applicant Requirements 
A.  Any person obtaining a permit as provided herein agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the City against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of such person's operations. Before a permit for excavating or opening any street or public way may be issued, the applicant must sign a statement in that it will indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from all liability for accidents and damage caused by any of the work covered by its permit, that it will fill up and place in good and safe condition all excavations and openings made in the street, that it will replace and restore the pavement over any opening it may make as near as can be to the state and condition in which it found it and keep and maintain the same in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to the satisfaction of the City for a period of one (1) year, that it will pay all fines imposed upon it for any violation of any rule, regulation, or ordinance governing street openings or drain laying adopted by the city, and that it will repair any damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation in accordance with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. Such statement shall also guarantee that if the City shall elect to make the street repair, the person opening the street will pay all costs of making such repair and of maintaining the same for one (1) year. 
B.  Whenever the City finds that any such work has become defective within one (1) year of the date of completion, it shall give written notice thereof to the contractor or to its surety stating the defect, the work to be done, the cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the City to be reasonably necessary to complete said work. After receipt of such notice, the contractor or the surety shall, within the time specified, repair the defect or indemnify the City for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. 
C.  Upon written request by the applicant, the city, in its sole discretion, may waive some of the requirements under this Ordinance when such requirements are deemed by the City to be inapplicable or unnecessary due to the nature of the work involved. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18) 
6.00.04 - Street Repair; Utility Placement, Excavation Cut and Engineering Details 
A.  When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the City shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation, or opening shall have the duty of refiling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the public works department, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
B.  The following specifications shall be used for asphalt and fill dirt reparations of all City streets and public properties after any excavations have been made, including all utilities. 

1.  Trenches shall be excavated to a width not to exceed 12 inches on each side of the pipe diameter of 24 inches or less and not to exceed 15 inches on each side of the pipe for pipe diameters greater than 24 inches. Trench walls shall be as nearly vertical as possible. 
2.  Backfill shall be dense graded aggregate or sand. Dense graded aggregate shall be placed in maximum six-inch loose lifts and mechanically compacted. Sand may be compacted by placing in maximum 12-inch loose lifts and then flooded or jetted in place where satisfactory drainage is provided for free water. 
3.  Backfilling up to sub grade elevation shall be completed prior to excavation for the additional 12 inches of concrete on each side of the trench. 
4.  The applicant will be held responsible during the ensuing five years for proper backfilling and replacement of surface. During the five-year period after the cut is made, any pavement settlement shall be immediately repaired in an approved manner at the expense of the applicant. 
5.  Concrete pavements shall be repaired in the same manner as described in this section except that the thickness of concrete shall be the same as the surrounding pavement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18) 
6.00.05 - Protection of Excavations and Liable 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit herein to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the City without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of such work. 
B.  All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work. 
1.  Every excavation shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers; warning signs, lights, and other such other traffic control devices as may be required by the Public Works Director and shall conform to the latest edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices." Warning lights shall be electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic and pedestrians from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not to replace light sources. 
2.  Unless otherwise approved, a minimum of one (1) lane of traffic in each direction shall be provided. Every effort shall be made on the part of the applicant to provide reasonable access to all properties adjacent to its project. In the event traffic is limited to less than one (1) lane in each direction, a flagman or temporary traffic control signal shall be provided so as to safely cycle traffic in each direction past the work area. 
C.  Each person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the City in defending any action brought against it for damages as well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such person or his/her employees of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons, vehicles, or property of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18) 
6.00.06 - Inspections 
The City shall inspect all streets, gutters, curbs, surface water drainage systems, wastewater drainage systems, paving standards and other such improvements before and after any pipe is covered or excavation is backfilled. All work performed in any street or other public way that involves the construction or reconstruction of paving, sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters, sewers and waterlines, after the same has been opened or excavated, shall be inspected by the Public Works Director or his/her designee. 
1.  All excavations or openings in any part of a street, sidewalk, alley or other public place shall be restored to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. 
2.  All driveways shall be constructed so as to prevent or obstruct the free flow or passage of water in the gutters of any streets in the city, or in any streets themselves having no gutters constructed thereon. 
3.  The person to whom such permit is issued shall be responsible for all defects in excavations occurring within one year from the completion of the work and shall be liable for all damages resulting from such defects. 
4.  The person to whom such permit is issued shall remain liable to the City for one year after the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-18) 
6.02.00 - TRANSPORTATION AND PARKING FACILITY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), adopted Oct. 15, 2018, amended § 6.02.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6.02.00 pertained to similar subject matter. 

6.02.01 - Right-of-Way 
Minimum Right-Of-Way Per Street Classification* 

 
* Additional street right-of-way width may be required to be dedicated at intersections or other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, or realignments are required for traffic safety and minimum right-of-way standards would be inadequate to accommodate the improvements. Right-of-way variable depending upon roadway design and Public Works Director approval. 

 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.02 - Design Standards for Streets 
A.  The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan for the city and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
B.  Where such is not shown in the major thoroughfare plan for the city, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
1.  Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width; or 
2.  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
C.  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
D.  Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac, the planning commission may require the subdivider to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround within the right-of-way, when the planning commission considers such to be necessary for effective traffic circulation. 
E.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require acceleration/deceleration lanes, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service drives or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
F.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
G.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. Alleys or service drives may be required on any lots to be used for multiple-family, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys or service drives. 
H.  Paving widths shall be no less than as follows, measured from back of curb to back of curb: 

 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.03 - Additional Right-of-Way and/or Pavement Widths 
A.  Right-of-way for all abutting and internal public streets, existing and proposed, may be dedicated in accordance with the street classifications as shown on the Major Thoroughfare Plan, and as contained in these Regulations, or as otherwise required by the Public Works Director. 
B.  On any existing street that abuts a property, one-half of the required width of right-of-way shall be dedicated to the City as measured from the centerline of the roadway. 
C.  Right-of-way miters are required at all intersections to provide area for adequate utility location and maintenance. Twenty (20) foot miters shall be provided at the right-of-way intersection of any major thoroughfare. Ten (10) foot miters shall be provided at the right-of-way intersection of any local and collector roads. 
D.  If a new street or thoroughfare is funded by the City, CDOT, or GDOT to adjoin or traverse the property, the proposed road right-of-way shall be incorporated into the development plans of the property in accordance with these regulations. These right-of-way requirements shall govern except where there exist clearly defined plans of the City, CDOT, or GDOT which require additional right-of-way. In that case, the greater right-of-way requirements shall govern. 
E.  Any development with property fronting on an existing City road for which there exists clearly defined plans by CDOT, GDOT or the City may be required to provide road improvements associated with the defined plans. In such cases, in lieu of the design and construction, at the discretion of the Public Works Director, the developer shall escrow the dollar equivalency of required improvements (including curbing, utility relocation, and drainage structures), as estimated by the developer and verified by the Public Works Department. These funds shall be deposited in the appropriate road construction account prior to the approval of development improvements or within 30 days of City award of a construction contract, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.04 - Right-of-Way Encroachment and Maintenance 
A.  No property owner, lessee, tenant or other person shall place or plant shrubberies, trees, or erect a fence closer than one foot to the edge of any of street, sidewalk easement, or the right-of-way on which their property abuts, except by consent of the Public Works Director or his designee. 
B.  The property owner, lessee, or tenant shall be responsible for maintaining, in a clean and sanitary condition, the sidewalks, ditches, curbs and gutters, driveway pipes, drainage pipes and unpaved/undeveloped portion of rights-of-way or easement abutting such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.05 - Roadway/Lane Widths 
A minimum of twelve (12) foot travel lanes is required on all streets except local residential which require eleven (11) foot travel lanes. Roadway widths and lane assignments are typically based upon the functional classification of said roadway; for Major Thoroughfares see Section 6.04. The following table indicates these minimum requirements per roadway classification. Widths shown are measured from back of curb to back of curb. 

 
Roadway width and design may be variable based upon current and/or proposed operational characteristics of the roadway and is subject to City and/or CDOT or GDOT review and approval. Median divided roadways may be required with left-run bays and median breaks in lieu of center two (2) way left turn lanes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.06 - Improvements Along State Highways 
For any development that abuts a state highway or other right-of-way controlled by the State of Georgia, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of GDOT. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the GDOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the City. A copy of the drawings approved by CDOT and/or GDOT is required to be submitted to Public Works Department prior to final plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.07 - Improvements Along Cobb County Highways 
For any development that abuts a Cobb County road or other right-of-way controlled by Cobb County, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from a Cobb County highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of CDOT. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the CDOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.08 - Improvements Along City Highways 
For any development that abuts a City street or right-of-way, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the City street shall comply with City standards and requirements. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the City and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.09 - Super Elevation and Run-Off 
Widening sections along existing streets shall be designed reflecting existing curvature and super elevation, if any, unless the existing street has been included in a specific design by the City, CDOT and/or GDOT which calls for different standards, in which case the project will be coordinated with the overall design (excluding local residential streets). 
Roadway edge curves shall be provided for tangent run out (bringing edge from a normal crown to centerline elevation) and super elevation run-off (from the end of tangent run out to the point of design super elevation) in accordance with design standards of AASHTO, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.10 - Unimproved Road 
If a subdivision and/or development have access to a substandard street (i.e., a dirt or gravel road), the following improvements shall be considered through a Development Agreement: 
A.  If the abutting substandard street provides the primary means of access to the development and is dirt or gravel, the developer shall upgrade the street to the classification of the roadway from the end of the improvements required to the nearest standard paved road along the route of primary access. 
B.  Where lots do not front onto, but the access is other than primary, in addition to the road widening requirements abutting the development access, a drainage ditch, shoulder, and adequate base shall be provided and the roadway shall be paved to a minimum width of twenty-six (26) feet. 
C.  Where lots do not front onto, but the access is other than primary, in addition to the road off-site improvements required above, shall at a minimum result in a full-section roadway meeting the requirements of a local residential rural roadway of twenty-six (26) feet, edge to edge of pavement, with drainage ditches as needed. Responsibilities shall be as follows: 
1.  The developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment, and materials required for roadway improvements and necessary drainage improvements. 
2.  All rights-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be considered in the Development Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.11 - Intersection Design 
For an intersection that contains at least one street classified in the Major Thoroughfare Plan, refer to Section 6.04.00. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.12 - Angle of Intersection 
Intersections shall be at right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than 75° for reasons of safety, topography, interference with utilities, or separation from other driveways. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.13 - Intersection Radius 
Intersection radii for all streets shall be measured at the back of curb or edge of pavement, if no curb exists. The minimum roadway radii for the intersection of local and residential collector streets, is 25 feet. When a local or residential collector intersects a higher classification of roadway, the radii shall be a minimum of 30 feet. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at an angle of less than 90° or when a vehicle and operating circumstances dictate. The radii can be reduced a maximum of five feet for the following reasons: 
1.  Separation from street or 
2.  Removal of obstruction 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.14 - Intersection/Corner Sight Distance 
A.  Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance for each street, which approaches a street of higher street category. Where necessary, back slopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened. 
B.  The minimum corner sight distance requirement shall be calculated per Chapter 6 of the UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.15 - Vertical Alignment/Intersection Approaches 
A.  For the intersections of local and residential collector streets, a leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding 2 percent shall be provided for a minimum tangent length of 25 feet. Exemptions are allowed for topographic considerations as determined by the design professional and the Public Works Director. 
B.  As a street approaches an intersection with a street classified in the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the approach shall be in accordance with the CDOT standards. 
C.  Tangent length is measured from edge of pavement of the intersecting street to the point of curvature in the approaching street. 
D.  This grade for the landing may be 1 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.16 - Horizontal Alignment/Intersection Approaches 
A.  New local streets, which approach an intersection with a street in a higher category on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius less than 240 feet, shall provide a tangent section of roadway at least 30 feet long. The tangent length shall be measured along the centerline of the street from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street extending to the point of tangency with the centerline of the curve section. 
B.  Minor and Major Collector classified streets in the Major Thoroughfare Plan shall provide tangent sections at intersections with streets in equal or higher categories as needed to provide adequate stopping sight distances at their design speeds as stated in Chapter 6, Maximum Grades. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.17 - Storm Water Design for Intersections 
For intersections classified under the Major Thoroughfare Plan, sheet or concentrated flows of water will not be permitted through the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.18 - New/Proposed Streets—General 
A.  All proposed new streets shall be designed and constructed to the standards contained in these Regulations in accordance with the classification of said streets. 
B.  The arrangement of local streets shall permit practical patterns, shapes, and sizes of development parcels. Street layout must strike a balance with proposed land use so as to not unduly hinder the development of land. Distances between streets, angles of intersections, numbers of streets, and related elements all have a bearing on efficient lot layout of an area. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.19 - Local Residential Streets 
A.  Local streets shall be so laid out that cut through routes are not created. Where this cannot be accomplished optional traffic calming features will be considered by the Public Works Director. 
B.  Local residential streets shall be 26 feet wide as measured from back of curb to back of curb. This provides for an 11-foot lane in each travel direction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.20 - Non-Residential Local Streets 
Local non-residential streets shall be laid out so that use by through traffic will be discouraged. The functional and operational characteristics of the roadway shall be to provide access to adjacent non-residential lots. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.21 - Minor and Major Collector Streets 
Collector streets shall be provided to channel through traffic movements within a development as part of or in addition to the current thoroughfare network. Actual classification of said roadway will be determined by the Public Works Director after review of the functional and operational characteristics of the roadway and adequate traffic study including, but not limited to trip generation data, as provided by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.22 - Private Streets 
A.  The developer shall grant such easements as required to the appropriate governing authority or Utility Company as is necessary for public purposes. 
B.  The private road must not unreasonably restrict public access to sites of cultural, historical, or natural significance, previously established pedestrian access and must not have unreasonable negative effects on the health and welfare of the community or the good order of the City. 
C.  All private streets should have a minimum right-of-way of as noted in Section 6.02.01 
D.  All private streets shall be built to City Public Street standards 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.23 - Street Names and Addresses 
A.  Street Names. The Community Development Department has the responsibility of maintaining the street addressing system throughout the city, and coordinates with the following: Atlanta Gas Light Co., Atlanta Regional Commission, AT&T Broadband, BellSouth, Cobb EMC, Cobb County Fire Department , Cobb County Schools, Cobb County Tax Assessor's Department, Cobb County Water Department, Cobb County Voters registration, Georgia Power Co., U.S. Post Office, City of Kennesaw 911 Emergency, Kennesaw Planning and Zoning Department, Kennesaw Public Works Department, Kennesaw Utility Billing Department, Kennesaw Parks and Recreation Department, and Kennesaw Business License Department. The goal is to ensure that addresses are assigned and properly maintained in a logical, sequential order for the purposes of locating property anywhere in the county. An accurate addressing system facilitates quicker response times for emergency services, and provides efficient mail delivery. Correct property identification is also necessary for locating utilities. 
B.  Street numbers and addresses shall be assigned, changed and/or corrected where deemed necessary to assure the health, safety, and welfare of all City residents and property owners. Street numbers shall be posted and maintained in a prominent place on the property (i.e. Building façade, mail box, signage, etc.), which is visible from the street providing public access. The numbers shall be posted in the following manner: 
1.  For residential properties, in figures at least one inch (1") high with a contrasting background; and 
2.  For commercial properties, in figures at least two inches (2") high with a contrasting background. 
C.  Cobb County and the City of Kennesaw utilizes a grid system for assigning street names and numbers. The reference point (or zero point) of the grid is located at the Marietta Square in the county seat of Marietta, Georgia. The base line between north and south part of the county is at Whitlock Avenue. The base line between the east and west part of the County is at Church Street. Directional base lines are extended to the county's boundaries thus creating four quadrants designed N.E., N.W., S.E., and S.W. Street numbers increase as one moves away from the base lines. 
D.  Street Numbering Procedures. All property address numbers are assigned by the Community Development Department. Typically, a property located on the right side of a street is given an even number as numbers increase. Numbers are always referenced from the address grid base lines. Generally, address numbers will increase sequentially as they move away from the zero point and the base lines and will decrease as they move toward the zero point and the base lines. 
E.  Street Naming and Selection Procedures 
1.  All street names are subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council. The following guidelines are used when assigning street names: 
a.  Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with other existing, named streets shall bear the names of such existing streets. Once a name is assigned to any alignment, it may not change anywhere along the extension of that alignment. 
b.  Except within the same project, no proposed street name shall duplicate an existing street name within Cobb County regardless of the use of any suffix such as "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "way," "court," or other designation. 
c.  All streets shall bear the proper quadrant suffix (ie. N.E., N.W., S.E., S.W.). 
d.  Proposed new names shall be reviewed for correct usage and reasonable meanings consistent with the language used. Such review shall also include correct spelling. 
e.  Street names shall not include directional words such as north, south, east or west. 
f.  A street name should be pleasant sounding, appropriate and easy to read so the public and children, in particular, can communicate the name in an emergency situation. 
g.  Street names tending to be confused as homonyms (similar names spelled differently) are not acceptable. 
h.  Names derived from a foreign language are unacceptable. 
i.  Names that tend to be slurred, or have pronunciations that run together are unacceptable. 
j.  Street names with the same theme (ie. flower, states, etc) are suggested for naming streets in an entire subdivision, as means of general identification, rather than duplicating the conventional name differentiated only by the street type (suffix). 
F.  Addressing for Commercial Properties. 
1.  A current "Full Site" Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) for the parcel proposed for development must be issued by the Community Development Department. This is required before a request for a street address will be processed. An approved copy of the site plans for the project must be presented at the time of application, or the 6-digit LDP number must be made available for reference. 
2.  A field check of the property may be necessary if a proper address cannot be established. Property is typically identified by legal description (i.e. land district, land lot and parcel location). The site plans for a project are examined; the property is located on the tax map; and the correct address number range is established. 
3.  A street number conforming to sequential order established by the grid system is selected. If the number has not been duplicated anywhere in the city, an official property address is issued to the parcel. 
G.  Addressing for residential properties. For new residential subdivision, street names are determined during the preliminary plat review and approval process. Names are only approved if the street name, including street type (suffix) is unique within the city. 
For a single family residential property located outside of a subdivision, the following process will apply: 
1.  A site plan based on a recent survey must be provided. The tract must be a legal "lot of record" as recorded by plat in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court. 
2.  The site plan must be approved by the Community Development Department for applicable zoning requirements. 
3.  The driveway location for the property must be approved by the Public Works Department for access onto a minor, major or arterial road. 
4.  Since this type of tract is not typically a candidate for a LDP and does not come through the formal plan review process, it must be reviewed individually on a case by case basis. Each property is unique and may be subject to further review and requirements (i.e. City or State stream buffers, floodplain areas, variance stipulation, septic or sewer approval, etc.) 
5.  A field check of the property may be necessary to ensure the new street address is in sequence. When appropriate number is determined, an official property address notice is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.24 - Industrial Roads 
6.02.25 - Cul-de-Sacs 
A.  Dead end streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround. Cul-de-sacs shall conform to the layout and dimensional requirements as shown in the Standard Details - 104A, 104B, or 104C meet the design standards of 104A, 104B, or 104C with the exception for the standard 104D. 
B.  Commercial cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum 50' paved radius. Industrial cul-de-sacs shall meet the same design standards but have a minimum 60' paved radius. 
C.  Non-standard cul-de-sacs will be evaluated individually and may be constructed with a landscaped island (subject to approval by the Fire Marshall) to be maintained by the Homeowners Association in perpetuity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.26 - Minimum Centerline Offsets and Intersection Separation 
Streets shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet for intersecting streets on opposite sides of the through street and a minimum of 250 feet for streets on the same side of the through street, as measured between centerlines of said streets. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
STREET GRADES AND DESIGN SPEEDS 
6.02.27 - Minimum Grades 
Minimum grade for all streets shall be 1½ percent. Grades of less than 1½ percent may be approved by the Public Works Director, based on adequate engineering designs, where at least 1½ percent cannot reasonably be achieved due to topographical limitations imposed by the land. In such cases, an as-built drawing and such computations as necessary shall be provided after construction to establish that the street will drain in accordance with these regulations. Street sections where unacceptable pooling, excessive spread at catch basins, or other hazardous conditions occur shall be reconstructed or otherwise improved to eliminate such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.28 - Maximum Grades 
Maximum grade for all local residential streets shall be 18 percent. Grades between 14 and 18 percent shall require an "as graded" survey prior to the installation of the curb or utilities 

 
Maximum grade on any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be limited by drainage concerns. 
Maximum grade in excess of those listed above may be approved by the Public Works Director in order to address topographical safety, hydrological, and environmental concerns. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.29 - Vertical Alignment 
Vertical alignment must be designed in conjunction with the horizontal alignment. All changes in street profile grades having an algebraic difference greater than 1 percent shall be connected by a parabolic curve. 
Minimum safe stopping sight distance is a direct function of the design speed of 25 mph in residential and 35 mph in local, non-residential, and commercial areas. A height of eye of 3½ feet and height of object of ½-foot is used to determine safe stopping sight distance. See Standard Detail 108. 
The minimum length of vertical curve required for safe stopping sight distance shall be calculated using AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.30 - Horizontal Alignment 
For streets classified by the Major Thoroughfare Plan, see Cobb County Development Standards Section 401.20. 
HORIZONTAL CURVES 

 
A minimum tangent is required between reverse curves to facilitate steering and control. Between reverse horizontal curves there shall be not less than the minimum centerline tangents shown in the following table. Compound radii curves are prohibited, except local residential streets. 
TANGENTS 

 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.31 - Pavement Specifications 
MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS* 

 
* NOTE: Unless otherwise specified by Public Works, CDOT or GDOT. 
Pavement of sections of existing roads of less than 4' in width which cannot be properly compacted, shall have a minimum of 6" Class "B" concrete base and 1" asphaltic topping. 
Engineers can submit alternate but equivalent pavement designs. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.32 - Curbs and Gutters 
All new streets or street widening sections shall be provided with curb and gutter. All gutters shall drain positively with no areas of ponding. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.33 - Curbing 
A.  Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by GDOT) and have a minimum strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. 
B.  Typical minimum section (residential subdivision only) shall be 6" x 24" x 12" for vertical curb (see Standard Detail 106) unless otherwise specified by CDOT or GDOT. A six (6") inches by thirty (30") inches by twelve (12") inches section may be required on non-residential local and collector roads. 
C.  ½-inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at intervals not to exceed 250 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter as shown on Standard Detail 106. 
D.  When the development ties into existing curbing, the curb and gutter shall match the existing width. 
E.  Where driveway access must be made through existing curbing, the curbing must be saw cut 2' wider than the driveway throat on either side and the driveway throat curbing extended to the point of saw cut and completed with a finished joint. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.34 - Minimum Grades 
Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and the grade of the street, horizontally field staked, and finished to the section shown on the plans. Along the widening section of a road, which Public Works has identified for resurfacing within one year of the construction, the grade of the new gutter shall be placed one inch above the widening pavement grade in areas where drainage will not be adversely affected. 
Line and grade shall be set by developers' engineer or surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.35 - Other Requirements 
Inferior workmanship or unprofessional construction methods resulting in unacceptable curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
Disturbed areas along all curbing shall be back-filled, stabilized, and grassed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.36 - Sub-Grade Preparation 
A.  Sub-grade preparation on all non-local streets shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications and these regulations. Sub-grade preparation for local streets shall meet and pass proof roll testing. 
B.  If any section of the sub-grade is composed of topsoil, organic, or other unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and then thoroughly compacted as specified for fill, or stabilized with stone or a geo-textile or geo-grid. 
C.  Fill shall be placed in uniform, horizontal layers not more than eight inches thick (loose measurement). Moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary to compact material to 95 percent of maximum dry density except for the top twelve inches, which shall be compacted to 100 percent of maximum dry density. 
D.  After the earthwork has been completed, all storm drainage, water, and sanitary sewer utilities have been installed within the right-of-way as appropriate, and the back-fill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the sub-grade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical roadway section shown on the plans. 
E.  Utility trenches cut in the sub-grade shall be back-filled as specified herein. Compaction tests at the rate of one per 150 feet of trench shall be provided to verify compaction. 
F.  The sub-grade must pass proof roll testing regardless of compaction test prior to placement of the base material. With the approval of the Kennesaw Public Works and Community Development Department, a geo-textile or grid may be used to stabilize a sub-grade that does not pass proof-rolling. 
G.  Provisions shall be made to drain low points in the road construction when the final paving is delayed. A break in the berm section is required when the curbing has not been constructed. After installation, drainage under the curb is required. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.37 - Signing and Striping 
Traffic Control Devices (signs and pavement markings) are normally provided by the City for local residential streets to be dedicated to the City for maintenance. On major thoroughfares, non-residential development, and private roads signs and pavement markings are to be provided by the developer. Traffic control devices must comply with the MUTCD and be approved by Public Works. No traffic control devices shall be installed without prior approval by Public Works. The developer shall provide and install all traffic control devices (signs and pavement), marking for streets not dedicated to the City for maintenance. All traffic control devices must comply with the MUTCD, City, CDOT, and GDOT design and installation standards. Decorative sign ownership and maintenance of these traffic control devices shall be transferred to the Home Owners Association at an appropriate time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.38 - Street Signs 
Streets dedicated to the City for maintenance shall be identified by signage of white lettering on green background. Private owned/maintained streets shall be identified by signage having white lettering on blue background. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.39 - Blocks 
A.  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, unless a planned unit development is contemplated; 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
B.  In general, residential blocks shall not be greater than 1,800 feet in length or less than 600 feet in length. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, the planning commission may, when existing or proposed public gathering places so justify, require public crosswalks across the block. 
C.  The depth of residential blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots, unless prohibited by natural or manmade barriers, or unless one tier backs onto a line of another person's property, provided that this shall not prevent the inclusion with the subdivision plan of blocks of greater width including super blocks. Super blocks may contain public or joint use areas, such as parks and playgrounds, and shall be covered by adequate maintenance agreements if not dedicated and accepted for public maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.02.40 - Lots 
A.  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. Each lot shall abut upon a public street. 
B.  The size, shape and orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the planning commission for the type of development and use contemplated. No lot shall be more than six times as deep as it is wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the planning commission. 
C.  Every residential lot shall conform to the minimum dimension and area requirements of the zoning ordinance, provided that every lot not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirements of the health department. 
D.  Additional building setback lines shall conform to front yard and building setback requirements of the zoning ordinance, unless excepted by the planning commission. 
E.  Size, shape and arrangement of commercial and industrial lots, where platted, shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission, provided that approval is not granted under the provisions of section 80-114. 
F.  Double frontage, unless required by the planning commission, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography orientation and property size. A planting screen reservation of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
G.  Lot remnants (lots below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
H.  The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing public street or to a street contained within the proposed subdivision. 
I.  The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake shall be such that lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the centerline of the lake. Such requirements may be waived upon submittal to the planning commission of an acceptable method for the maintenance of the lake and any recreational operations to be provided thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § 1(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
6.03.00 - STREET LIGHTS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-07, adopted April 2, 2018, amended § 6.03.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6.03.00 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-11, §§ 2—5, 7—9, 12, adopted May 1, 1995; and Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2007. 

6.03.01 - Street Light District 
(a)  Authority: The governing authority of the City of Kennesaw is granted supplementary powers pursuant to Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ 3(a)(4) to provide street light services within corporate limits. Further, the City is granted powers with respect to its municipal street system to provide lighting on any public road located within its corporate limits. O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(a)(9). Further, Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VI permits the City to create a special district for the provision of local government services within such district and allows a fee to be collected within such district to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. Such special district may be created and fees collected by municipal ordinance. 
(b)  Purpose: The governing authority of the City of Kennesaw does hereby declare that it shall promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City by providing for street lights in public rights-of-way. The governing authority of the City finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of Kennesaw and to those visiting the City of Kennesaw that the City provide a street light system that is functional, operational, aesthetically pleasing and uniform throughout the City. The maintenance of street lights in the public rights-of-way provides illumination for vehicular and pedestrian commuters in the City to navigate and travel to and from their respective destinations along and across the public rights-of-way during non-daylight hours. Further, street lights provide illumination for citizens to access (ingress and egress) and frequent commercial and residential establishments within the City during non-daylight hours. Further, the illumination provided by street lights during non-daylight hours may help to reduce crime by discouraging criminal behavior in areas that are lighted throughout areas of the City. The City finds that the cost to provide street lights within the City rights-of-way should be borne by all property owners that receive the public benefit of street lights Citywide. 
(c)  Creation: The governing authority of the City does hereby create a special street light district pursuant to Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VI as amended from time to time. The boundaries of said district are the same as the corporate limits of the City of Kennesaw as they currently exist on the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
(d)  Annexation and Deannexation: Upon the annexation of any territory into the City following the adoption of this ordinance, the boundaries of the street light district shall extend to include the territory so annexed and all territory so annexed shall thereafter be subject to the terms of this article. Upon the dennaxation of any territory out of the City, the boundaries of the street light district shall be reduced to exclude the territory so deannexed and all territory so deannexed shall thereafter not be subject to the terms of this article. 
(e)  Cost: The governing authority of the City does hereby declare that the cost for the creation and maintenance of the street light district shall be a service, as authorized by Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VI, and not a tax. A street light district special revenue fund shall be created and revenues from the street light district program will be deposited into that special revenue fund. Such revenue shall be used exclusively for any direct and indirect costs and expenses related to the City's street light district program, including but not limited to, the cost to purchase street lights on the public right-of-way and to supply electricity to street lights in the public right-of-way in the district. 
(f)  Service Fee: Each owner of each parcel of land contained in the street light district, unless exempted herein, is required to pay a monthly service fee to the City's street light district special revenue fund, as such fee is determined from time to time by the Mayor and City Council. A 'parcel of land' or 'parcel' for purposes of this Article means any plot, lot, or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records that has its own individually assigned tax parcel number. 
(g)  Calculation of Service Fee: The fee calculation for each parcel will be based on the amount the City actually paid to Georgia Power Company and Cobb EMC for street light services and structures during the twelve months preceding each budget year for which the fee is calculated and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
(1)  The manner in which the parcel is developed will determine the method of calculation to determine the amount of the service fee. The Public Works Director will take an annual inventory of all property types throughout the City including commercial (single and multi-unit parcels), industrial (single and multi-unit parcels), residential (single and multi-unit parcels) and institutional; 
(2)  All single family residential parcels will be charged a flat fee; 
(3)  All multi-family parcels will be charged a flat fee based on the number of units developed on that parcel minus 10% (to account for non-leased or vacant units); 
(4)  All commercial, industrial, and institutional parcels (single parcel and multi-unit parcels) will be charged a per-acre fee based on the average number of total units developed divided by the total number of acres. 
(h)  Exemptions: The following parcels are exempt from having to pay the street light service fee: (1) any parcel of land that is undeveloped; (2) any parcel of land that is developed but which has not obtained a certificate of occupancy at the time the fee is collected by the City; (3) any parcel of land whose owner has obtained a temporary suspension by the Director of Public Works; and 4) parcels that comprise common areas owned by homeowner and property owner associations. 
(1)  Temporary Suspension: A single family residential parcel, a single commercial parcel, a single industrial parcel, or a single institutional parcel of land that is developed but not occupied for more than three consecutive months is eligible for a temporary suspension by the Director of Public Works from the monthly street light district fee. Process: An owner or owner's representative may make application with the Director on forms provided by the Department for the temporary suspension. The application shall include an affirmative and sworn statement by the parcel owner, or his/her representative, that the property will be unoccupied and vacant for at least three consecutive months. 
(2)  Expiration: The suspension under this section automatically expires whenever the parcel becomes occupied or within twelve months following the granting of the suspension, whichever occurs first. To the extent the property remains unoccupied upon the expiration of the suspension, a new application for a temporary suspension must be filed with the Department in order to remain suspended from the payment of the fee. 
(3)  Resuming collection: Once the suspension under this section expires, the City shall thereafter resume collection of the monthly service fee to the City's street light district special revenue fund for that parcel. 
(4)  No retroactive application: Fee waivers shall not apply retroactively and the City is under no obligation to refund the special street light district fees already received. 
(i)  Administrative Remedy for multi-family residential parcel whose vacancy rate based on non-leased units is more than 10%: An owner or owner's representative of a multi-family residential parcel whose vacancy rate based on non-leased units is more than 10% for six consecutive months may make application with the Public Works Director for an adjustment of its monthly fee to be based on number of units actually occupied. The request for adjustment shall include an affirmative and sworn statement by the parcel owner, or his or her representative, that the multi-unit residential parcel has more than 10% of its units vacant based on non-leased units for six consecutive months. To the extent that an adjustment is made by the Public Works Director, the adjusted monthly fee is effective for six months. 
(j)  Collection: The City shall collect the street light service fee on all non-exempt parcels through the City's monthly billing statement. 
(1)  The street light district service account shall be in the name of the parcel owner, even if the structure located on the parcel is leased to a tenant. The parcel owner shall be responsible for paying the monthly fee. 
(2)  The fee shall be paid by the due date and interest may accrue and be assessed against the parcel's account for all payments made after the due date. A service charge shall be assessed for all dishonored checks or dishonored credit card charges in the amount equal to any charge incurred by the City in connection with same. 
(3)  If the account becomes delinquent for more than four months, a lien may be placed against the parcel and any further delinquencies may result in the City foreclosing on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, 4-2-18) 
6.03.02 - Conformance by developers; acceptance of public right-of-way 
(a)  The owner, developer, or any other person or entity developing a subdivision, a shopping center, industrial park, office park, apartment complex or like development constructing new streets or roads to be dedicated to the City or utilize existing City roads or any combination thereof shall be required to provide street lights which conform to all standards provided in this article. 
(b)  The City will not accept any streets for dedication unless the provisions of this article are complied with. The Public Works Director shall not recommend the acceptance of any public streets or roads proposed to be dedicated to the City for perpetual ownership and maintenance until such time as the street lights conform to the approval street light layout. Unless waived by the Public Works Director, the developer, at the time of submitting the final plat to the City, shall: 
(1)  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing the exact location of street lights within the development. For residential subdivisions, this drawing must be approved by the public works department prior to obtaining any building permit within the subdivision. For nonresidential developments, the drawing must be approved by the public works department and payment made for installation of standards/poles prior to acceptance by the city of any streets or roads for public maintenance. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company, which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. 
(2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
(3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the public works department. 
(4)  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(5)  Submit an executed contract between the homeowners' association and an independent electrical contractor for complete maintenance and/or replacement of such lighting, equipment and wiring. 
(6)  The following requirements are minimum requirements pertaining to street lighting. The Public Works Department or the City may require additional information or conditions prior to final approval: 
i)  Lighting plan drawn to scale showing the location of all proposed lights, including all nearby City and County streets; 
ii)  Arrangement of all poles; 
iii)  Height of all poles; 
iv)  Type of electrical service (underground or overhead); 
v)  Number of luminaries per pole; 
vi)  Mounting heights of luminaries; 
vii)  Wattage of proposed lights; 
viii)  Mounting angle of fixtures; 
ix)  Lamp source to be used; 
x)  Photograph of the light to be utilized must be attached to the final plans. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, 4-2-18) 
6.03.03 - Standards; Approval by Director 
(a)  Safe Use of Roadways: Street lights to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner so as to prevent glare from being a nuisance, or creating a hazard, or interfering with the normal use of adjacent residential property or the public rights-of-way. Lighting shall be established in such a way that the quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. 
(b)  Illumination: 
1.  In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute latest edition, as amended, is adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the City on rights-of-way in the City, subject to the following recommended minimum standards. 
2.  A .2 minimum foot candle level is recommended for pedestrian lighting and street scape lighting projects. 
3.  A 1.0 minimum foot candle level is recommended for parking areas and multi-family residential developments using mounting heights in the range of 25-30 feet using an LED fixture. A .5 minimum foot candle level is recommended for parking areas and multi-family residential developments using a decorative post top style lighting application. 
(c)  Subdivisions: The lighting plan shall provide that lighting be located at all subdivision entrances, cul-de-sacs, and intersections and pole locations every third lot line, as such location is permissible by the design. 
(d)  Mounting Height: The fixtures shall be mounted on a minimum of 16 and 25 feet above the ground for post top and regular street lamps, respectively, and each fixture shall have appropriate arm length to illuminate the street. Mounting heights in subdivisions should not exceed 16 feet. 
(e)  Lights at Intersections: The City may require, in addition to other requirements, a light to be located at any or all street intersections within any development. 
(f)  Parking lots: In order to ensure adequate illumination of parking lots and promote safety and security, the Parking Lot Design Guide standards set forth for Basic Enhanced Security, Security, and High Security as set forth in the Illuminating Engineering Society Lighting Handbook (IESNA), latest edition, as amended, is adopted a the standard for the installation and operating of lighting in parking lots in the City. 
(g)  Discretion to Approve Plans: Notwithstanding the objective standards contained in this ordinance, the Director is authorized, in his or her discretion, to vary from those standards and approve lighting plans that are consistent with the objectives and goals of this ordinance, which include, but are not limited to: 1) to locate street lights on lot lines; 2) to eliminate glare of lights existing on commercial property to negatively impact the use and enjoyment of adjacent residentially used property; 3) to provide adequate illumination for safe use of streets, sidewalks and parking areas; and 4) to maintain uniform and aesthetically pleasing lighting system throughout the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, 4-2-18) 
6.03.04 - Appeal 
Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Director made under this Article may appeal that decision to the Board of Construction Appeals pursuant to Section 10.05.01 of the Unified Development Code within 30 days of the Director's decision. Any such appeal shall be made in writing and sent via statutory overnight delivery to the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, 4-2-18) 
6.04.00 - MAJOR THOROUGHFARES 

6.04.01 - Process 
Roadways, streets, or highways that are shown on the Cobb County Major Thoroughfare Plan to be classified as arterials, major collectors, or minor collectors shall conform to this section. Also, new roadways that the County determines to be classified as major thoroughfares shall conform to this section. All roadways proposed for industrial use shall conform to this section. 
Because major thoroughfares carry a higher volume of traffic and a higher rate of speed than the lower classified roadways, the planning, design, and construction of these roadways must conform to higher standards. 
A.  New, modified, or improved major thoroughfares must be coordinated with the existing Major Thoroughfare Plan and all future planned roadways on file with the County, State, or City. 
B.  The design of the roadway shall be performed by an engineering firm pre-qualified with CDOT and/or GDOT who shall become pre-qualified prior to performing the services involved. Both maintains a list of pre-qualified engineering firms for all the categories of roadway, bridge, environmental, surveying, traffic engineering, and geotechnical services involved with roadway projects. 
C.  The plan review process shall be as follows: 
1.  Concept Plan & Traffic Study 
2.  Preliminary Engineering 
3.  Right-of-Way Plans 
4.  Final Construction Plans (including pavement design) 
D.  Plans shall conform to the CDOT, GDOT Specifications, and AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. The design shall utilize the GDOT construction standards and details. 
E.  If the County is to fund, participate, or otherwise share the cost of any part of the construction of the roadway or related infrastructure, the design services must conform to Cobb's standard Consultant Services Agreement, latest revision. 
F.  If the County is to administer the construction contract (bid the project) the plans shall be prepared in accordance with all chapters of the Cobb DOT Roadway Plans Preparation Manual, latest edition. 
6.04.02 - Specifications 
Specifications and design criteria stated herein are for planning purposes. Design exceptions will be considered on a case-by-case basis and it is the responsibility of the developer and his engineer to identify the exceptions in the concept and preliminary design stages. Exceptions/variances will be subject to approval by the Public Works Director. 
A.  Right-of-Way 
MINIMUM RIGHT-OF-WAY PER ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION 

 
1.  Additional right-of-way width may be required to be dedicated at intersections or other locations where turning lanes, medians, traffic signal poles and controllers, or other improvements are required and the minimum right-of-way standard would be inadequate to accommodate the improvements. 
2.  For existing roadways being improved or modified where the proposed centerline of the pavement to right-of-way is less than ½ the width shown herein, the additional width will be required for all property fronting the roadway. 
3.  Right-of-way mitres are required at all intersections and are dependent on the size of the intersection curb radii. 
4.  Permanent and temporary easements will be required and shall conform to the City of Kennesaw UDC Standards. 
5.  Deeding of right-of-way is covered in Dedication of Right-of-Way and Easements Section. 
B.  Roadway/Lane Width 
1.  Roadway widths curb, and gutter dimensions are based on the Functional Classification of the Roadway. Lane widths for non-residential roads shall be (13) thirteen feet unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. 
2.  One way, single access lane shall be (20) twenty feet back of curb to back of curb, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. 
3.  If any part of the roadway improvements is within the limits of CDOT and/or GDOT jurisdiction, the lane widths shall comply with the County's or State's requirements. 
4.  For right-of-way and lane width requirements for multi-lane urban section streets, see Standard Details. 
C.  Intersection Design 
1.  Angle of intersection 
2.  Intersections for new roadways shall not be at an interior angle less than 85° unless the intersection is otherwise warranted and approved for a stop-and-go traffic signal in which case the minimum angle shall be 80°. 
3.  Intersections of existing roadways shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis using AASHTO, latest edition guidelines. 
4.  Intersection radius 
5.  Intersections radii for new roadways shall be as follows: 
35' for Minor Collectors  40' for Major Collectors  50' for Arterials 
6.  Larger radii will be required if channelized right turn lanes are proposed. 
7.  Larger radii will be required if the intersecting angle of the roadways is less than 85°. 
8.  Traffic Signals 
9.  Intersections on thoroughfares with another roadway classified as a major thoroughfare shall require a traffic study utilizing Highway Capacity Software and the MUTCD, latest editions, signal warrants. Additional intersections may require a traffic study pursuant to Cobb County or GDOT traffic study requirements. 
6.04.03 - Maximum Grades and Super elevation 

 
6.04.04 - Pavement Sections 
(Per GDOT Specifications) 

 
* Additional structural pavement section may be required by Kennesaw Public Works. 
6.04.05 - Bikeways 
The Cobb County Bikeway Plan shall be reviewed by the developer and his engineer and incorporated into the concept stage of the plan preparation. If bikeways are to be provided, three to four feet of additional pavement width on both sides of the roadway will be required. Additional right-of-way may be required. Residential subdivisions shall be excluded. 
6.04.06 - Non-Motorized Accommodation 
The City encourages non-motorized accommodation (i.e., bicycle, pedestrians, etc.) design in accordance with routes designated on the adopted Cobb County Bicycle Plan. 
6.05.00 - ACCESS 

6.05.01 - General 
A.  Driveways provide access to property and are a service to the traveling public. However, vehicles entering or leaving driveways may disrupt the flow of traffic on streets and cause accidents, thereby infringing on the rights of the public to travel the roadway. All driveways should be restricted to locations where movements into and out of them can occur in a safe and orderly manner. 
B.  Because of their simple appearance, driveways often do not receive sufficient design consideration. At the least, driveways should always be designed to eliminate or minimize opposite lane encroachment while entering and exiting property. 
C.  All driveways are to be designed and constructed to provide turning radii for appropriate design vehicles sufficient to minimize adjacent lane encroachment. For commercial driveway requirements see Standard Detail 116. 
D.  All driveways are to be designed and constructed with sidewalk transitions as appropriate. 
E.  All driveways are to be considered low volume intersections and to comply with minimum Intersection/Corner Sight Distance requirements of these regulations. 
F.  Additional guidance is available in GDOT document "Driveway and Encroachment Control". 
6.05.02 - Access From Thoroughfare Streets 
A.  In order to provide ease and convenience in ingress/egress to private property and the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on thoroughfares, there shall be the minimum number of access points to adequately serve the development. The number and location of driveways shall be regulated. 
B.  When property frontage is less than 200 feet, only one driveway shall be considered for approval. Additional entrances/exits for property having street frontage in excess of 200 feet may be considered by Public Works Director upon a showing that such additional entrances/exits are necessary and would not increase traffic congestion or otherwise reduce the safety and convenience of the traveling public. 
C.  To allow for proper corner clearance, the minimum tangent curb length between a driveway radius and an intersection shall be 100 feet. 
D.  If the closest intersection is or is likely to be signalized, traffic movements to and from any driveway within 250 feet of an intersection with (as measured from the point of tangency) a collector or an arterial shall be limited to right turns only. 
6.05.03 - Access Limitations for Development Adjacent to Thoroughfares 
A.  All access points and driveways adjacent to thoroughfares may be subject to further restriction and consideration as may be deemed necessary by the CDOT and/or GDOT and/or Public Works Director to insure safe, functional design and efficient operation of the thoroughfares. A maximum number of 200 residential dwelling units shall be allowed one street outlet on an existing public street. If a second access to an existing public road is not available or, in the opinion of Public Works Director, would encourage non-residential traffic to traverse the development, a single entrance may be allowed if designed with sufficient right-of-way and improvements to provide a protected left-turn lane, subject to the approval of CDOT and/or GDOT. 
B.  For non-residential developments, improvements to provide a separate left-turn lane shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
C.  Access to all residential lots shall be from interior subdivision streets or roads where possible. Exceptions are subject to approval from the Public Works Director. Subdivisions of three or less lots may be exempted upon approval by the Public Works Director with proper consideration of safety, hydrological, and environmental concerns. 
D.  Catch basins should not be installed within access/driveway radii (turning radii). 
6.05.04 - Service Drives 
A.  Where a development borders on or contains a limited access roadway right-of-way, or arterial road right-of-way, GDOT, CDOT, and/or Public Works Director may require a service drive or suitable provisions for future service drives approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Distances involving rights-of-way shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
B.  All driveways along designated thoroughfares with existing or planned service roads shall access to such service roads. To gain temporary direct access to the thoroughfare, the developer shall construct the section of the service road adjacent to the development. The service road section shall be located where planned. Any right-of-way not previously dedicated shall be dedicated prior to consideration of a temporary driveway approval providing direct access to the thoroughfare. 
6.05.05 - Driveways; Permit to Construct 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to construct, establish, open, grade or cause to have constructed, or in any manner to form or use a driveway or other opening from private property into any street, highway or thoroughfare in the City or entered upon across any sidewalk in the city, without first obtaining a permit for such work from the Public Works Director or his designee. 
B.  When such permit is issued, the permittee shall conform to all requirements of the standard specifications of the City, Cobb County and Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) in use at the time for that portion of the driveway from the curb or gutter line to the property line, and such constructing party shall conform to all grades established and other special requirements in effect at the time. 
C.  In no event, shall any driveway be constructed in the City so as to prevent or obstruct the free flow or passage of water in the gutters of any streets in the city, or in any streets themselves having no gutters constructed thereon. 
MEDIAN OPENINGS 
6.05.06 - Location 
No median opening shall be spaced at a distance less than 660 feet from any other median opening (measured from nose to nose) unless specifically approved by the Public Works Director. 
6.05.07 - Design Criteria 
All median openings shall include at least 200 feet storage with 100 feet transition unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. 
6.05.08 - Building Setbacks Adjacent to Thoroughfares 
Any building constructed along a thoroughfare as defined by the Cobb County Major Thoroughfare Plan, latest edition, shall have a minimum setback from the required right-of-way as required by the UDC. 
6.05.09 - Residential Driveway Standards 
6.05.10 - Residential Driveways 
Residential driveways provide a primary means of access to single-family residential uses. 
Along collector and arterial roadways, residential driveways are to be designed and constructed to the following standards. GDOT Standard # 6050 may be substituted, if prior approval is made by the Public Works Director. 
1.  Width - Minimum 12', Maximum 24' on right-of-way 
2.  Radii or flare - Minimum 5' 
3.  Spacing from street intersection - Minimum 50' 
4.  Angle of intersection with street/roadway - Approximately right angled 80 o to 100 o 
5.  Corner/intersection sight distance - To comply with corner/intersection sight distance requirements of roadway intersected with the driveway as per these regulations. 
6.  Landing grade - Compatible with shoulder grade 
7.  Length - A minimum of 25' or to the edge of the County or State, or City right-of-way, whichever is greater, shall be paved with a treated hardened surface. 
8.  Maximum 10 percent on driveways. 
Rural residential driveways may be constructed with an asphalt pavement section, if approved by the Public Works Director. 
6.05.11 - Driveway Drainage Pipes 
A residential driveway constructed at a location along a roadway shall have a ditch along the roadside for the purpose of collecting, channeling, and controlling storm water runoff. In addition to the design and construction requirements, rural residential driveways shall be constructed with culverts to conduct storm water underneath the driveway and shall be: 
1.  Concrete pipe, or other type of culvert approved by the Public Works Director; 
2.  Sized to accommodate the 25-year storm, as a minimum; 
3.  Provided with flare-end/or headwall sections at the inlet and outlet; 
4.  Of sufficient length to accommodate a minimum of 2-foot shoulders at each end of the driveway with a maximum side slope of 3:1 to the bottom of the ditch line; and, 
5.  Installed in a ditch of minimum 2-foot wide flat bottom with sides sloped at a grade no greater than 2:1 stabilized with acceptable vegetation. 
6.05.12 - Non-Residential Driveways 
Driveways servicing developments shall provide uninterrupted ingress/egress to and from the site. The minimum distance required is measured from the street right-of-way line at the ingress/egress to the outer edge of any interior service drive or parking space with direct access to such driveway as measured perpendicularly from the street. The length of the uninterrupted ingress/egress is determined by the maximum peak hour volume of the facility in which the driveway is provided and as shown in the table below. The developer shall provide this information. 

 
Non-residential driveways shall not be designed or marked to allow more than one lane of traffic to exit onto a street simultaneously, unless such driveway is channelized in accordance with traffic engineering design principles as applicable when designing channelized street intersections. 
As may be requested, left-turn driveway lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and provide a minimum 150 feet storage with 100 feet transition. 
Non-Residential driveways are to be constructed to the following standards: 
 1. Width - Minimum 24' two way access  *Maximum 32' two way access  Minimum 14' one-way access  Maximum 18' one-way access 
 2. Radii - Minimum 30'  Maximum 50' 
3.  Spacing from street intersection - Minimum one hundred (100) feet tangent 
4.  Composition - Shall meet or exceed the same specification as the connecting public roadway 
5.  Drainage - Consistent with existing drainage plan of the connecting public roadway unless other improvements are required for safety, hydrological and environmental considerations 
6.  Angle of intersection with roadway - Approximately right angled 80 o to 100 o 
7.  Corner/intersection sight distance - To comply with corner/intersection sight distance requirements of roadway intersected with the driveway as per these regulations 
8.  Landing grade - +2 percent of intersecting roadway within the right-of-way 
Driveway designs other than as provided within these regulations, i.e., median divided or additional lanes, are subject to consideration of the CDOT, GDOT, or Public Works Department. 
6.05.13 - Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes/Roadway Improvements Along Existing Streets 
A.  The City shall require a deceleration and/or acceleration lane for all developments unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. Requirements for constructing the lane(s), by the Public Works Department includes (but are not limited to) sight distance, posted speed limit, classification of the existing street, volumes on the existing street, volumes to be generated by the development, vertical curvature, horizontal curvature, length of property road frontage, hydrological, and environmental concerns. 
B.  During the evaluation of the development's entrance, additional improvements, such as tapers, left turn lanes, bypass lanes, median modification, or other facilities, may be required to enhance safety and operations. The developer should contact Kennesaw Public Works Department at the earliest possible time to request the evaluation so the appropriate construction plans are prepared and submitted through the plan review process. 
6.06.00 - OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES 
GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

6.06.01 - Street Access 
Each building shall be located on a lot or parcel, which abuts a public street for at least 50 feet. Access to a public street by means of a recorded access easement may be permitted if approved by the Zoning Administrator and Public Works Director. 
6.06.02 - Street Access - Curb Cuts in Residential Districts 
Curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits, and other similar facilities on public streets in Residential Districts shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of any intersection or within 40 feet of another curb cut. A curb cut shall be no greater than 40 feet in width and no closer than 20 feet to any property line. 
6.06.03 - State Highway Department Approval 
All entrances or exits of any street or drive, public or private, from or to any State highway shall be approved by GDOT prior to the construction of such street or drive, or the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive, but permit approval shall not be held longer than 30 days. A copy of the approval shall be provided to the Public Works Department before any work is done. 
6.06.04 - Corner Visibility Clearance 
In any district no fence, structure sign, planting, or other obstruction (above a height of three feet) shall be placed and/or maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
6.06.05 - Off-Street Automobile Parking 
Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
6.06.06 - Design Standards 
All parking facilities, including entrances, exits, and maneuvering areas shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.  Shall have access to a public street; 
2.  Shall be graded and paved, including access drive(s), and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control; 
3.  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curbstones, or other similar designations; 
a.  Each space set at a 90° angle shall have not less than 162 square feet and shall not be less than 8 feet 6 inches wide and 19 feet deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than 24 feet wide; 
b.  Each space set at a 60° angle shall have not less than 176 square feet and shall be not less than 8 feet 6 inches wide and 20 feet 8 inches deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than 18 feet 6 inches wide; each space set at a 45° angle shall have not less than 165 square feet and shall be not less than 8 feet 6 inches wide and 19 feet 5 inches deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than 13 feet 6 inches wide; 
4.  There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street; 
5.  Shall be drained to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets; 
6.  Lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. Such lighting shall be arranged and installed not to reflect or causes glare on abutting properties or roadways and shall be subject to the lighting standards. 
7.  Any parking areas within the required front yard of any RM or office district shall not be closer than ten feet to any public right-of-way. 
8.  No parking or loading area shall be established in the required front yard of any "R" District except for a single-family residential use; no more than 35 percent of the required front yard may be used for parking and total impervious surface in such case. 
9.  The parking area shall be separated from sidewalks and streets by a strip of land at least ten feet wide as measured from the edge of pavement reserved as open space and planted in grass. 
10.  Surfaces for parking spaces and areas are to be installed by a professional contractor and have a smooth finish that does not create any tripping hazards or irregular textured surface that may cause injury. 
11.  The provisions of subsections above shall not apply to single-family residential uses where three (3) or less spaces are required, except that it shall have access to a public street. 
6.06.07 - Location 
All parking facilities shall be located in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  The required space shall be provided on the same plot with the use it serves, except as provided herein; 
2.  If vehicular parking or storage space required cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Zoning Administrator and Public Works Director may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such vehicular parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not hereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner; and 
3.  The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for religious assemblies, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sunday may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 11, 4-20-15) 
6.06.08 - Location and Surface of Parking Areas 
The parking of any vehicle, including but not limited to recreational vehicles as defined in section 1.09.02, motorized homes, private passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles, boats, with or without trailers, campers, and utility trailers, on any lot in any district on other than a surface treated and hardened to accommodate such vehicle is prohibited except as provided herein. In addition, parking of vehicles in a residentially zoned district shall be located on a hardened treated surfaced driveway or in a carport or garage. A treated or hardened surface shall be defined as concrete or asphaltic pavement. Alternative paving materials/designs may be approved by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15) 
6.06.09 - Required Spaces - Table 6.06.09A 
The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 
Table 6.06.09A: PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 12, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 2016-18, § 6, 8-15-16) 
6.06.10 - Restricted Parking Areas for Business and Industrial Uses 
The establishment and operation of a restricted parking area shall be permitted in such parts of any residential district except the HIS, RR, R-80, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-12, and R-10 districts as abut, either directly or across an alley or street, a commercial or industrial district subject to the conditions and requirements of this section 
A.  The parking lot shall be accessory to and for use in connection with one (1) or more business or industrial establishments located in an adjoining commercial or industrial district. 
B.  Such parking lot shall be situated on premises which have an area of not less than 6,000 square feet, which shall be at least fifty (50) feet either contiguous to or across an alley or street from a commercial or industrial district. 
C.  Such parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger vehicles. 
D.  No commercial repair work or service of any kind other than emergency repairs shall be conducted on such parking lot. 
E.  No sign of any kind, other than those designating entrances, exits and use, shall be maintained on such parking lot. 
F.  A buffer shall be provided along all side and rear lot lines. 
G.  No charge shall be made for parking except directly to the business or industrial establishments in the adjoining district who are using the lot to meet the parking space requirements of this ordinance. 
H.  Each entrance and exit to and from such parking lot shall be at least twenty (20) feet distant from any adjacent property located in any residential district. 
I.  The location and design of entrances, exits, surfacing, marking, and lighting shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer and Planning Commission. 
J.  Such parking lot shall have all spaces adequately marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar designations. 
K.  Such parking lot shall be permanently maintained by the owners or the tenants for their invitees and/or licenses so long as the use exists. 
L.  After giving thirty (30) days written notice of any violation of the provisions of this section, the building official may revoke a permit granted for a restricted parking lot. 
6.06.11 - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry hereafter erected, shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley, or if no alley exists, to a street. For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet by forty (40) feet, exclusive of adequate access drives and maneuvering space, and an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet in height above the alley or street grade. 
A.  Retail business: One (1) space for each 3,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof. 
B.  Wholesale and industry: One (1) space for each 10,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof. 
C.  Truck terminal: Ample space to accommodate the maximum number of trucks loading, unloading or stored at any time. 
6.07.00 - PARKING LOT DESIGN AND DRIVEWAY STANDARDS 
General. These provisions shall be used on all developments, private property and City right-of-way. These off street parking rules shall apply to any parking area where three or more vehicle stalls are required. Parking lots should be graded and drained to allow for the disposal of all surface water accumulated within the area and should be arranged and identified so as to provide for an orderly, safe loading or unloading, parking and storage of all vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-47), 2-21-06) 

6.07.01 - Sub-Grade Design 
A.  Sub-grade preparation should be completed according to the City of Kennesaw Developmental Standards. 
B.  Grading and compaction of the area should be completed so as to eliminate yielding or pumping of soil. 
C.  Sub-grade must be uniform and have a minimum of 95 percent standard proctor density. 
D.  Unsuitable soil shall be removed from the area. If unsuitable soil cannot be removed from the area due to environmental conditions, a soil reinforcement mat and additional gravel stone base shall be used to meet the required compaction density. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-48), 2-21-06) 
6.07.02 - Drainage 
A.  Off-street parking areas should be designed and graded in such a manner as to dispose of all surface water accumulation from within the area. Drainage over sidewalks or onto adjacent property shall not be permitted. A storm water drainage management plan shall be required for all new off-street parking areas. This plan may include detention areas within the parking lot. 
B.  Off-street parking should be designed for a maximum six percent slope and a minimum two percent slope. Driveways are recommended to not exceed an eight percent slope. Driveways may drain surface water to the street drainage system or to the site the driveway is serving and is located on. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-48), 2-21-06) 
6.07.03 - Pavement Requirement for Parking Lots 
Rigid and flexible pavement design life should be for 20 years. Pavement thickness for parking lot areas shall be as follows: 
1.  Rigid pavement design: Portland cement concrete type A  Class A - General purpose concrete 3000 PSI 
2.  Flexible pavement design: Hot mix asphalt shall be per the thickness charts below. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-49), 2-21-06) 
6.07.04 - Areas Subject to Light Loads 
Parking lots subject to 200 or fewer autos per day and/or two or less trucks per day or equivalent axle loads, as determined by the Director of Public Works, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
Table 1 Light Loads 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-50), 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.07.05 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-03, adopted May 7, 2012, deleted § 6.07.05, which pertained to areas subject to moderate loads and derived from Ord. No. 2006-06, §(18-51), adopted Feb. 21, 2006. 
6.07.06 - Areas Subject to Moderately Heavy Loads 
The pavement for entrances, perimeter travel lanes, frontage roads, trash dumpster sites, and delivery truck parking as well as approach areas to these spaces must be increased in thickness to prevent pavement failure caused by weight and dynamic loading. These areas should be constructed with thickness that will support this special type of pavement loading. Failure to provide this could result in severe pavement failure. 
Table 2 Moderately Heavy Loads 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-52), 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.07.07 - Areas Subject to Heavy Loads 
Industrial parking lots/truck stops, and those areas designed primarily for trucks, require a thicker pavement. For those parking lots greater than 200 trucks per day, as determined by the Director of Public Works, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
Table 3 Heavy Loads 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-53), 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.07.08 - Curb and Guttering Options 
A.  Where possible off-street parking and associated driveways, access roadways and frontage roads are required to have curb and gutter. 
B.  All concrete curbing shall be at least three feet from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structure where parking, driveways, or aisles are located. 
C.  All concrete curbing shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City development standards. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-54), 2-21-06) 
6.07.09 - Additional Driveways 
The provisions of this section shall be applied on all requests for driveways that are not part of a site plan under a current plan review/approval process. 
1.  An "Additional Driveway Request Form" must be completed and submitted to the building services department. This submittal shall include a scaled drawing or sketch with the dimensions of the parcel and requested driveway. 
2.  There is a $25.00 fee per residential driveway and a $50.00 fee per commercial driveway requested. 
3.  The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the review of all requests. 
4.  Construction shall not begin on any driveway request until the request has been approved by the Public Works Director. Any construction started before the request has been approved shall be required to be returned to the original condition of the parcel prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(18-55), 2-21-06) 
6.07.10 - Visibility at Intersections 
On a corner lot in the city, no plant, structure, fence, wall, sign or other obstruction to vision shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersection of street right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting points on said street lines, each of which is twenty-five (25) feet distance from the point of intersection. 
6.07.11 - Functional Elements of On-Site Circulation System 
An on-site circulation plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City for developments. 
6.08.00 - SIDEWALKS AND PATHWAYS 
The City is actively pursuing the continuation of an integrated and multi-modal transportation system that promotes compliance with the Federal Clean Air Act by emphasizing the need to create increased pedestrian travel opportunities by expanding the sidewalk network and developing a pathway program. Whenever possible, developers will be encouraged to construct sidewalk along the right-of-way abutting their developments. The pathway program takes pedestrian access one step further by providing safe, convenient access to activity centers such as schools, parks, and shopping centers in an effort to encourage pedestrian and non-motorized vehicular travel. The county will support and encourage a viable network of off-street travel routes that can reduce the need for and volume of vehicular traffic throughout the county. 

6.08.01 - General Sidewalk Requirements 
When a subdivision project abuts a public right-of-way, sidewalks shall be required for a length equal to the distance of the required road improvements along the road frontage. Sidewalks will be required to be constructed on both sides of the road (if development abuts both sides of the road) when the road is classified as an arterial, major collector, or minor collector roadway by the Thoroughfare Plan. Sidewalks shall be constructed on all remaining streets that qualify for such requirements under the Sidewalk Ordinance. Sidewalk location and orientation may be altered under site-specific conditions at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. 
1.  Amenity areas must be accessible by sidewalks from the nearest sidewalk in the subdivision. All sidewalks must be installed prior to the acceptance of the subdivision by the City unless a performance security or letter of intent is in place at the time of acceptance. 
2.  Sidewalks will not be required in subdivisions zoned to an R-80 classification or approved for a rural road classification and will be considered exempt. 
3.  Sidewalks will be constructed to the specification as shown on Standard Detail #113 and located a minimum of three feet back of the curb. Sidewalks location can be varied at the discretion of the Public Works Director. 
4.  Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet for interior residential streets, five (5) feet for exterior and non-residential or as required by ADA or the Georgia Accessibility Code. 
•  The concrete shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch at 28 days and a minimum depth of four inches. 
•  Builders are required to install sidewalk per City of Kennesaw Sidewalk Standards prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
6.08.02 - General Pathway Requirements 
When a subdivision project includes a creek with associated floodplain, the City may require the developer to convey a twenty (20) foot section of flood plain along the creek as public right-of-way in an effort to develop a network of pathways along the creeks throughout the City. When a subdivision project includes multiple or long cul-de-sacs, the City will encourage the developer to convey a twenty (20) foot permanent public access easement between lots; connecting cul-de-sacs to other cul-de-sacs, other subdivisions, and other existing pedestrian access facilities. 
The dedicated public right-of-way or permanent public access easement for the pathway will have a width of twenty (20) feet. 
6.08.03 - Accessibility Requirements 
Georgia law relating to the access to and use of facilities by persons with disabilities is set forth at O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-1, et seq. The law "is intended to eliminate, insofar as possible, unnecessary physical barriers encountered by individuals with disabilities or other individuals, and whose use of government buildings and facilities by the public is restricted." 
Local governing authorities, including the City of Kennesaw, are responsible for the administration and enforcement of the Code with regard to all government and public buildings and facilities which are not under the jurisdiction of the Safety Fire Commissioner or Board of Regents. O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-7: 
I.  Adoption & Incorporation by Reference of State Statutes. 
A.  State Statute (O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-1, et seq.) The Georgia Accessibility Code, O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-1, et seq., is adopted and included, in its entirety, by reference, and made part of City of Kennesaw Standards and Specifications. A brief overview is included for ease of access. Copies of the Georgia law may be found in O.C.G.A. 
B.  Safety Fire Commissioner Rules & Regulations. The Rules & Regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-7 (h) as may be amended from time to time, are also adopted and included in their entirety, by reference, and made part of City of Kennesaw Development Standards and Specifications. An overview is included for ease of access. 
II.  Summary of Statutory Requirements 
A.  State Statutes: O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-1, et. seq. 
1.  Building Permit Requirements: Architect's Seal. Pursuant to the Georgia Accessibility Statute, no building permit for buildings or facilities to be approved by the local governing authority may be approved unless the plans and specifications conform to the requirements of O.C.G.A. Secs. 30-3-3 and 30-3-5 and unless the architect or engineer responsible for preparation of the plans and specifications affixes that person's seal to such plans. The affixing of the seal of the architect to the plans constitutes a certification that to the best of that person's knowledge, information, and belief, they have been prepared in conformity with Sections 30-3-3 and 30-3-5. (See O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-7 (c)) 
2.  Standards and Specifications. The standards and specifications for compliance as set forth in O.C.G.A. 30-3-3 and 30-3-5 are as follows: 
a.  OCGA Sec. 30-3-3. This section provides that permits for construction or renovation of government buildings, public buildings and other facilities after July 1, 1995 may be approved only if the plans and specifications, at a minimum, comply with ADAAG standards (or more restrictive rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner). The section further specifies standards and specifications for buildings permitted prior to July 1, 1995. 
b.  O.C.G.A. Sec. 30-3-5. Specific amenities required to be provided. This section identifies specific amenities required to be provided to make buildings and facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including requirements for accessible parking spaces; accessible entrances; accessible toilet rooms, bathrooms, bathing facilities and shower rooms; and accessible seating, tables, and work surfaces in a reasonable number. 
Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations. Copies of the Safety Fire Commissioner's Rules and Regulations, Chapter 120-3-20, may be obtained from the State Safety Fire Commissioner's Office. A copy is on file in the Kennesaw Community Development Department, and in the County ADA Coordinator's Office. 
6.09.00 - BUS SHELTERS 
The City of Kennesaw does not operate a transit system. Cobb County has adopted Cobb Community Transit Accessibility Guidelines and Performance Specifications for Bus Pads and Shelters. This standard, and as may be amended from time to time, is adopted for purposes of privately and publicly constructed bus pads and shelters constructed within Cobb County. A copy may be obtained through the Department of Transportation. 
6.10.00 - EASEMENTS 

6.10.01 - [Utility Easements] 
Easements to facilitate underground installation of multiple utilities for new development that improves multiple parcels will be required for all new development located in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15) 
6.11.00 - STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-03, adopted May 7, 2012, deleted the §§ 6.11.00—6.11.11, and enacted new sections as set out herein. The former provisions pertained to similar subject matter. These provisions bore no history note. 

6.11.01 - Applicability and Exemptions. 
All development in the City of Kennesaw, and in those other jurisdictions which by special agreement with the City of Kennesaw apply City of Kennesaw Standards shall comply with these standards. Exceptions will be considered by the Public Works Director only in those cases involving the legitimate bequest of property for reasonably continuous use by the original recipient by subdivision under the current Zoning Regulations, or where these standards would apply to private roads or driveways where a single residence is constructed on property not a part of or outside of a subdivision, upon written request of the property owner to said Director. No other exceptions to these minimum standards will be considered by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.02 - Applications/Permit Process. 
All drawings and calculations must be signed and sealed by a design professional registered to practice in the State of Georgia. Submittal shall be made to the Community Development Department either independently or as a part of an overall project. Once demonstration has been made of a workable system, Site Plan Review shall not unreasonably withhold a Land Disturbance Permit for the work to be done. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.03 - Inspection. 
The City of Kennesaw may periodically inspect the work in progress and completed for compliance with the City of Kennesaw minimum standards and the approved drawings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.04 - Stormwater Facility Operation Permit. 
An Operating Permit will be issued for each stormwater system that requires regular operation and maintenance activities. The Permit will outline the operating activities required of the permittee and penalties for non-compliance. The duration of the permit will be five (5) years, with yearly reporting to the Public Works Department, required of the permittee. Each renewal will require a fee to cover yearly monitoring of the facility. The renewal application must be filed in time to re-issue the permit prior to the expiration of the previous permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.05 - Storm Drainage System Design. 
Standards to be used in designing system: 
A.  Sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered design professional subject to approval by the Public Works Director or his/her designee. 
B.  Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped to maintain a minimum flow velocity of three (3) feet per second (fps) so sediment will not collect. Exit velocities of eight (8) fps or greater from outlet headwalls will require energy dissipation devices beyond the normal six (6) times diameter length of rip-rap. Unimproved ditch velocities shall be maintained below five (5) fps velocity. 
C.  Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped at a minimum of one percent (1%). Maximum slopes for concrete storm drainage pipes shall be ten percent (10%). Storm drainage pipes on grades steeper than ten percent (10%) shall outfall into a drop structure with a least one (1) section of outlet pipe sloped on greater than two percent (2%) (drop structures must be properly anchored down). 
D.  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), current Roadway and Bridge Standard Plan 1030D, shall be used in determining class (RCP) or gauge (CMP) of pipe under fill and method of back-filling, subject to the stipulations contained herein. 
E.  Inlet spacing shall be performed using FHWA's HEC-12 software or approved alternate. 
F.  Minimum design allowance for inlet clogging is fifteen percent (15%). 
G.  Manning's roughness coefficient ("n"-value) for pavement inlet-design shall be no smaller than 0.016. 
H.  Gutter spreads shall be limited to one-half (½) the travel lane or eight feet (8'), whichever is less. Drainage formula used in determining size of drainage structure shall be determined by the design professional. 
I.  The Rational Method shall use the twenty-five (25) year storm or rain event as the minimum design frequency. Stormwater handled in this manner shall be water internal to the specific subdivision only. 
J.  The Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (Section 3.02.00) designates each headwater pool created during a one hundred (100) year storm as a one hundred (100) year floodplain equal to the one hundred (100) year floodplain as established and designated by FEMA. 
K.  All subdivision drainage systems, both piped and channelized, receiving stormwater from off-site (outside the bounds of the subdivision specific) shall be designed to handle and transport through the subdivision the one hundred (100) year storm. This design must address all necessary adjustments to channels, pipe sizes, lots, and any infrastructure of the subdivision specific. 
L.  Catch basins and/or drop inlets shall be designed by the developer's engineer to the GDOT Standard Plans 1033D, 1034D, 1019 and subject to final approval by the City of Kennesaw Stormwater Management Division. 
M.  Grated inlets in unpaved areas are not recommended. Raised lid area drains are preferred in unpaved areas. 
N.  Catch basins in accepted subdivisions handling street water shall be designed to handle a ten (10) year storm considering bypass, as prescribed in FHWA's Hydraulic Engineering Circular 12 (HEC-12). Maximum allowable gutter spread shall be one-half (½) the travel lane width or eight feet (8'), whichever is less. 
O.  Catch basins outside of accepted subdivisions handling street water shall be designed to handle a ten (10) year storm considering bypass, as prescribed on the major collectors by the GDOT design requirements. Maximum allowable gutter spread shall be one-half (½) the travel lane width or eight feet (8'), whichever is less. 
P.  Maximum inlet spacing, unless a different spacing is supported by design calculations approved by the Public Works Director or his or her designee, shall not exceed the following: 
1.  Five hundred feet (500') on grades up to seven percent (7%); 
2.  Four hundred feet (400') on grades from seven percent (7%) to ten percent (10%); 
3.  Two hundred fifty feet (250') on grades over ten percent (10%). 
Q.  Demonstration shall be made that the one hundred (100) year storm event runoff will track through the development along the drainage routes assigned by the site specific hydrology study. 
R.  A certification of the pipe specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.06 - Storm drain pipes. 
A.  A minimum size of eighteen inch (18") diameter pipe is required under public streets and within City dedicated drainage easements. 
B.  All pipe within City rights-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) except for the outfall pipe going from the last structure, perpendicular to the roadway, toward the system outfall may be Aluminum Corrugated Metal Pipe (ACMP). 
C.  Minimum wall thickness for ACMP is twelve (12) gauge. 
D.  No ACMP is permitted on a live stream. For the purpose of this requirement live streams are defined as any continuously flowing stream, which intercepts more than a one-quarter (¼) square mile (one hundred sixty (160) acres) drainage area. 
E.  High-density polyethylene pipe (HDPE) pipe will be permitted under the following conditions: 
1.  Must have granular backfill to the top of the pipe; 
2.  Depths no greater than ten feet (10') as measured to the invert of the pipe; 
3.  Installation must be outside of roadway right-of-way; 
4.  Watertight bell and spigot gasketed joints must be provided; 
5.  Thirty-six inch (36") diameter or greater must be inspected and certified by a geotechnical engineer or a manufacturer's representative; and, 
6.  Smoothbore bore pipe only. 
F.  Concrete or solid masonry headwalls of an approved type are required on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. Steel flared end sections are not permitted. Only concrete flared end sections will be accepted. Standard step bevel end treatment may be approved on large diameter (sixty inches (60") or larger) storm drains where the perimeter is secured with grouted rip-rap or poured in place concrete. 
G.  No ACMP will be permitted if depth as measured to the invert of the pipe is greater than fifteen (15) unless the individual exceptional instance is specifically approved in writing by the Public Works Director or his/her designee. 
H.  Extend outfalls fifty feet (50') beyond the front building setback line for pipes thirty inches (30") or smaller. 
I.  Maximum continuous length of pipe without a point of access (i.e., manhole or junction box) shall be three hundred feet (300') for pipes forty-eight inches (48") and smaller. 
J.  Junction boxes having a manhole-type frame and cover access at grade to the pipe shall be constructed at all changes in horizontal or vertical alignment to meet the requirement of GDOT Standard 1030D. 
K.  The one hundred (100) year headwater pool shall be determined at each proposed and/or modified cross-drainage structure. 
L.  Emergency flow-bypass or emergency overflow relief shall be provided at the elevation of the one hundred (100) year headwater pool to convey flow through (or over) the impoundment structure in instances where the cross drainage structure intercepts a live stream, as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.07 - Storm Water Detention Facilities 
A.  Each project shall provide stormwater controls such that predevelopment peak flow rates are maintained, unless otherwise approved by Division Manager of Stormwater Management or his/her designee 
B.  Storms with a statistical rate of return of two (2), five (5), ten (10), twenty-five (25), fifty (50), and one hundred (100) years shall be evaluated and controls created to attenuate peak flows. 
C.  Responsibility for calibration and application of the empirical equations rests with the design engineer. 
D.  Times of concentrations of less than ten (10) minutes for existing/undeveloped conditions are not acceptable for design nor are runoff percentages CN's higher than fifty-five (55) for on-site area, without supporting documentation acceptable to the City of Kennesaw Stormwater Management Division. 
E.  Hydrologic calculations must employ an engineering methodology currently recognized and accepted within the industry. This methodology must include a hydrograph routing analysis, which generates an inflow hydrograph to the detention pond to create an outflow hydrograph. Multiple inflow hydrographs shall be combined on a real time basis. Multiple outflow hydrographs shall be combined on a real time basis. Multiple detention ponds in series must be routed from one to the next and so on throughout. 
F.  A hydrograph routing analysis shall be submitted for all proposed areas drainage structures, which intercept more than three hundred twenty (320) acres (one-half (½) square mile). 
G.  Where existing developed sites are changed, only those portions of the site, which are unchanged, are "grandfathered" as existing conditions for allowable runoff calculations. That is, impervious areas will be grandfathered as "existing conditions" in only those areas that are not changed, modified, or improved and constitute less than forty percent (40%) of the total impervious area. The calculated allowable flow from all areas razed and reformed must be considered in the undeveloped condition. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.08 - Stormwater Hydrologic Methodology. 
A.  The design professional engineer may utilize any industry-accepted methodology for creating hydrologic design which routes a hydrologic model of the storm through the detention pond and outlet control structure and generates a related hydrologic model for output. All storms from two (2) year to the one hundred (100) year event shall be analyzed and controlled such that corresponding peak flows leaving the site are not increased. 
B.  To expedite City of Kennesaw's review, the hydrologic study for the project must include the listing of input parameters: 
1.  Drainage areas in acres; 
2.  Time of concentration/lag time; 
3.  Amount or percentage of impervious area within the drainage area both before and after the project; 
4.  Length, in feet, of all drainage system improvements along the route; and, 
5.  Soil Conservation Services (SCS) curve numbers estimates for before and after project conditions. 
C.  Analysis of stream flow and backwater elevations shall be consistent with FEMA's accepted methodologies whether or not the project is within a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Zone. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' standard step HEC II analysis, HEC RAS or approved equal shall be utilized. Routing of flood waters through an impoundment using a hydrologic model (to justify attenuated peak flows, for example) may be allowed, subject to approval of the Public Works Director or his or her designee 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.09 - Stormwater Quality/Quantity Control Facilities. 
A.  The City of Kennesaw requires each new project to create adequate stormwater controls using Best Management Practices (BMPs). Use of BMPs to enhance water quality and to comply with the Clean Water Act (CWA) is Federally mandated. The City of Kennesaw will utilize the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volumes I and II, as standards for compliance with the required BMPs. 
B.  Water quality BMPs as recommended in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volumes I and II shall be utilized for any project that requires a land disturbance permit. 
C.  The total directly connected impervious surface area within its development, including all public and private structures, roadways, utilities, and other facilities shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area. 
D.  Green Infrastructure/Low Impact Development (GI/LID) design principles are encouraged. 
E.  Impervious surfaces can be considered disconnected from the drainage system if the runoff from the impervious surface flows over a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') of pervious surfaces (non-concentrated flow) or if the runoff from one and two-tenths inches (1.2") of rainfall is treated by one of the following water quality best management practices as approved by the Public Works Director or his/her designee: 
1.  Wet Ponds (extended detention for less that twenty (20) acres); 
2.  Constructed Wetland; 
3.  Dry swales; 
4.  Sand Filter; 
5.  Bio-retention; 
6.  Vegetated Filtration Systems; 
7.  Dedicated recorded greenspace conservation areas; 
8.  Donated (Fee Simple) floodplain land and/or stream buffers; 
9.  Any other best management practice approved by the Public Works Director or his/her designee. 
F.  Residential detention facility and/or dam and outlet control structure shall be located outside the boundaries of a permitted building lot. Setbacks and density calculations for permitted building lots, which abut a residential detention facility, shall not be adversely affected by the boundaries of the residential detention facility. A detention pond shall be defined as any dam or roadway embankment with a control structure on the upstream side. (This does not apply to roadway detention areas.) Headwater pools created by restrictive culverts are not considered as detention facilities for the purposes of this section. 
G.  Access shall be provided via a graded and grassed roadway not less than twenty feet (20') wide and minimum grade practical. Said access must connect the detention pond lot to a public right-of-way. In the event that the detention pond is not accessible via City-owned property to a public right-of-way, the City of Kennesaw will not accept for maintenance; the pond/facility will be privately owned and maintained. Privately maintained ponds within residential projects must be so noted on final plats, including deed covenants and must provide and access easement. 
H.  Access to the facility and/or dam and outlet energy dissipater from the public roadway shall occur on City-owned land and shall not occur on any permitted building lot. Access must be used exclusively for access to detention facility even though other utility easements may cross it. 
I.  Permanent drainage easements of twelve feet (12') in width shall be recorded around all detention ponds at or above the one hundred (100) year pool elevation. 
J.  Detention facilities will not be allowed within any FEMA "A"-numbered or "AE" designated flood zone or the City of Kennesaw Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance flood hazard area without obtaining prior written permit approval from the City of Kennesaw Stormwater Management Division. 
K.  Roadway Detention will be allowed on the upstream side of a subdivision street or public road subject to Corp. of Engineer/Ga. Environmental Protection Division approval and, providing that the outlet control structure is located outside of the right-of-way and the roadway shoulder is not impacted. Area must be undisturbed, no grading will be allowed, and must be accessible from the public right-of-way and identified on the final plat with a permanent access and maintenance easement surrounding the headwater pool. 
L.  Publicly owned and maintained roadways are not permitted across permanent impoundment structures that have a permanent pool (water) level. 
M.  Dams may be created across streams provided all appropriate required State and Federal permits are obtained on all properties affected, including backwaters inundation by a flood pool, are under the control or joint control of the developer of said dam. Backwater elevations upstream and off-site cannot be increased without obtaining flood easements from the affected property owners. In addition, FEMA permitting is required for any dam crossing a regulated floodplain. 
N.  Existing lakes and ponds provide a mitigating influence on stormwater flow by attenuating flood peaks. For this reason, the City of Kennesaw may require that each property owner maintain the lake or pond now existing on his/her property. Prior written permission from the Public Works Director or his/her designee is required to remove said lake or pond and the flood attenuating benefits that they provide. The City of Kennesaw will require a pre and post development sediment range survey for any existing lake or pond within the drainage basin that is downstream of a proposed project. 
O.  Each residential detention facility, which is normally dry, and is in excess of six (6) vertical feet as measured from the crest of the dam to the invert of the pond, shall be fenced using chain link fencing (or approved alternate) complying in material and installation with Section 643 of the GDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, current edition, except as follows: 
1.  Height shall be six feet (6'). 
2.  Access gate shall have a clear opening width of twelve feet (12'), made of two (2) panels, which shall be centered upon the access road. 
3.  Any chain link fencing around detention facilities required by these standards which is located within three hundred feet (300') of any public roadway classified other than a local residential street within the proposed project, must be vinyl coated. 
4.  Fencing shall be mounted to provide a minimum twelve foot (12') wide access surrounding the detention pond at top of the bank and shall be located at the crest of the dam. Fencing shall not extend across any spillway opening or downstream channel. 
5.  Fencing is also required in cases where detention ponds are constructed using vertical walls with wall heights in excess of four feet (4') (as measured from the top of the wall to the bottom of the pond). Fences shall be installed around the wall in such a manner as to deter access to the top of the wall and to deter someone from falling off the wall. 
6.  Fencing of commercial and industrial detention facilities is also required as specified above. 
7.  Any detention facility proposed for the exterior boundary of a project which will abut an existing, residential structure, shall provide a ten foot (10') landscape buffer. 
8.  As a minimum, developments shall provide facility systems established to provide water quality improvements. This may be accomplished through the appropriate use of BMPs and natural wetland filtration buffers. 
9.  Exceptions to fencing will be considered on a case-by-case basis if it can be demonstrated there is no drowning potential for children. 
P.  Detention can be waived in certain instances, e.g., fee in lieu of detention, large lot sizes with small house, enhanced canopy/green space, as evaluated on a case-by-case basis. 
Q.  The Public Works Director or his or her designee may grant variances to these standards on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.10 - Storm Drainage Easements. 
All permanent easements shall be: 
A.  A minimum of ten feet (10') for piped easements; 
B.  A minimum of twenty feet (20') wide for open channel; 
C.  Defined as ten feet (10') on each side of the centerline of drainage course; 
D.  Wide enough to allow for full depth excavation of pipe within the side slope limitations of the Trench Ordinance. Nominally, this requires the drainage easement to be four (4) times the depth of the pipe. As an alternative for consideration, engineers can submit concrete pipe designs. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.11 - Combined Easement for Sanitary and Pipe Storm Drainage. 
Combined easement for both sanitary sewer and piped storm drainage shall be: 
A.  Minimum width of thirty feet (30'); 
B.  If the storm drainage system consists of an open channel and a sanitary sewer easement; 
C.  Minimum construction easement width shall be forty feet (40'); 
D.  City Code prohibits any structure being built within ten feet (10') of a permanent sewer easement on front and rear setbacks or within two feet (2') on side setbacks. A waiver of setback requirements can be obtained on a case-by-case basis from the Public Works Director or his or her designee 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.12 - Minimum Easement Width. 
A.  Actual easement shall provide for fully excavated trench with two to one (2:1) side slopes to IE (Invert Elevation) of pipe. Engineers can submit concrete pipe and alternate designs. 
B.  A drainage swale shall provide for collection of stormwater to an easement. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.11.13 - Record Drawings. 
Record drawings of Storm Drain systems installed in new developments must be submitted prior to approval of the Final Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.12.00 - WATER AND SEWER 

6.12.01 - Applicability 
This section shall apply to all current and potential users of the Cobb County Water System including users outside the County who, by contract or agreement with the County, utilize the services of the Cobb County Water System. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director or his designated representative shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the section. Cobb County Water System Sewer and Water Specifications, Appendix B, provide additional details for designing, constructing, and inspecting sewer and water systems. All Water and Sanitary Sewer Systems must be reviewed/approved by Cobb County Water System. 
6.12.02 - Street Cuts 
All major street crossings should be bored and cased per City and GDOT standards. If a bore cannot be made, the Public Works Department must permit the street cut. 
6.13.00 - FENCES, BUFFERS AND BERMS, MAILBOXES, AND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 

6.13.01 - Fences 
No fence or wall (other than subdivision entrance walls, retaining walls, noise abatement walls or tennis court fences) shall be more than eight feet in height in rear and side yard areas. New fences constructed in residentially zoned districts will not exceed four feet in height when fence is located in front yard area and no higher than eight feet when located in side and rear yard areas. All new fences will be made of solid weather resistant material including but not limited to wrought iron, wood and alternative materials and will be subject to architectural review by the planning and zoning administrator. Chain link fencing can be used on commercial and residentially zoned property if not visible from the right-of-way. No fence or wall constructed on private property shall be located on public right-of-way. Should a fence be erected in error within the right-of-way, the city shall not be responsible for replacing or repairing the illegal structure. Barbed wire fencing components shall not be used in residentially zoned property. All new fencing will be required to obtain a building permit under the building services department. Location map, dimension and material information will be required as part of the building permit application process. All fences will be installed with finished side facing adjoining property and rights-of-way. All fences will be oriented on property so that structural posts will not be visible. All fencing installed on property located in the Historic District will be subject to the adopted Historic Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, 11-16-15) 
6.13.02 - Buffers and Berms 
Landscape buffers and screening requirements are not applicable to residential zoning classifications of R-80, RR, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15 and R-12. Landscape buffers and screening requirements are required for all other residential zoning classifications. Landscape buffers and screening requirements are required for all non-residential zoning classifications. The buffering and screening requirements for applicable zoning classifications are listed within the individual zoning classification regulations of the City's UDC. 
Parcels of land being developed may have zoning stipulation(s) that require buffering or screening. The official records in the Zoning Department should be checked prior to purchasing or developing land. 
6.13.03 - Mailboxes 
Mailboxes shall be constructed in accordance with approved materials and standards as required by the Postmaster General and the U.S. Postal Service. Installation location shall be compatible with Standard Design 80. Intersection sight distance and sidewalks shall not be obstructed by mailbox installation. Intersection sight distance and sidewalks shall not be obstructed by mailbox installation on one-way streets, all mailboxes will be installed on the right side of the street as traffic flows. 
6.13.04 - Irrigation Systems 
Irrigation systems shall be constructed outside the right-of-way. Any damage by the City to improperly located systems shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. 
6.14.00 - STRUCTURAL RETAINING WALLS 
When permanent grades are proposed with a resulting slope steeper than one-foot vertical for every two feet of horizontal displacement (2:1), an appropriate retaining structure shall be designed to reinforce or retain the resulting embankment. The structure shall be designed by a registered professional engineer to be constructed of reinforced concrete or other masonry materials designed by a registered professional engineer. Initiate latest revision O.S.H.A., or as may be amended from time to time. An engineered design may be substituted for the reinforced concrete design if the specific vendor has a pre-qualified acceptance from the City. All structural components of the wall shall meet the minimum building codes for the proposed use. 
When the necessity for an earth retaining structure is required for a vertical displacement of 30 inches or less, appropriate landscaping timbers, or approved equal, may be employed if no permanent structure is supported by the soil retained by the retaining wall. The use of railroad cross ties or other timber products will only be allowed in these instances as per detail. 
All wall designs must demonstrate complete dimensions for line and grade. Wall design will consider foundation drainage and select backfill material for the proposed conditions. 
Walls shall be located in such a fashion to not encroach upon existing or proposed drainage easements, drainage courses or floodplains to encumber the natural flow of surface runoff of storm water. Walls shall be located at a distance from such watercourses to allow for anticipated future maintenance of the easement to prevent a safety hazard to the maintenance workers or to jeopardize the structural integrity of the wall. 
Walls that are not attached to the permitted structure and require a foundation shall be permitted as a freestanding structure and shall be inspected as prescribed by the permitting procedure. Walls will be inspected for conformance with the approved design. Any deviation from the approved design will require the engineer of record to submit a certification of the non-conforming structure along with supporting calculations to indicate that the construction is consistent with the initial design parameters. In the event the inspector has not been provided ample opportunity to inspect the structure, the contractor must provide a certification of the construction by the engineer of record and geotechnical reports for concrete testing for strength, reinforcing steel specifications. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section will require that the remaining work cease and/or removal of nonconformance until the adequacy of structural integrity is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City. 
Retaining walls that are proposed for the purpose of storm water detention must be designed to demonstrate that the walls are capable of a hydrostatic load as measured from the top of the foundation footing to the highest elevation along the top of the wall. The hydrological design must allow for a free board dimension of one foot and an emergency overflow capacity equal to the allowable peak discharge for the 100-year storm event. The routing calculations should not take into account the existence of the emergency overflow. Place the overflow device above the projected 100-year flood elevation within the detention area. 
Any construction that may impact or be within the right-of-way of an existing or proposed water or sanitary sewer easement must be approved by Cobb County Water. 
6.15.00 - DAMS 

6.15.01 - Permanent Pool Impoundments 
6.15.02 - General Criteria 
A.  City of Kennesaw Dam Regulations shall apply to all new, rebuilt, or modified storm water impoundments, including appurtenant works, with the exception of: 
1.  Any Category I Dam requiring permitting under the control of the Georgia Safe Dams Program; 
2.  Any dam owned and operated by any department or agency of the United States Government; 
3.  Any newly constructed dam financially assisted by the United States Natural Resource Conservation Service or any other department or agency of the United States Government when such department or agency designed or approved plans and supervised construction and maintains a regular program of inspection of the dam; 
4.  Any dam licensed by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or for which a license application is pending with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; and 
5.  Any dam currently constructed and operating is hereby grandfathered in its present state with the owner assuming all rights, responsibilities, and liabilities thereof. Any existing dam that is modified, other than for maintenance activities, becomes subject to these requirements. 
B.  All new dams of 25 vertical feet in height (or greater), impoundments containing a maximum storage volume of at least 100 acre-feet, or dams which have been ruled Category II by the Safe Dams Program shall be designed and constructed according to Category I Spillway Standards, as promulgated by the Safe Dams Program under the direction of a Georgia Licensed Civil Engineer and a Georgia Licensed Geotechnical Engineer, both experienced in the design and construction of dams. All dam heights will be measured from the streambed at the downstream toe to the top of dam. 
C.  Prior to construction of any dam over 15 vertical feet or any dam impounding more than 50 acre-feet, the contractor shall provide the City sufficient documentation of his/her qualifications to construct dams. 
D.  A pre-design meeting shall be held with representatives of the plan review committee, to review any proposed dam or proposed dam changes for any dam over 15 vertical feet or impounding more than 50 acre-feet. 
E.  Depending on the level of downstream risk and size of impoundment, the City may require a dam breach analysis to be submitted for any proposed or existing dam impacting a proposed development, utilizing the National Weather Service's DAMBREAK Program or other methodology approved by the Georgia Safe Dams Program. A DAMBRK analysis will be required for all Category I and II dams. When a dam breach analysis is required by Cobb County, as a minimum a sunny day dam breach analysis shall be performed under full pool conditions. 
F.  Guidelines are available from the State of Georgia Safe Dams Program (EPD) to assist the design/construction professional. Dam design documents shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Technical specifications; 
2.  Hydrology/hydraulic report; 
3.  Geotechnical report (with borrow study applicable); 
4.  Drainage basin map with land use and land improvement parameters; 
5.  Existing topography of site; 
a.  Dam ;hg;= Plan view  = Sections at all critical points  = Details, complete 
6.  Names and professional seals of design civil engineer and geotechnical engineer with 24-hour contact; and 
7.  Designated contractor, if available. 
Because of the variables associated with selecting spillway(s), outlet device(s) or appurtenant structure(s) to suit a given site condition, the design consultant is responsible for the selection, subject to the review and approval of the plan review committee. The Committee will include in its consideration the ease of maintenance, longevity of the system, blockage potential, and practicality of operations. 
No orifice shall be less than 3 inches in diameter unless it is installed to meet a State or local requirement. 
All risers (standpipes) shall be equipped with a debris deflector (trash rack) and an anti-vortex device. To facilitate outlet operation, curved or inclined trash racks designed to allow debris to rise with the water level are preferred. In all cases, trash racks shall be either hinged or removable to facilitate maintenance operations. Corrugated metal pipe is not permitted for standpipes. 
Spillways: Every dam shall be provided with a principal spillway, fully capable of passing at least the 50-year flood, with excess spillway capacity provided by the emergency spillway(s) capable of handling excess flows up to the design storm. The principal spillway can be sized for floods of less magnitude than the 50-year flood only if the emergency spillway is appropriately armored against scour with concrete or other suitable lining as protection against more frequent usage. 
Principal Spillway: All spillways shall be analyzed (hydraulically rated) for both inlet and outlet control conditions using appropriate tail water ratings. If a control-box or weir-box is affixed, then the total system (inlet control box and outlet conduit) shall be hydraulically rated to determine the stage-discharge relationship. 
Emergency Spillway(s): For every type of water impounding facility, a planned safe flow path must be provided for conveyance of flows of water in an emergency. In many instances, this function can be provided through installation of an emergency spillway. Emergency spillways may be excavated open channels, either vegetated or paved with reinforced concrete, weir sections of concrete walls, or appropriately designed conduit. 
Any portion of an open channel spillway excavated into a dam embankment or other fill section must be paved with reinforced concrete equipped with appropriate seepage controls, under drainage, and cut-off walls. 
Any portion of any spillway excavated into undisturbed residual soil shall be vegetated in accordance with the practices described in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" or protected against scour and erosion by other suitable measures if vegetation does not provide adequate stabilization. If the spillway is activated by storms smaller than the 50-year frequency, then vegetation alone will not be considered sufficient protection against scour according to these standards. 
A 12-foot combined drainage and permanent access easement shall be established around the pond at the 100-year pool level or at the elevation of top of dam, whichever is greater to provide access and permanently prevent usage or modification of this flood storage area. A 12-foot combined easement shall also be provided along the toe of the dam. A 20-foot access easement from the public right-of-way shall be provided. 
Emergency Draining of the Lake: Upon obtaining evidence which indicates that a potentially hazardous condition may exist, such as: 
•  Excessive leakage transporting soil from the dam interior (i.e., piping); 
•  Slope failure, excessive scouring, or other apparent soil instability; 
•  Longitudinal cracks, bulging, or shifts in alignment; 
•  Excessive sloughing or seepage; or 
•  Failure of the spillways and/or outlet devices to function properly (due to cloggage, damage, or other deficiency). 
The Public Works Director has the authority to order the immediate and complete draining of the lake in whatever manner deemed necessary at the time and to require the owner to keep the pool down until remedial work, as is deemed most appropriate to create a safe dam condition, is completed and approved by the City. 
All lakes shall have a permanent lake drain. 
No public roadways shall be constructed over any permanent water impoundment structure. Private roadways and driveways over any permanent impoundment structure (including full indemnification to the County) shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Public Works Department (access for public safety vehicles must be addressed in said indemnification). 
No utilities are permitted to pass through any dam, either longitudinally or transversely, unless approved by the City. 
6.15.03 - Specific Criteria 
(Dams with vertical heights less than or equal to 6 feet.) 
Earthen Dams: Any earth fill dam equal to or less than 6 feet in height is an exempt structure according to Georgia Safe Dams Act. The following minimum design criteria shall apply: 
Design shall be by a professional engineer registered and licensed to practice engineering in the State of Georgia; 
Plans shall be submitted to the City for review and comment; 
Construction shall be performed by a qualified contractor who has sufficient skills and experience to perform this work; 
Design storm shall be at least SCS 24-hour 100-year event or equivalent approved by the City; 
A minimum freeboard of two feet is required from the design flood pool to the top of the dam; 
All soil shall be CL or ML material, compacted to 95 percent standard proctor; and 
Side slopes shall be no steeper than 3:1 unless approved by the City. Under no circumstance shall the slope exceed 2:1. 
B. Reinforced concrete or masonry dam: 
1.  Design and construction supervision must be performed by a civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. Construction verification checklist to be submitted to Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
2.  Design shall address and account for overturning, sliding uplift and seepage with adequate safety factor (2.0 for over-turning, 1.5 for sliding) and adequate freeboard (0.5 feet above 100-year pool). Steel design shall conform to American Concrete Institute Code. Uplift loads can be reduced by 70 percent, if an under draining system is provided. Construction verification checklist must be provided by design engineer or approved alternate. 
3.  Design storm shall be at least SCS twenty-four (24) hour one hundred (100) year event or equivalent approved by Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
(Dams with vertical heights between 6 and 25 feet with less than 100 acre-feet of storage) 
Earthen Dam: 
Design, construction supervision, and certification of completion according to plans and specifications to be by civil engineer and a geotechnical engineer both licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Design shall conform to the requirements of a Category I Spillway Standards Dam as classified by the Georgia Safe Dams Office and as published in "Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety," Act No. 796, as amended to date. 
Design storm shall be at least 25 percent of the Probable Maximum Precipitation (6 hour) storm event. 
Principal spillway shall be adequate to handle at least the 50-year flood. 
Emergency spillway(s) as a minimum shall be adequate to handle flows in excess of the 50-year flood, up to the ¼ PMP. 
Front and back slopes shall not be steeper than 3:1 unless design includes a slope stability analysis, which confirms and documents that a steeper slope will be stable. In no condition, however, will a slope steeper than 2:1 be permitted. 
All organics and topsoil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation certified by a geotechnical engineer (PE). 
Earthen fill shall be CL or ML material approved for use by geotechnical engineer (PE), placed, and compacted to not less than 95 percent standard proctor under said engineer's direction. 
Compaction records accompanied by a geotechnical engineer's certification that soil compaction meets this specification should be forwarded to the City. 
The low-level outlet (lake drain) shall be concrete pressure pipe or ductile iron pressure pipe, cradled in concrete. Bedding shall be in concrete poured the full width of the exposed trench and as a minimum, up to the spring line of the pipe. Pipe and joints shall be rated for internal pressures exceeding that of the design storm and shall meet or exceed ASTM 361 or AWWA C-301. Corrugated metal pipe is not allowed. 
A lake drain may also be comprised of a valve-operated siphon system designed by a registered civil engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. Piping for a siphon system shall be schedule 80 PVC in conformance with current state standards or ductile iron with mechanical joints or PV joints with adequate strength and anchoring to sustain the water forces incumbent with operation. 
Freeboard of a dam, above the design storm maximum pool, shall be 3.0 feet in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. The City reserves the right to require additional freeboard above the nominal 3-feet requirement, if supported by fetch calculations. 
Crest width shall be not less than 12.0 feet. 
Reinforced Concrete or Masonry Dam: 
Design, construction supervision, and certification of completion according to plans and specifications to be by design civil engineer and a geotechnical engineer both licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Design shall address and account for overturning, uplift, and seepage with adequate safety factory and adequate freeboard. 
All slab on grade concrete, including concrete footings, shall be designed and constructed to control seepage and piping of foundation soil along the underside of the slab in incorporating cutoff walls or other appropriate measures. 
Design storm shall be as specified by the City of Kennesaw and Cobb County Storm Water Division. Generally, at least 25 percent of the Probable Maximum Precipitation 6-hour storm event (¼ PMP) is required. 
Principal spillway shall be adequate to handle at least the 50-year flood unless the emergency spillway is appropriately armored against scouring. 
Emergency spillway shall be adequate to handle flows in excess of the 50-year flood, up to the 6-hour PMP. 
Freeboard of a dam, above the design storm maximum pool, shall be 3.0 feet in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. Additional freeboard above the nominal 3 feet required, if supported by fetch calculations. 
Design shall conform to the requirements of a Category I Spillway Standards Dam as classified by the Georgia Safe Dams Office and as published in "Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety," Act No. 796, as amended to date. 
All organics and topsoil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation certified by a geotechnical engineer (PE). 
Earthen fill (if any) shall be subject to the criteria specified above for earthen embankments. 
Required 28-day compressive strength for concrete is 3000 psi. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
6.15.04 - Temporary Pool Impoundments 
Normally dry storm water storage basins - impound storm water temporarily, i.e., dry detention ponds. 
6.15.05 - General Criteria 
Design to be by registered civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Detention pond dams equal to or greater than 15 feet in height or greater than 50 acre feet of storage must conform to the corresponding design criteria for permanent impoundments, as referenced above. Smaller detention pond, refer to Storm Water Management section for guidance. 
The following criteria apply to dry detention pond dams less than 15 feet high and less than 50 acre feet: 
1.  Design storm shall be at least the 100-year storm. 
2.  Multi-frequency outflow control shall be provided for the 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year frequency storms per the current City of Kennesaw Storm Water Management Ordinance. 
3.  Principal spillway shall be adequate to handle at least the 25-year flood. 
4.  Emergency spillway(s) shall be provided to handle flows in excess of the 25-year flood, up to the 100-year flood. 
5.  No orifice shall be less than 3 inches in diameter unless it is installed to meet a State or local requirement. 
6.  Install fencing around all ponds deeper than 6 feet as measured vertically from the crest of the dam down to the invert of the lowest control structure. Gates are to be at least 12-feet wide to permit access for maintenance equipment. The City is not responsible for the replacing of any non-permitted structures or plantings destroyed, removed, or otherwise damaged during maintenance operations. Fencing shall not be installed across spillways or drainage ways. 
7.  A 12-foot combined drainage and permanent access easement shall be established around the pond at the 100-year pool level or at the elevation of top of dam, whichever is greater to provide access and permanently prevent usage or modification of this flood storage area. A 12-foot combined easement shall also be provided along the toe of the dam. A 20-foot access easement from the public right-of-way shall be provided. 
6.15.06 - Specific Criteria 
Earthen Dam: 
Front slope shall not be steeper than 2.5:1 unless design includes a slope stability analysis, which confirms and documents that a steeper slope will be stable. In no condition, however, can any slope be steeper than 2:1. 
All organics and topsoil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation inspected and approved by the geotechnical licensed, qualified engineer prior to fill placement. 
Earthen fill shall be CL or ML material approved for use by a geotechnical engineer (PE) and placed and compacted to not less than 95 percent Standard Proctor under said engineer's direction. 
Freeboard of a dam, above the 100-year design storm maximum pool, shall be 2.0 feet in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. Cobb County reserves the right to require additional freeboard above the nominal two feet requirement, if supported by fetch calculations. 
Crest width shall be not less than 12.0 feet, unless approved by the City of Kennesaw and Cobb County Storm Water Division. 
Reinforced Concrete or Masonry Dams: 
Design shall address and account for overturning, uplift, and seepage with adequate safety factor (2.0 for overturning, 1.5 for sliding) and adequate freeboard (0.5 feet above 100-year). Steel design shall conform to American Concrete Institute Code. Uplift loads can be reduced by 70 percent, if an under draining system is provided. Construction verification checklist must be provided by design engineer or approved alternate. 
All slab on grade concrete, including concrete footings, shall be designed and constructed to incorporate appropriate cutoff walls. 
In no condition can any fill slope (if any) be steeper than 2:1. 
All organics and topsoil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation inspected and approved by the City prior to gravity dam concrete or masonry placement. 
Earthen fill (if required) shall be approved for use by a geotechnical engineer (PE) and placed and compacted to not less than 95 percent Standard Proctor under said engineer's direction. 
Freeboard of a dam, above the 100-year design storm maximum pool, shall be 2.0 feet along any earth fill sections of the dam, in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. City reserves the right to require additional freeboard above the nominal two feet requirement, if supported by fetch calculations. Freeboard for the concrete section of the dam shall be a minimum of 0.5 feet. 
Required 28 day compressive strength for concrete is 3000 psi. 
6.16.00 - CEMETERIES 
In the event a cemetery or burial site is located on or adjacent to the property, the developer is required to adhere to the following: 
1.  Prepare a site plan identifying the full boundaries with a metes and bounds description. 
2.  Provide a fifty (50) foot natural undisturbed natural buffer from the common property line; or a 50-foot undisturbed natural buffer around the perimeter of the outermost burials of the cemetery; whichever provides the greatest protection for the cemetery. The outermost burials to be determined by a professional archaeologist. The archaeology survey will locate all grave shafts and define the burial boundary as well as the fence line. Member(s) of the Cemetery Preservation Commission (or approved staff member appointed by Public Works Director) must be present during archeology survey. 
3.  Lots adjacent to fifty (50) foot undisturbed natural buffer shall have some or the entire required setback in addition to the buffer. 
4.  The fifty (50) foot undisturbed natural buffer shall be recorded as a conservation easement with the City Of Kennesaw Cemetery Preservation Commission having third party right of enforcement. 
5.  Provide uninhibited daylight access to the cemetery via a twenty (20) foot graveled easement to the cemetery from the nearest public road. The outer boundaries of this easement may be landscaped. 
6.  A plat to be prepared by a registered surveyor denoting the location of all grave shafts, the fifty (50) undisturbed buffer, the fence line as determined by the archaeology survey and the access easement. 
7.  The archeology survey and plat must be submitted to the Cobb County Cemetery Preservation Commission three (3) business days prior to any zoning hearing or plan review, as may apply. 
8.  Provide and install an orange protective fence on the outer perimeter of the fifty (50) undisturbed natural buffer before beginning construction. This fence shall be maintained throughout the life of the project. At completion of the project, the orange protective fence shall be removed from the premises. A sign stating Cemetery Preservation Buffer- Do Not Disturb shall be erected at fifty (50) foot intervals along the outer perimeter of the buffer. At the completion of the project, these signs may be maintained or replaced by the City of Kennesaw Cemetery Preservation Commission. 
9.  Provide at least a permanent six (6) foot chain link fence with gate on the fence line determined by the archaeology survey or on the common property line between the cemetery and the development whichever provides the greater protection for the cemetery before beginning construction. 
10.  Fence must be 9 gauge with top rail and fence post must be set in concrete. Fence may be upgraded to vinyl coated chain link and/or wrought iron. 
11.  Comply with State and local laws and ordinances. 
12.  All cemetery preservation requirements must be Site Plan specific. 
6.17.00 - UTILITIES 
City of Kennesaw has adopted the Georgia Department of Transportation, Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards, Section 3 - Rules for Issuing Permits (as may be amended from time to time). Please see Volume 2, Section 508, Materials Specifications and Standard Details. 
1.  For damage prevention purposes, all utility locations within a street right-of-way shall correspond to the utility location cross section in Standard Details 80, 80a, 80b, 81, 81a and 82. 
2.  On residential streets constructed without curb and gutter, the utility depths shall be increased by one foot to allow for the realignment of the ditches without damaging the utilities. The developer is encouraged to coordinate with the City of Kennesaw Public Works. 
3.  Southern Bell requests to be moved from 18" BOC (back of curb) to 7½' BOC and from 24" deep to 30" deep to accommodate the gas service crossings. 
4.  CATV requests to be moved from 5" BOC to 12" BOC and from 18" deep to 24" deep. 
5.  Power requests to be moved from 8' BOC to 9' BOC with power transformer being flush with back of the right-of-way. 
6.  Gas requests to remain at 36" BOC and 30" deep and will raise service laterals from 30" deep to 24" deep. 
7.  Water requests to remain at 5' BOC and 42" deep. 
8.  Utility companies may utilize a joint trench for utility installation. If a joint trench is used, its depth shall be that of the utility in the trench required to place its lines at the greatest depth. Joint trench placement may be specified or random placements. 
9.  All contractors, developers, utility companies, and the "general digging public" are encouraged to abide by the OCGA 9 (25). The UPC number is (404) 623-4344; (800) 282-7411. 
10.  All privately owned equipment or utilities, with the exception of residential mailboxes, shall be allowed on public right-of-way by special permit only. A special permit must be approved by the Public Work Director and Kennesaw Building Official. 
11.  Any utility installed on the City's right-of-way under special permit shall be equipped with a tracing or locating mechanism. As an example, any non-conductive conduit shall be equipped with a minimum size 16 gauge corrosion-resistant tracer wire to aid in locating the utility. The wire shall extend along the tributary conduit to a point four feet off of the right-of-way. 
12.  Water and sewer service lateral locations are to be permanently marked on the curb under which they cross. 
13.  Any contractor operating within the City shall sign a statement to acknowledge receipt of this new regulation as a condition of obtaining a business license to operate within City. Contractors shall provide a 24-hour contact telephone number to the Georgia UPC. 
14.  Responsibility for the location of any utility placed on the City right-of-way under special permit rests solely upon the owner of the utility. Any damage repair to non-permitted utilities shall be the responsibility of the owner of the utility. 
15.  The design and construction specifications for all-public water and sanitary sewer facilities shall conform to the specifications of the Cobb County Water System or applicable authority, i.e., water meters should back-up to the property line. 
16.  Storm drains and cul-de-sacs shall off-set the right-of-way to accommodate utilities. See Standard Details 80 and 81. 
17.  All streetlights shall be placed at the property line. 
18.  The standard color codes adopted by the American Public Works Association and the Georgia Utilities Coordinating Committee shall be utilized for any necessary marking of underground utility lines. The color scheme is as follows: 

 
19.  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. Manhole covers and splice boxes placed within the sidewalk zone shall be constructed to be flush mounted with the finished sidewalk. 
20.  Utility poles and transformers shall be located as near as possible to the frontage line. Wherever practical, utility poles or transformers shall not be located on the same lot corner as water service. 
6.18.00 - CONDOMINIUMS 

6.18.01 - Project Design 
•  Design of project shall conform to the requirements of the Cobb County zoning regulations and to the standard design specifications. 
6.18.02 - Monuments 
•  Permanent bench markers shall be placed at all land lot corners on the boundary of the property being developed. These markers are to be concrete with brass markings. Placement (to be verified by visual inspections) to extend no less than 6 inches above the finished grade. 
NOTE: Set as witness to existing pins. 
•  All other corners shall be marked with an iron pin, ½-inch diameter, 24 inches long, and driven to extend no less than one inch above the finished grade. 
6.18.03 - Easements 
•  Easements shall be cleaned and opened at the time of development to control surface water run-offs. Run-off slope and side slopes are to be specified by the developer's engineer, according to good engineering practice. 
•  Permanent sanitary sewer easements of 20 feet in width shall be provided for necessary lines. 
•  Buildings shall not be located closer than 10 feet from the edge of any permanent sanitary sewer easement without approval from the Public Works Division. 
•  Easements for sanitary sewers and drainage purposes shall not overlap unless approved by the Public Works Division. 
•  Drainage easements shall be provided where the project is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural stream, or channel. Easements shall conform substantially to the limits of such watercourse plus any additional width as is necessary to accommodate future construction as recommended by the Storm Water Division. 
•  Drainage easements within the project and off the dedicated street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the final plat of the project. The owner of this property shall be required to keep the easement open and free of undue obstructions at all times. 
•  All easements shall be cleared of debris, excess dirt, and other materials. The ground shall be smoothed down and grassed within 10 days of completing construction work. The use of sediment control measures may be required to protect the area until a vegetative cover is obtained. 
6.18.04 - Street Names 
•  All street names are subject to the approval of the Community Development Agency and shall be done in accordance with Chapter 6, Section 6.02.22. 
6.18.05 - Property Address 
•  Property address numbers shall be provided by the Community Development Department. 
6.18.06 - Sidewalks 
•  Sidewalks of an approved design shall be required on residential streets per sidewalk requirements addressed in this chapter. 
6.18.07 - Suitability of Land 
•  Such land deemed unsuitable for residential purposes may be set aside for such uses that shall not be harmed by the existing condition of the land. (See FEMA floodplain regulations) 
6.18.08 - Utilities 
•  The design and construction specifications for all public utilities shall conform to the standard design specifications by the applicable agency. 
6.18.09 - Variances 
Where the sub-divider can show that a provision of the regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and/or where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, and/or where, in the opinion of the Mayor and Council a departure may be made without adversely affecting applicable City regulation, the Mayor and Council appeals' decision for authorization shall be noted on the final plat before approval of the plat. 
6.18.10 - Zoning or Other Regulations 
No final plat affected by an existing zoning ordinance shall be approved unless it conforms to such ordinance. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards of dimensions noted in these regulations and those contained in the zoning regulations, building code, or any other official regulation in Cobb County, the highest standard shall apply. 
6.19.00 - GATED COMMUNITIES 
Gated communities must be developed in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
All private roads must be designed and constructed according to City standards. 
Gates must be set back a minimum of 50 feet from public right-of-way. Minimum gate width must equal the required road width plus the width of any utility easements present, but in no case shall the width be less than 30-feet (including 14-feet of clearance width), provided, however, that the required gate width may be accomplished through the combination of adjacent entrance and exit gates of equal width. 
Gate width and placement must be reviewed by, and are subject to approval by, both the City and County Public Safety Agency (including Fire Marshall's Office). 
All gates must be "manned" 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
Arrangements for access through the gate for emergency service vehicles must be reviewed by, and are subject to approval by Cobb County Public Safety (including Fire Marshall's Office). Necessary arrangements may include Knox-fire boxes for keyed/keyless entry, keypad code entry, occupant telephone authorized entry, and/or automatic gate opening upon power disconnect. 
Arrangements for access through the gate for non-emergency service vehicles must be reviewed by, and are subject to approval by the City. Non-emergency public service vehicles include, but are not limited to, mail delivery, garbage pickup, public utility meter reading, and public utility maintenance. Necessary arrangements may include, but are not limited to: access easements for refuse collection vehicles and appropriate utility easements for public utility development and maintenance. Gates may not restrict access to any public right-of-way or publicly owned property within the proposed development. 
The City must be properly indemnified against any liability resulting from the proposed development including damage from or broken utilities, fines associated with damaged or broken utilities. This indemnification shall be evidenced by: 
1.  The Release and Indemnity Agreement placed on the plat. 
2.  A separate release and indemnity agreement executed by the developer. 
3.  A clause in each deed of conveyance by the developer for each lot in the subdivision acknowledging the release and indemnity agreement. 
4.  Assumption of liability of the release and indemnity agreement by the Homeowners' Association. 
5.  Assumption of liability of the release and indemnity agreement in the Protective Covenants, which shall become part of the covenants of the subdivision. The developer's liability shall end three years after the last lot has been sold by the developer, provided that there are then no pending or threatened claims against the developer, the County or the Homeowners' Association. All language for liability agreements and covenants shall read as required by the City Attorney's Office. 
The developer shall grant such easements to the appropriate governing authority or Utility Company as is necessary for public purposes regarding said community. 
In the event that the developer does not obtain any approval required hereunder, same shall not alleviate the requirement of obtaining such approval. 
Via a written Memorandum of Agreement in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, and compliance by the developer with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 40-6-3 (a) (6) as it may be amended from time to time, the developer, for itself and its successors in title, shall grant the City the authority to enforce all local ordinances and state laws, including the state Uniform Rules of the Road and necessary and required easements, within the gated community. The following standards shall be used by City of Kennesaw when considering any request for gated communities: 
1.  The number of units in the development shall not be excessive as identified on the Future Land Use Map of the City Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The developer must demonstrate adequate provision for perpetual maintenance of the private road and any other infrastructure associated with the development, including but not limited to a note on the plat and a clause in each deed of conveyance by the developer for each lot in the subdivision acknowledging the perpetual maintenance of the private road (and other private infrastructure) by the Homeowners' Association. 
3.  The developer must demonstrate an adequate strategy for necessary emergency access. 
4.  The private road and gate must not unreasonably impede the logical future development of public roads in the vicinity of the project. 
5.  The private road and gate must not unreasonably restrict public access to sites of cultural, historical, or natural significance. 
6.  The private road and gate must not unreasonably restrict previously established pedestrian access. 
7.  The establishment of gated communities must not have unreasonable negative effects on the health and welfare of the community or the good order of the City and/or County. 


























6.20.00 - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION ORDINANCE 

6.20.01 - Declaration of Findings and Purpose, Scope, Definitions 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The City is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all Rights-of-way in the City as such Rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the City and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the City, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Ga. Const. Art. 9, §§ 2 and 3; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(10), has adopted this ordinance for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the City Rights-of-way. 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all Utilities and Facilities occupying the Rights-of-way as provided herein. 
C.  Definitions. For the purposes of the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of the Utility Accommodation Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "Sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to Sections in this Ordinance. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
1.  City means the City of Kennesaw, Georgia; 
2.  Codified Ordinances means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia; 
3.  Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs or Facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the Rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the Right-of-way; 
4.  Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or Facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the Rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the Right-of-way; 
5.  Director means the Director of Public Works Department of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
6.  Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear or imminent danger to life, health, property; or interruption of Utility services; or repairs to transportation facilities that require immediate attention. 
7.  Facility or Facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any Utility seeking to locate or already located in, on, along, over, or under any part of the Rights-of-way within the City; 
8.  Facilities Representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s) of a Utility who is/are authorized to direct field activities of that Utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for Facilities' related information. The Utility shall be required to make sure at least one (1) of its Facilities Representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately and directly respond to, Facilities-related emergencies or situations; 
9.  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
10.  Utility Permit means an authorization given by the City which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written document or in a related provision of this Ordinance; 
11.  Right(s)-of-Way means the real property owned and controlled by a governmental agency for maintaining public infrastructure, including streets, sidewalks, pathways, mass transit rail line, drainage ditches and structures, shoulders, traffic control devices and vegetative buffers. The width of the right-of-way outside the pavement of any given street or road can be determined by the City Public Works Department; 
12.  Service(s) means the offering of any service by a Utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a Utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
13.  Street or Streets means a dedicated and accepted right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a highway, thoroughfare, land, road, boulevard, or otherwise; 
14.  Transfer means the disposal by the Utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than fifty percent (50%) at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the Facilities, or of more than fifty percent (50%) cumulatively of such interests in the Facilities to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
15.  Unused Facilities means Facilities located in the Rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the Utility is unable to provide the City with a plan detailing the procedure by which the Utility intends to begin actively using such Facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the Facilities who will be actively using the Facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or, that the availability of such Facilities is required by the Utility to adequately and efficiently operate its Facilities; 
16.  Utility or Utilities means any privately, publicly or cooperatively owned line, facility, or system for producing, transmitting or distributing communications, telecommunications, cable television, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, clay, waste, storm water not connected to highway drainage, and other similar services and commodities, including river gages, fire and police signals, and street lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public. The term "Utility", when capitalized, may also be used to refer to the owner of any above described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
6.20.02 - Utility Permit 
A.  Utility Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any Utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate Facilities in, on, along, over or under the right-of-way of the City without a Utility Permit from the Public Works Department in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance. 
B.  Permit Procedure. Utility Permits shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee upon application made on forms prescribed by the Public Works Department. The written application shall include the following: 
1.  The name and principal office address of the Utility; 
2.  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed Facility, Facilities, or operations as described in the application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of Facilities to be installed; their relationship to Street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the Street and its operation; 
3.  The name and address of the person or firm who is to perform such work; 
4.  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more Facilities Representative(s); 
5.  The projected dates for the work to be initiated and completed; 
6.  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the City for damages incurred to any part of the City road system or other City property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the Utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
7.  A copy, if requested, of the Registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
8.  A copy, if requested and if applicable documentation (i.e. Resolution, Lease Right-of-Way Agreement) that authorizes the Utility to use or occupy the Right-of-way for the purpose described in the application; and 
9.  A copy, if applicable, of documentation demonstrating that the Utility has written permission from privately-owned utility pole or facility owners that are located in the Right-of-way to locate or co-locate Facilities thereon. 
C.  Permit Fees. Fees shall be determined by the Director, subject to the approval by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the Director and the City Clerk and open for public inspection. 
D.  Issuance of Permit. The Director may issue a Utility Permit if the Director determines the Utility has satisfied the following requirements: 
1.  Issuance of the Utility Permit is consistent with this Ordinance and any other applicable local, state and federal regulation; 
2.  The Utility has submitted a complete Application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct Facilities in the manner proposed by the Utility; 
3.  The impacts on public safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the Right-of-way have been minimized giving due consideration to the scope, difficulty, duration, construction, and future maintenance of the project for which the Utility Permit is being issued; and 
4.  The placement of the Facilities under the Utility Permit complies with any applicable documentation authorizing the Utility to occupy the Right-of-Way (i.e. Resolution, Lease, Right-of-Way Agreement). 
E.  Emergency Situations. 
1.  Each Utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the Director of any event regarding its Facilities which is considered to be an Emergency. The Utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the Emergency and abate the situation. A Utility who engages in an emergency response shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid and minimize damage to any existing Facilities. 
2.  In the event that the City becomes aware of an Emergency related to a Facility located in the Right-of-way, the City may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the Emergency, including, but not limited to, cutting or moving or removing any of the Facilities. The City shall not incur any liability to the Utility for taking such emergency action(s), and the cost of such action(s) taken by the City shall be paid by each Utility involved by the Emergency. 
F.  Effective Period of Permit. 
1.  Each Utility Permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the Utility's Permit application. 
2.  The Utility Permit shall remain in place until Construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the Utility is in default. The Director may give written notice of default to a Utility if it is determined that a Utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a Utility Permit application or any law of the City, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this Ordinance; 
c.  Engaged in any fraud or deceit in connection with the Application or the Utility Permit; 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in connection with the Application or the Utility Permit; 
e.  Unused Facilities located in the Right-of-way. 
G.  Termination for Cause. If a Utility fails to cure a default after notice is provided to the Utility by the City, then such default shall be a material breach and the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the Utility Permit. If the Director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
1.  The Director shall serve a Utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a Utility a minimum of fifteen (15) business days to cure the breach. 
2.  If the Utility fails to cure within fifteen (15) business days, the Director may declare the Utility Permit terminated. 
H.  Expiration of Utility Permit. If construction under the Utility Permit is not initiated within six (6) months of the date of issuance, the Utility Permit will automatically expire and shall be null and void without further action by the City. 
I.  Indemnification. Any Utility obtaining a Utility Permit as provided in this Ordinance agrees, as a condition of the issuance thereof, to indemnify and hold the City harmless against any claim of liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of the negligence or willful misconduct of the Utility, its employees, contractors, or agents, including accidents or occurrences arising out of such Utility's operations under the Utility Permit. In addition, the Utility must sign a statement affirming that it will indemnify and save harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees from all liability for accidents and damage (personal and property) caused by any of the work covered under the Utility Permit, that it will fill up and place in good and safe condition all excavations and openings made in the street, that it will replace and restore the pavement over any opening it may made as near as can be to the state and condition in which it found it and keep and maintain the same in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to the satisfaction of the City. 
J.  Insurance. Any Utility obtaining a Utility Permit as provided in this Ordinance shall obtain and carry insurance per Section 3.5 (as amended from time to time) of the State of Georgia Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual relating to certification of insurance, policy provisions, coverage and any other insurance requirement under the Manual. 
K.  Performance bond. The City reserves the right, pursuant to Section 3.5.F (as amended from time to time) of the State of Georgia Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual, to require a performance bond, a letter of credit, or letter of escrow, as a condition of the Utility Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
6.20.03 - Required Minimum Standards 
A.  Utility Accommodation Manual Adopted. The 2016 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained herein. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the Director or his/her designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this ordinance and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to State personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Kennesaw municipal equivalents. 
B.  Protection of Traffic and Roadway. The normal operation of the Utility that is subject to the Utility Permit cannot interfere with the use of any portion of the City street system or any City extension of a county public road. Unless specifically in the Utility Permit, no Utility may occupy the City Rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the City from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant Facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the Facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
C.  Grading: If the grades or lines of any street within the City Right-of-way are changed at any time by the City during the term of the Utility Permit and this change involves an area in which the Utility's Facilities are located, then the Utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the City giving at least 60-days written notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the Facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the Utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the Facilities, in addition to any other remedy allowed by law, the City shall have the right to break-through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the Facilities without any liability to the Utility and the Utility shall promptly pay to the City the costs incurred in connection with such breaking-through, removal, alteration, or relocation. If the Utility has entered into a franchise agreement with the City and that agreement contains provisions that govern the relocation of facilities, the franchise agreement relocation provisions control over this paragraph. 
D.  Installation of Poles and Other Wire holding Structures and Relocation. No placement of any pole or wire holding structure of the Utility is to be considered a vested interest in the Right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the Utility at its own expense whenever the City determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The Facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of adjacent property owners. 
E.  Blasting or Excavating. As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no Utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating Facilities unless and until the Utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the Utility Protection Center, beginning the next Working Day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than Working Days. In addition, the Utility shall comply in all respects with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 in connection with such blasting or excavating activity. 
F.  Protection. No Utility is allowed to engage in Construction of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the City without first placing and maintaining proper guardrails, signal lights, or other appropriate warnings as the circumstances may command, in or around the Construction work site, sufficient to warn the public of any such Construction, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of such Construction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
6.20.04 - Restoration of Property 
A.  Responsibility for Costs. Each Utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any Facilities in the Rights-of-way and adjoining property or other Facilities which it or its Facilities damage. A Utility shall be obligated, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore, or repair, any Street, Facilities, or property or structure thereon, thereunder, there over or adjacent thereto that may be disturbed or damaged as a result of the Construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of Facilities. 
B.  Condition. The Utility shall replace, restore, or repair to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the Utility that caused such disturbance or damage. 
1.  The Utility is responsible for the proper backfilling and replacement of the surface of the Right-of-way. Any pavement settlement shall be immediately repaired at the expense of the Utility. 
2.  The Utility shall conduct any such restoration so as to not obstruct the free flow or passage of water in the gutters of any streets in the City. 
3.  The Utility performing the work under the Utility Permit shall be responsible for all defects in workmanship and shall be liable for all damages resulting from such defects. 
C.  Reimbursement for Costs. If the Utility does not commence such replacement or repair after fifteen (15) business days following written notice by the Director, the City or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the Utility shall reimburse the actual cost of the same within thirty (30) calendar days of the City or the owner giving notice to the Utility of the actual cost. Such notice by the City or property owner may be accompanied with supporting documentation justifying the actual cost. 
D.  Penalty. Any Utility neglecting, refusing, or failing to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal, or failure is continued, after notice from the Public Works Department, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for which the Utility shall be liable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
6.20.05 - Inspection 
A.  Time for Inspection. The Utility shall make the Construction site available to the Director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the Construction. 
B.  Stop Work Order. At any time, including the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the Utility Permit and/or this Ordinance or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the Utility Permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
C.  Notice of Completion. When the Construction under any Utility Permit is completed, the Utility shall notify the Director in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
6.20.06 - Obstructions, Transfers, Signs 
A.  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, in any of the streets or in any of the easements, or on any of the public sidewalks of the city an obstruction of any kind or character whatever, except by the consent of the mayor and council or a designated officer of the City, except in the case of an Emergency as defined herein. 
B.  Transfer or Lease. The Utility shall notify the City in writing of any transfer or lease of its Facilities that are the subject of a Utility Permit under this Ordinance. Such notice shall be given to the City no later than 30 days following any such transfer or lease. The notice shall include: (a) the name, address, telephone, and contact name of the person or company to whom the interest in the Facility was transferred or leased; (b) a copy of the document evidencing such transfer or lease; and (c) a copy of documentation that the Utility to whom the Facilities were transferred or leased (in whole or in part) has the legal authority to locate or co-locate on the Right-of-way, and if applicable, to locate or co-locate on public or privately owned Facilities located in the Right-of-way. 
C.  Signs. All signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, 2009 Edition (including Revision 1 dated May 2012 and Revision 2 dated May 2012) as promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration (MUTCD), as the MUTCD is amended and/or revised from time to time. The Utility shall be required to give the City written notice at least one week prior to the erection of any signs in the Right-of-way. Such signs shall be subject to the City requiring relocation and/or removal of same. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
6.20.06 - Penalties 
A.  Every Utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be obligated to pay a civil fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation plus applicable surcharges. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies at its election, including but not limited to abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, or termination of the Utility Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
6.20.07 - Other Provisions 
A.  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
B.  Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. The City by issuing a Utility Permit under this Ordinance, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the City's Codified Ordinances to regulate the use of the Rights-of-way. The Utility, by applying for and being issued a written Utility Permit, is deemed to acknowledged that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the City, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the City at any time. A Utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the City pursuant to such powers. 
C.  Compliance. No Utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance by reason of any failure of City to enforce compliance. 
D.  Appeal of Administrative Decision. Any Utility aggrieved by a decision of the Director made under this Ordinance may appeal that decision to the Board of Construction Appeals pursuant to Section 10.05.01 of the Unified Development Code within 30 days of the Director's decision. Any such appeal and shall be in writing and sent to the Director. 
E.  Ordinance Headings. Ordinance headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this Ordinance. 
F.  Notice. All notices to the City or the Director required under this Ordinance shall be made in writing and shall be sent via statutory overnight delivery to the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 4-2-18) 
Chapter 7 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE 
SECTION 7.01. - SHORT TITLE, AUTHORITY, AND APPLICABILITY 

7.01.01. - Short title 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Kennesaw, Georgia," or, for brevity, the "Impact Fee Ordinance." 
7.01.02. - Authority 
This Ordinance has been prepared and adopted by the City Council of Kennesaw, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
7.01.03. - Applicability 
A.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be construed to limit the power of Kennesaw, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this Ordinance. 
B.  This Ordinance shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Kennesaw, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
SECTION 7.02. - FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT 

7.02.01 - Findings 
The City Council of Kennesaw, Georgia, finds and declares: 
A.  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kennesaw; and 
B.  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
C.  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
7.02.02 - Purpose 
A.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
B.  It is also the purpose of this Ordinance to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Kennesaw and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
7.02.03 - Intent 
This Ordinance is intended to implement and be consistent with the Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq. ); and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning and the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements , both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
SECTION 7.03. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kennesaw. 

7.03.01 - Rules of Construction 
Unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this Ordinance: 
A.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this Ordinance and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Kennesaw, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this Ordinance. 
B.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
D.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
E.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
F.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
G.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
H.  The use of "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
I.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
J.  The Article, Section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this Ordinance are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this Ordinance. 
7.03.02 - Definitions 
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
ADMINISTRATOR means the City Manager of Kennesaw, Georgia, or the City Manager's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this Ordinance. 
BUILDING PERMIT is the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable Building Code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those Public Facilities as defined herein. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ELEMENT means that portion of the Kennesaw Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the City Council. 
CITY means Kennesaw, a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
CITY COUNCIL means the City Council of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be Development Impact Fee funds or not, for a Public Facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a Public Facilities project. 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN means the Kennesaw Plan or Planning Elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq. ) and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
DAY means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
DEVELOPER means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
DEVELOPMENT means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
ENCUMBER means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Kennesaw, Georgia. 
EXCESS CAPACITY means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
FEEPAYOR means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this Ordinance has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT DETERMINATION means a finding by the Administrator that an Individual Assessment Study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this Ordinance or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT STUDY means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
LEVEL OF SERVICE means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Kennesaw, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
PRESENT VALUE means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
PROJECT means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Kennesaw, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
PROPERTY OWNER means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
PROPORTIONATE SHARE means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
PUBLIC FACILITIES means: (A) Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; and (B) Public safety facilities, including police facilities. 
SERVICE AREA means a geographically defined area as designated in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three (3) percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
UNIT OF DEVELOPMENT means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
UNUSED OR EXCESS IMPACT FEE means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
SECTION 7.04. - IMPOSITION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Any person who after the effective date of this Ordinance engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this Ordinance. 

7.04.01 - Construction Not Subject to Impact Fees 
The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this Ordinance, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
A.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this Ordinance that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
B.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
C.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
D.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence and operation prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
E.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
F.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
G.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
7.04.02 - Grandfathered Projects 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
B.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this Ordinance, provided that: 
all fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be or have been paid in full; and, 
said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within 180 days, whichever is later. 
7.04.03 - Method of Calculation 
A.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this Ordinance shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan, and which: 
are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
C.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this Ordinance shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Kennesaw, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
D.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
SECTION 7.05. - FEE ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT 

7.05.01 - Fee Schedule 
A.  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A for a property located inside of Kennesaw, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Kennesaw, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
B.  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
C.  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
The Administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
In making such determination, the Administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this Ordinance, then an appropriate new category may be added by the Administrator and an appropriate fee established under the City's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the City Council. 
Appeals from the decision of the Administrator shall be made to the City Council in accordance with the Administrative Appeals Section of this Ordinance. 
7.05.02 - Timing of Assessment and Payment 
A.  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. 
B.  All development impact fees shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
C.  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
D.  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the Administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a Certificate of Occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
7.05.03 - Individual Assessment Determinations 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
A.  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the Administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A. 
B.  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or, 
be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Kennesaw or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and, 
provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the Administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
C.  The Administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance. A negative determination by the Administrator may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the Administrative Appeals Section of this Ordinance. 
D.  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Kennesaw, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
7.05.04 - Fee Certification 
Upon application to the Administrator, a developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
SECTION 7.06. - EXEMPTIONS 

7.06.01 - Exemption Policy 
The City of Kennesaw recognizes that certain office, retail trade and industrial development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the city's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. To encourage such development projects, the City Council may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such development projects upon either the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to City of Kennesaw, in accordance with adopted exemption criteria. It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. 
7.06.02 - Process for Exemption Approval 
An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: 
A.  Application for exemption approval must be made by the building permit applicant to the Administrator. A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made, or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and payment of impact fees have been paid. 
B.  Documentation must be provided to the Administrator that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted by the City. This documentation constitutes the application for exemption. 
C.  The Administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted by the City and is complete. A negative determination by the Administrator may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the Administrative Appeals Section of this Ordinance. 
D.  The Administrator or the City Council shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the standards and procedures contained in the exemption criteria adopted by the City Council. If action by the City Council is required, the application for exemption shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received by the Administrator. 
SECTION 7.07. - DEPOSIT AND EXPENDITURE OF FEES 

7.07.01 - Maintenance of Funds 
A.  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this Ordinance shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
B.  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
C.  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this Ordinance. 
7.07.02 - Expenditures; Restrictions 
A.  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
B.  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, the following shall be considered general revenue of Kennesaw, and may be expended accordingly: 
impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Kennesaw for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and, 
any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the Administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
7.07.03 - Annual Report 
A.  The Administrator shall prepare an annual report to the City Council as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
B.  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
SECTION 7.08. - CREDITS 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this Section. 

7.08.01 - Credits; Restrictions 
A.  Except as provided in Paragraph 2 below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this Ordinance. 
B.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this Ordinance for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the Project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Kennesaw, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
C.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
7.08.02 - Granting of Credits 
A.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
the system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan; 
the amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the Capital Improvements Element; and, 
the City Council shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
B.  The credit allowed pursuant to this Section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private agreement executed under the provisions of Section 9 of this Ordinance. 
7.08.03 - Guidelines for Credit Valuation 
Credits under this Section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
A.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the City, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the Administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
B.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the City, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
C.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the City, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Kennesaw, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
D.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the City, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
E.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the City Council in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
7.08.04 - Credits; Application 
A.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the Administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the Administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
B.  The Administrator, in his or her reasonable discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
C.  Any credit approved by the Administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the Administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
7.08.05 - Credits; Abandoned Building Permits 
In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the Administrator that an impact fee was received by the City, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
SECTION 7.09. - REFUNDS 

7.09.01 - Eligibility for a Refund 
A.  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
capacity is available in the Public Facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or, 
the development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
B.  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
7.09.02 - Notice of Entitlement to a Refund 
When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the Administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the Administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Kennesaw within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
7.09.03 - Filing a Request for a Refund 
All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the Administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
7.09.04 - Payment of Refunds 
A.  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the Administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
B.  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
C.  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Kennesaw for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
SECTION 7.10. - PRIVATE CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENTS 

7.10.01 - Private Agreements; Authorized 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the City and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
A.  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan; and, 
B.  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
7.10.02 - Private Agreements; Provisions 
A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
A.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the City to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this Ordinance. 
B.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
C.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this Ordinance, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable Letter of Credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
7.10.03 - Private Agreements; Procedure 
A.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this Section shall be submitted to the Administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the City Council. 
B.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the City Council of Kennesaw, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the Clerk of Superior Court for recording. 
SECTION 7.11. - PERIODIC REVIEW AND AMENDMENTS 

7.11.01 - Ordinance Amendments 
A.  This Ordinance may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. 
B.  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the Administrator under Section 0 are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the City Council when this Ordinance is subsequently amended. 
7.11.02 - Capital Improvements Element Periodic Review 
A.  Update. At least once each year, the City Council shall review and may update the Capital Improvements Element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The Capital Improvements Element Update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The Capital Improvements Element Update shall be submitted to the Regional Development Center for their review, in accordance with the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
B.  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the Capital Improvements Element and calculation of development impact fees, the City Council may determine to amend the Capital Improvements Element. Amendments to the Capital Improvements Element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the Capital Improvements Element that would: 
redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the Capital Improvements Element; 
add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
make any other revisions needed to keep the Capital Improvements Element up to date. 
7.11.03 - Continuation of Validity 
Failure of the City Council to undertake a periodic review of the Capital Improvements Element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this Ordinance. 
SECTION 7.12. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 

7.12.01 - Eligibility to File an Appeal 
Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the City or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
7.12.02 - Appeals Process 
A.  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the Administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
B.  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
The name and address of the appellant; 
The location of the affected property; 
A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the Administrator (from which the appeal is taken); 
C.  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the Administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
D.  Appeals from the final decision of the Administrator shall be made to the City Council within 30 days of receipt by the appellant of the Administrator's decision. Delivery by hand or certified mail to, or posting upon the property at, the address given by the appellant in the application for relief shall constitute "receipt by the appellant" under this provision. 
E.  The City Council shall thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days provided that at least 2 weeks written notice thereof can be given to the appellant. The City Council shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing, but in no case more than 15 days following the hearing, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
7.12.03 - Payment of Impact Fee during Appeal 
A.  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
B.  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be stopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
SECTION 7.13. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

7.13.01 - Enforcement Authority 
A.  The enforcement of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Administrator and such personnel as the Administrator may designate from time to time. 
B.  The Administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this Ordinance and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the Administrator in his or her reasonable determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this Ordinance shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within thirty (30) days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the Administrator. 
C.  The Administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals. if the provisions of this Ordinance have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
7.13.02 - Violations 
A.  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this Ordinance shall constitute an actionable violation. 
B.  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
C.  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. 
D.  A violation of this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the Kennesaw Code of Ordinances. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the City Council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this Ordinance, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this Ordinance and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
SECTION 7.14. - REPEALER, SEVERABILITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 

7.14.01 - Repeal of Conflicting Laws 
Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
7.14.02 - Severability 
If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this Ordinance is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
7.14.03 - Incorporation by Reference of Georgia Law 
It is the intent of the City Council that the Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Kennesaw, Georgia comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). To the extent that any provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with the provisions of said Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this Ordinance is silent as to any provision of said Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise made mandatory by said Chapter 36-71, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the City. 
7.14.04 - Effective Date 
This Ordinance shall take effect on February 16, 2010. 
BE IT SO ORDAINED this _____ th day of ________, 2010, by the CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KENNESAW, GEORGIA. 
City Manager, City of Kennesaw 
Attachment A 
Fee Schedule—Kennesaw, GA 
The attached fee schedule reflects the adoption of an impact fee schedule that is below the maximum allowable impact fee, as calculated in the City of Kennesaw Impact Fee Methodology Report as adopted February 15, 2010. Insert Attachment A . 


Chapter 8 - BOARDS AND AGENCIES 
8.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The Boards, and Commissions described in Chapter 8 are established for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the UDC. The Boards and Commissions described in this chapter shall have the powers and duties described necessary to achieve the purpose of this UDC. 
8.01.00 - CITY OF KENNESAW PLANNING COMMISSION 

8.01.01 - Members 
A.  The Kennesaw Planning Commission, referred to in this UDC as the Planning Commission, shall consist of seven (7) members. 
B.  A chairperson shall be elected by the Planning Commission at the first meeting of each year. 
C.  A vice-chairperson shall be elected at the first meeting of each year and shall serve in the absence of the chairperson. 
D.  Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for a three (3)-year term or to fulfill an unexpired term. 
E.  All members shall be residents and registered voters of the city. 
8.01.02 - Quorum and Meetings 
A.  To establish a quorum for the meeting, four (4) members must be present, one (1) of whom may be the chairperson. 
B.  The meetings of the Planning Commission shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise stated prior to the meeting. 
8.01.03 - Duties and Responsibilities 
A.  The Planning Commission shall hear all matters pertaining to zoning and use of land. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall act as an advisory board to the Mayor and City Council in all matters pertaining to zoning, present or future, and use of land. 
8.02.00 - KENNESAW HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

8.02.01 - Establishment of a Historic Preservation Commission 
The authority to establish a Historic Preservation Commission is granted per Title 44. "Property," Chapter 10 "Historic Preservation," Article 2 "Ordinances Providing for Historical Preservation," O.C.G.A. 44-10-24 enacted March 1, 1980: 
A.  The local governing body of a municipality or county electing to enact an ordinance to provide for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, or use of historic properties or historic districts shall establish or designate a Historic Preservation Commission. Such local governing body shall determine the number of members of the Commission, which shall be at least three, and the length of their terms, which shall be no greater than three years. A majority of the members of any such Commission shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history or architecture; all the members shall reside within the historic preservation jurisdiction of their respective municipality or county except as otherwise provided by subsection (b) of this Code section; and all shall serve without compensation. In establishing such a Commission and making appointments to it, a local governing body may seek the advice of any state or local historical agency, society, or organization. 
B.  The local governing body of a county and the local governing body or bodies of one or more municipalities lying wholly or partially within such county may establish or designate a joint Historic Preservation Commission. If a joint Commission is established, the local governing bodies of the county and the municipality or municipalities involved shall determine the residence requirements for members of the joint Commission. 
8.02.02 - Creation 
A.  The Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission is hereby created, consisting of not more than seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor and City Council. 
B.  The term of office of the members shall be for two (2) years. One-half of the initial members shall be appointed for two (2) years, and the remaining half for one (1) year. Subsequently, members shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years as vacancies occur. 
C.  Members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
D.  All members shall be residents of Cobb County, and a majority of the members shall be residents of the city. 
8.02.03 - Meetings 
A.  The Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission shall meet monthly. 
B.  A public record shall be kept of the Commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. 
C.  Meetings shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order, most recent edition. 
8.02.04 - Conflicts of Interest 
A.  At any time the Historic Preservation Commission reviews a project in which a member of the Commission has ownership or other economic or vested interest including the involvement of relatives, that member will be restricted from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
B.  Provided, however, the Commission member may be excused from sitting in attendance with the Commission on such matter and may then address the Commission as an affected citizen. 
8.02.05 - Duties, Responsibilities and Powers 
The Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission shall be authorized and encouraged to: 
1.  Prepare an inventory of all property within the historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property; 
2.  Recommend to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw specific places, sites, buildings, structures, works of art, and districts to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
3.  Review all applications of historic properties requesting the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness and grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance; 
4.  Recommend to the Mayor and City Council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure or work of art as a historic property be revoked or removed; 
5.  Review the change in exterior architectural appearance or exterior environmental appearance of any city-owned property designated as a historic property and, further, make recommendations on such proposed change; 
6.  Monitor the condition of all historic properties and determine if a condition of demolition by neglect exists; further, if such a condition does exist, recommend appropriate steps to the building official to correct it; 
7.  Promote the acquisition by the City of Kennesaw of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976" (Georgia Laws 1976, page 1181); 
8.  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction; 
9.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the Mayor and City Council or the Commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purpose of preserving historic resources; 
10.  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
11.  Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources or its successor any historic property(ies) determined by the Commission to promote historic interests of the community and provide the historic preservation section whatever information is needed to nominate these to the National Register of Historic Places; 
12.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Program; 
13.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the Commission; the Commission shall not employ any person which obligates the City of Kennesaw without prior consent of the Mayor and City Council; 
14.  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts for use as determined by the Commission. To acquire or sell historic properties upon approval of the Mayor and City Council. Further, the Commission shall not obligate the City of Kennesaw without prior consent of the Kennesaw Mayor and City Council; 
15.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Kennesaw upon approval of the Mayor and City Council; and 
16.  Consult with historic preservation experts in the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources or its successor, the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc., and the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Georgia Certified Local Government Program, other historic Commissions, and the Atlanta Regional Commission or other similar agencies. 
8.02.06 - Appeals 
A.  Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Kennesaw Historic Preservation Commission may appeal to the Mayor and City Council. 
B.  The appeal must be filed within seven (7) days of the decision of the Commission and must be made by written petition delivered to the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  The appeal shall be on the application exactly as presented to the Commission. 
D.  The appeal shall be advertised for public notice in accordance with this UDC. 
E.  Appeals from decisions of the Mayor and City Council may be taken to the superior court of Cobb County in the manner provided by law for appeals from a conviction for municipal or county ordinance violation(s). 
8.02.07 - Guidance standards and maintenance of consistent policies 
In order to provide guidance and insight into desirable goals and objectives for the Historic Preservation Commission, the Commission shall maintain a file containing records of all applications brought before the Commission for review. Each file shall include: the action taken by the Commission; drawings submitted; amendments of drawings approved pertaining thereto; and drawings and photographs or reproductions thereof showing structures in authentic Kennesaw character. Where in the Commission's opinion these files or records serve as general guides to appropriateness or as expressions of objectives to prospective developers or property owners, these files may be referred to for use on other applications. Such documents shall remain the property of the City of Kennesaw and be held in the custody of the Zoning Administrator. 
8.03.00 - CITY TREE BOARD 

8.03.01 - Establishment of a City Tree Board 
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board and shall consist of the Keep Kennesaw Beautiful Board sitting as the City Tree Board. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. The Board shall choose its own officers, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
Tree Board Duties and Responsibilities—It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to: 
A.  Study, develop and update annually, specifications for the care, conservation, pruning, planting, and replanting of publicly owned trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. 
B.  Develop and maintain arboricultural specifications for tree care and replacement. 
C.  To conduct a public Arbor Day tree planting activity and develop or secure and distribute tree care and tree benefit information as part of a county/city wide tree benefit educational program. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 5-7-12) 
8.04.00 - CITY OF KENNESAW ART AND CULTURE COMMISSION 

8.04.01 - Establishment of the Art and Culture Commission 
A.  The local governing body or bodies of one or more municipalities lying wholly or partially within such county may establish or designate an art and culture commission. If a joint commission is established, the local governing bodies of the county and the municipality or municipalities involved shall determine the residence requirements for members of the joint commission. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
8.04.02 - Creation 
A.  The Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission is hereby created, consisting of not more than seven members of which at least four members must be City of Kennesaw residents appointed by the Mayor and Council. The members shall include: 
1.  A practicing architect licensed in the State of Georgia; 
2.  An active participant in local or state art councils or member of art/cultural foundations with professional background in art programs or art culture education; 
3.  An active student or professor from a college, university, technical school or other educational institution; 
4.  A business owner within the city limits of Kennesaw; 
5.  A current Cobb County resident; 
6.  Of the seven (7) members, four shall be residents of the City of Kennesaw. 
B.  The members of the commission shall be appointed for two-year staggered terms as vacancies occur. 
C.  Members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
D.  Members serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and may be removed at any time with or without cause by a majority vote of the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
8.04.03 - Meetings 
A.  The City of Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission shall meet as needed. 
B.  A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. 
C.  Meetings shall be conducted according to the most recent version of the Robert's Rules of Order, unless it is announced at the beginning of the meeting that those Rules will not be used. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
8.04.04 - Conflicts of Interest 
At any time the Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other economic or vested interest including the involvement of relatives, that member will be restricted from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
8.04.05 - Duties, Responsibilities and Powers 
The City of Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission shall be authorized and encouraged to: 
A.  Recommend to the Mayor and Council, city departments and boards regarding programs and community outreach activities that promote local cultural and artistic awareness and education. 
B.  Review all applications requesting the issuance of a site plan permit and to provide a recommendation to Mayor and Council to grant or deny submitted applications in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
8.04.06 - Appeals 
Appeals from decisions of the Mayor and Council may be taken to the Superior Court of Cobb County in the manner provided by law for appeals from a conviction for municipal or county ordinance violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
8.04.07 - Guidance standards and maintenance of consistent policies 
In order to provide guidance and insight into desirable goals and objectives for the City of Kennesaw Art and Culture Commission, the commission shall maintain a file containing records of all applications brought before the commission for review. Each file shall include: the action taken by the commission; drawings submitted; amendments of drawings approved pertaining thereto; and drawings and photographs or reproductions thereof showing structures in authentic Kennesaw character. Where in the commission's opinion these files or records serve as general guides to appropriateness or as expressions of objectives to property owners or artists, these files may be referred to for use on other applications. Such documents shall remain the property of the City of Kennesaw and be held in the custody of the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-16-15) 
Chapter 9 - VARIATIONS 
9.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this UDC. There are several ways that potential relief from hardship is addressed. Section 9.01.00 addresses relief through requirements regarding nonconforming development. Section 9.02.00 addresses relief through the grant of a variance in a particular situation due to the characteristics of the land to be developed based on the required site design standards. Section 9.03.00 addresses relief through specific exceptions to the conditions of zoning. Section 9.04.00 addresses relief through the grant of an administrative waiver in specific situations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
9.01.00 - NONCONFORMING USES[15] 
A.  The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of this UDC may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this UDC except that the use of a principal nonconforming building, structure or land shall not be: 
Changed to another nonconforming use; 
Re-established after discontinuance or abandonment for one (1) year. Discontinuance or abandonment means the failure to devote the property to the permitted nonconforming use evidenced by an overt act or failure to act (or combination of the two) sufficient to support the implication of an intent to relinquish the right to continue the nonconforming use. 
Expanded, enlarged or extended, either on the same or adjoining parcel, except in conformity with this ordinance; 
Rebuilt, altered, replaced, or repaired after damage exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of destruction as determined by the building official except in conformity with this ordinance. For those situations where the damage does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, any such rebuilding, alteration, replacment or repair shall be completed within twelve (12) months of such damage; 
Altered, except if less than thirty percent (30%) of the floor space of a building or structure is found by the building inspector to be structurally unsafe then a permit may be issued to correct the unsafe condition. 
B.  At the time of the enactment of this UDC, every owner of a nonconforming building or structure shall have sixty (60) days to indicate in writing to the Zoning Administrator which building or structure or group of buildings or structures will be considered the "principal" nonconforming building or structure defined in Section A above. In the event that more than one (1) building or structure is classified as "principal" under this section, said classification must be justified by the owner and accepted in writing by the Zoning Administrator. In the event that multiple buildings or structures are accepted by the Zoning Administrator as being the "principal" nonconforming building or structure as defined in Section A above, then all percentage figures stated in this section will pertain to the total area of the multiple buildings or structures so accepted. 
C.  All nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be discontinued and made to conform within the time periods set forth below: 
1.  All nonconforming uses of land where no buildings are involved—Six (6) months from date of adoption of this UDC. 
2.  All nonconforming uses of land on which are located demountable or portable buildings or structures—twelve (12) months from date of adoption of this ordinance unless approved by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA). 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), adopted Oct. 15, 2018, amended § 9.01.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9.01.00 pertained to nonconforming lots, structures, and uses. 

9.02.00 - VARIANCES 

9.02.01 - Generally 
A.  The Mayor and City Council may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this UDC as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. 
B.  A variance shall be authorized only so that the spirit of this UDC shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
C.  A variance shall not be granted to allow a use of land that is otherwise prohibited in the zoning district applicable to the property. 
D.  The existence of a nonconforming use on adjacent land, buildings, or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for a variance. 
E.  The Mayor and City Council shall be responsible for consideration and a decision regarding requests for variances, pursuant to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in Chapter 10. 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
9.02.02 - Types of Variances 
A request for a variance shall be limited to vary the following : 1) maximum building height; 2) minimum lot width; 3) required spacing for driveways; 4) minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks; or 5) dimensional standards for parking or loading spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
9.02.03 - Requirements for Variances 
Variances may be granted using the following criteria: 
A.  There is extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property because of its size, shape or topography; 
B.  The application of the UDC standards to property creates practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; 
C.  The practical difficulty and/or unnecessary hardship are conditions which are peculiar to the property involved; and 
D.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impede the purposes and intent of the UDC . 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
9.02.04 - Requirements for Making Variance Applications 
A.  An applicant for a variance shall file with the zoning department the following: 
1.  A completed application on forms prescribed by the zoning department; 
2.  The notarized signature of the applicant and record titleholder upon the application. 
3.  The application fee. 
a.  These fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. 
b.  A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained in the City Clerk's Office. 
4.  A current boundary survey and plot plan, to scale, that bears the signature and seal of a registered surveyor, engineer, architect or landscape architect. Such plans shall also include such other information thereon as may be required by the zoning department, including preliminary plans for development, building locations, parking areas, access points, adjacent streets, land lot lines, buffer areas, future right-of-way, wetlands, floodplains, utilities, and retention. 
5.  Private sewage disposal must be approved by the Cobb County Health Department, and written approval from the health department must be filed with the application. 
6.  Any other information required by the zoning department which they deem necessary or desirable in processing the application which is related to the present or proposed use of the property. 
B.  Posting of public notice. The posting shall be the same as set forth in Chapter 10 for zoning applications. 
C.  Rejected applications. Any variance request may not be reconsidered for a period of twelve (12) months after it has been rejected by the Mayor and City Council, unless by court order or pursuant to a settlement of litigation. 
D.  Expiration of variance approval. Any variance authorized by the Mayor and City Council, for which construction has not commenced within one (1) year from the date on which the decision of the Mayor and City Council becomes final, shall be deemed abandoned and be void and of no further force and effect. 
E.  An appeal of a decision of the Mayor and City Council on a variance application shall be to the Superior Court of Cobb County within 30 days of the Mayor and City Council's decision on the application. The date of the decision is the date that the Mayor and City Council vote to grant or deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
9.03.00 - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

9.03.01 - Conditional Zoning 
A.  Each zoning use category described in this UDC shall have a subhead thereunder to be known as "conditional" for that category. 
B.  The Planning Commission may hear and act upon requests for "conditional zoning" of the petition as originally presented which are imposed to protect the health, safety and welfare. 
1.  The Planning Commission and Mayor and City Council may hear and act upon new conditions requested by the petitioner which were not contained in the original "conditional" petition. 
2.  Further, the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council may hear and act upon new conditions recommended by the Zoning Administrator which were not contained in the original "conditional" petition. 
3.  Further, the Mayor and City Council may impose new conditions not contained in the original petition. 
C.  The City Council may act on any petition where new conditions on the petition have been included which were not contained in the "conditional" petition heard and acted upon by the Planning Commission or may send such petition back to the Planning Commission for further study and recommendation before rendering a decision within sixty (60) days from the date of the public hearing held by the Mayor and City Council. 
D.  All other requirements of the UDC must be complied with. 
E.  Whenever the City Council, after holding a public hearing as provided in Chapter 10, approves such specific plans and design for a particular development and use and also approves a change in the district maps, then the property may be rezoned for the proper category as set forth in the UDC of the City of Kennesaw as "conditional" under the category and the Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit for the development of such property in substantial accordance with the plan submitted. 
F.  Upon approval by the City Council of the plans supporting the approval and procedure outlined in Subsection E above, said plans shall bear a certificate by the Zoning Administrator indicating said approval. One copy of said plan will be filed with the record of rezoning. 
G.  If for any reason, development and use of the property approved in accordance with the procedure outlined in Subsections E and F above cannot be accomplished, such plans shall not be substantially altered, changed, or varied; nor shall gross square footage, number of dwelling units or lot coverage be increased except after approval of the City Council. 
H.  Nevertheless, when conditional zoning has been granted, but no affirmative action to perform said conditions or to obtain a building permit subject to such conditions, and such status shall continue for twelve (12) months from the date of approval of such conditional zoning, the property shall revert to its original status prior to such conditional zoning. 
1.  Provided, however, the owner of the property conditionally zoned may request the Mayor and City Council to extend the conditional zoning or the Mayor and City Council on its own action may consider extension of the conditional zoning. 
2.  If the Mayor and City Council find just cause for extending the conditional zoning, such conditional zoning may be extended for a period of up to twelve (12) months from the date of approval of such zoning period if the Mayor and City Council find just cause for extending conditional zoning, additional periods of up to twelve (12) months each may be granted. 
3.  It is the responsibility of the owner to notify the Zoning Administrator and to petition the Mayor and City Council for an extension of the conditional zoning. 
4.  Such petition must be presented by the owner and/or the owner's representatives to the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date so as to be in time for the Mayor and City Council act thereon before the twelve (12) months expire. 
5.  If no extension is granted by the Mayor and City Council prior to the expiration date, the property concerned reverts to its zoning before the conditional zoning was approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
6.  If an extension of such conditional zoning is approved by the Mayor and City Council, such approval will be made on the conditional zoning originally approved by the Mayor and City Council, provided however, additional conditions approved by the Mayor and City Council may be included in the "conditional" petition. 
9.03.02 - Lots of Record 
A.  Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one (1) or more adjacent lots of record at the time of the enactment of this ordinance did not at that time own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this ordinance, such plot may nevertheless be used as a building site. 
B.  The yard and other space requirements of the district in which the plot is located may be reduced by the smallest amount permitting a principal building of minimum acceptable size to be built upon the lot. 
9.03.03 - Height Limitations 
Except for antennas in single-family residential districts, the height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Religious assembly spires 
B.  Belfries 
C.  Cupolas 
D.  Domes 
E.  Ornamental towers 
F.  Water towers 
G.  Chimneys and smokestacks 
H.  Conveyors 
I.  Silos 
J.  Barns, when located on a working farm, not intended for human occupancy or public utility facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 13, 4-20-15) 
9.03.04 - Fences and Walls 
Fences and freestanding walls shall be permitted on single-family residential properties when constructed in conjunction with a single-family detached residential use, provided the following requirements are met: 
A.  No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard, other than a retaining wall or necessary fencing encompassing a tennis court on private property, shall be more than eight (8) feet in height, or be constructed in a public right-of-way. 
B.  Fences or free standing walls constructed in front yard, as defined in this UDC shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
C.  In the case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, a fence located along a street property line shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
D.  The height of a fence shall be measured from grade to the highest point of the fence and shall be no taller than eight (8) feet or four (4) feet at any point, respectively. 
E.  No wall or fence constructed of woven wire or metal fabric (chain link, hog wire or barbed wire) shall extend into a front yard, except that a woven wire or metal fabric fence may extend into a front yard when the property contains a minimum of two (2) acres and any wall or fence shall not be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk or other discarded materials. 
F.  Any walls or fence which extends into the required front yard on property less than two (2) acres shall be decorative and constructed of brick, stone, wood, stucco, wrought iron, split rail, and shall not be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk or other discarded materials. 
G.  The exterior surface of any fence shall not be unfinished along abutting properties. 
H.  Any subdivision entrance wall or fence shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and shall be subject to architectural approval by the Kennesaw Community Development Department. 
I.  The Mayor and City Council of the City of Kennesaw shall hear and decide appeals and request for variance from this section of the UDC. 
9.03.05 - Corner Lots 
A.  All corner lots setbacks subject to Chapter 4 site design standards 
9.04.00 - ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES AND REQUIREMENTS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), adopted Oct. 15, 2018, amended § 9.04.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9.04.00 pertained to administrative waiver and derived from Ord. No. 2016-32, adopted Oct. 17, 2016. 

9.04.01 - Administrative Variance 
A.  The Planning and Zoning Administrator has authority to grant the following administrative variances: 
1.  A reduction in the minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks for a single lot, provided that the reduction is limited to a maximum of five (5) feet. 
2.  An increase in the maximum floor area ratio limitations for a single lot provided that the increase is limited to a maximum of five percent (5%) of the maximum standard. 
3.  An increase in the maximum building coverage ratio limitations for a single lot provided that the increase is limited to a maximum of five percent (5%) of the maximum standard. 
4.  Maximum height of structures—Height variance not to exceed averaged roof height of the area by ten percent (10%) maximum. The height variance will take into consideration the scale and character of the area and the intention of the zoning district being affected. 
5.  Parking spaces reduction—Reduction of minimum parking spaces required not to exceed six percent (6%) of total required spaces required under the UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
9.04.02 - Requirements for Submittal of Administrative Variance Application 
A.  An application for an administrative variance shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Department through the Zoning Administrator. 
B.  The following documents will be required for processing: 
1.  A completed administrative variance application with all applicable signatures. 
2.  All required fees submitted with completed application as per master fee schedule adopted by the City of Kennesaw. 
3.  All supportive drawings, surveys, reports and any other information required by the Planning and Zoning Department deemed necessary that conveys all relevant information referenced in the application. 
C.  Processing of application. 
1.  Upon submittal and receipt of completed administrative variance application, the Zoning Administrator will attempt to process and render a decision within 15 business days. 
2.  The applicant will have the responsibility to notify all adjoining property owners (including property owners for property located across the street or streets from the property on which the variance is requested) of the intention and purpose of the variance application. The applicant must forward all written responses either recommending approval or denial of the applicants request for administrative to the Zoning Administrator. 
3.  If the Zoning Administrator receives objections from adjoining property owners regarding the administrative variance application then the Zoning Administrator will contact all parties who have objected to see if the matter can be settled between all parties. 
4.  If the matter cannot be settled, the Zoning Administrator will deny the variance and advise the applicant that he or she may appeal this decision to the Mayor and City Council under provisions of Chapter 10 of the UDC. 
5.  The above provision may be waived if all the adjoining property owners sign consent to the variance on the forms provided by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and staff. 
6.  The applicant will be responsible for securing all signatures if consent from the adjoining property owners and submittal to the Planning and Zoning Department. 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
9.04.03 - Required Reports 
Prior to a vote by the Mayor and Council on any project, the Zoning Administrator shall report to the Mayor and Council all administrative variances associated with said project. Any administrative variances considered by the Planning and Zoning Administrator related to any project previously approved by the Mayor and Council shall be put forth for review and comment by the Mayor and Council at a work session, regular meeting or special meeting prior to any action being taken. 
A.  A monthly written report of all administrative variances shall be prepared by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and submitted at the first regular meeting of each month to the Mayor and Council for review and comment. 
B.  An annual written report of all administrative variances shall be prepared by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and submitted to the Mayor and Council for review and comment at the first regular meeting of each calendar year. 
C.  All reports shall contain: 
1.  A summary of each administrative variance application made during the period, including a description of why the variance from any law, ordinance, rule or regulation is necessary; 
2.  The action taken on each application; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity making each application; and 
4.  The name, address and telephone number of any attorney who represented the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-23, § 2(Exh. B), 10-15-18) 
Chapter 10 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
10.00.00 - GENERALLY 

10.00.01 - Purpose 
This Chapter sets forth the procedures for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for permits, rezoning, subdivisions, multi-family and nonresidential development, mixed use development, and planned developments. This Chapter also sets forth the requirements for appealing decisions and for enforcement. It is the City's intent that the procedures and requirements set forth in this Chapter shall be followed in order to seek approval for any development. 
10.00.02 - Approvals Required 
A.  Building Permit Required. No building, sign, except "for sale" or "for rent" signs or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended or enlarged, or structurally altered; nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the building official has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
1.  Application. Each application to the building official for a building permit shall be accompanied by plot plans in duplicate drawn to a scale showing: the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the size, height and use of the building to be erected; the location of the building on the lot; the location of the existing structures on the lot, if any; the number of the dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; the approximate setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. One (1) copy of said plot plan shall remain on file in the office of the building official. 
2.  Duration of Validity. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after work is commenced. 
3.  Conditions and Intent of the Permit. 
a.  A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this ordinance. 
b.  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work is commenced. 
c.  One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. 
d.  The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
e.  Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
B.  Certificate of Occupancy Required. 
1.  A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a.  Any lot change or extension in the use thereof; 
b.  A building or structure hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing building or structure; or 
c.  Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance or an amendment thereto or that is changed, extended, altered or rebuilt thereafter, the Certificate of Occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  A Certificate of Occupancy, either for the whole or part of a building, shall be applied for, coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alterations of such building, or part, shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.  A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
4.  If the Certificate of Occupancy is denied, the building inspector shall state in writing the reason for refusal and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. 
5.  A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
10.00.03 - Expiration of Approvals 
A.  Any permit shall become void if the work authorized by the permit has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit. 
B.  The time period for which a permit is valid may be extended for one (1) or more periods of not more than ninety (90) days each where an application for such extension is filed and such extension has been granted in writing by the Zoning Administrator or Building Official. 
C.  The expiration of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall conform to Items A, B and C of this section. 
10.00.04 - Fees Required 
A.  All applications shall be accompanied by payment of application fees, as set forth in the City of Kennesaw Fee Schedule adopted by the Mayor and Council and as may be amended from time to time. An application shall not be complete until all required fees are paid. Such fees shall include the filing fee, and where notice is required, shall include an additional fee to defray the expense of preparing and mailing such notices. 
B.  For land clearing permits, a fee in addition to local permitting fees will be assessed pursuant to Georgia statutes. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. 
10.00.05 - Public Notice Requirements 
A.  Before making a recommendation concerning a proposed rezoning, variance or application requests to the Mayor and Council or the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
B.  At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the Mayor and Council or Planning Commission shall cause to be published in a newspaper (Marietta Daily Journal) of general circulation within the County notice of the hearing. 
1.  Such notice shall be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in such newspaper. 
2.  The notice shall state: 
a.  The time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
b.  Location of the property. 
c.  Present zoning classification of the property. 
d.  Proposed zoning classification of the property. 
C.  The City of Kennesaw shall be required to post and maintain signs supplied by the zoning division on or near the right-of-way of the nearest public street, so as to be visible from the street, for at least fifteen (15) days immediately preceding the date for any public hearings on the application, which shall remain posted until a final decision by the Mayor and Council. 
1.  It is the responsibility of the City of Kennesaw to post the signs and to maintain the signs during the posting period. Failure to post and maintain the signs continuously may prohibit consideration of the application at any scheduled public hearing. 
2.  The Planning Commission or Mayor and Council may also, in its sole discretion, continue, hold, approve or dismiss the application. 
3.  Any dismissal under the provisions of this subsection shall be with prejudice unless specifically noted as being without prejudice by the Planning Commission or Mayor and Council. 
D.  In addition to the requirements herein stated in subsection (A) above, it shall be the duty of the applicant for zoning to notify in writing all surrounding property owners within a 200-foot radius of the boundary lines of the property as shown on the most current tax records. 
1.  Such notice shall be satisfied by the applicants mailing of a copy of the proposed site plan and copy of application to the surrounding property owners by both first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested. 
2.  Return receipt addressee for all notifications mailed will be the community development department. 
3.  The notice shall be mailed no later than fifteen (15) days before the first public hearing. 
4.  The cost of the notices shall be borne by the applicant. 
E.  The provisions of subsections (A) and (B) above shall apply to "other business" items as well except that the zoning division staff shall cause notice to be mailed no later than fifteen (15) days before the action is to be heard. 
10.00.06 - Procedures for Conducting Public Hearings 
The following rules of procedure shall govern public hearings pertaining to development subject to the provisions of this UDC: 
A.  Hearings before the Planning Commission. 
1.  All persons who wish to address the Planning Commission at a hearing on the proposed zoning application under consideration by the Planning Commission shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the Zoning Administrator prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
2.  The Chairman of the Planning Commission will read the proposed zoning application under consideration and any departmental reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input on the proposed zoning decision. Proposed zoning applications shall be called in the order in which they were filed. 
3.  The Chairman shall then call each person who has signed up to speak on the zoning application before the Planning Commission in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak. 
a.  The applicant will always speak first. 
b.  Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself or herself and state his/her current address. 
4.  Each speaker shall be allowed sufficient time to address the Planning Commission concerning the zoning application then under consideration. 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of the Chairman of the Planning Commission to allocate sufficient time according to the complexity of the pending issue. 
b.  One (1) member of the Planning Commission shall be designated as the time keeper to record the time expended by each speaker. 
c.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and as amended from time to time, both proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning decision shall be given a minimum of ten (10) minutes per side for their presentation. 
5.  Each speaker shall: 
a.  Speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning application under consideration and shall address his/her remarks only to the members of the Planning Commission. 
b.  Refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning application under consideration. 
c.  The chair may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
6.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the chair from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure the public hearing on a proposed zoning application is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
B.  Hearings before the Mayor and Council 
1.  All persons who wish to address the Mayor and Council at a hearing concerning a proposed zoning decision or application under consideration by the Mayor and Council shall first sign up on a form to be provided by The Zoning Administrator/City Clerk prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
2.  The Mayor and Council or their designee will read the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration and any department reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input on such proposed zoning decision or application. Proposed zoning decisions or applications shall be called in the order in which they were filed. 
3.  The Mayor or his designee shall then call each person who has signed up to speak on the zoning decision or application in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak. 
a.  The applicant will always speak first. 
b.  Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself or herself and state his/her current address. 
c.  Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak. 
4.  Each speaker shall be allowed sufficient time to address the Mayor and Council concerning the zoning decision or application then under consideration. 
a.  The City Clerk shall be designated as the time keeper to record the time expended by each speaker. 
b.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and as amended from time to time, both proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning decision shall be given a minimum of ten (10) minutes per side for their presentation. 
5.  Each speaker shall: 
a.  Speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration and shall address his/her remarks only to the Mayor and Council. 
b.  Refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration. 
c.  The Mayor and Council may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
6.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the Mayor and Council from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision or application is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
10.00.07 - Requirements for Developments of Regional Impact (DRI) 
The Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs), shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Atlanta Regional Commission for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, utility tap, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
10.00.08 - Procedures for Annexation of Property 
A.  Authority. The City of Kennesaw is authorized to annex real property into the City limits as granted under O.C.G.A Chapter 36 and all supplemental State of Georgia enabling legislation. 
B.  Initiation of Proposals for Annexation. A petition to amend the City limits and ordinance may be initiated by: 
1.  The City of Kennesaw Mayor and Council; 
2.  Any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner of the property involved in petition for annexation and further provided that the petition is accompanied by a payment payable to the city of Kennesaw as specified by the adopted master fee schedule adopted by the City of Kennesaw. 
C.  Processing of Application by Planning and Zoning Department Staff. 
1.  The annexation application will follow the same procedures as the rezoning process under Section 10.01.02 
2.  The City of Kennesaw must comply with written legislation HB 489 which requires intergovernmental agreement coordination with Cobb County regarding the processing of annexation applications. 
3.  The City of Kennesaw must comply with all State laws and procedures regarding the annexation and all potential land use dispute processes and regulation required under State law. 
4.  All annexation of property must also follow the rezoning process in order to designate the subject property for annexation with a city zoning designation. 
5.  Staff report as required under Section 10.01.02 must also incorporate a report that demonstrates service delivery capability from the City of Kennesaw. 
10.01.00 - PROCEDURES FOR AMENDING OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS 

10.01.01 - Procedures for Amending the Unified Development Code 
10.01.02 - Rezoning Procedures for Amending the Official Zoning Map 
A.  Authority to Amend. The Kennesaw City Council may from time to time amend the number, shape, boundary, or area of any district, or may amend any regulation pertaining to any district; or may amend any article or section of this ordinance. The procedure for amending the ordinance shall be as provided in this article. 
B.  Initiation of Proposals for Zoning Amendment. A petition to amend this ordinance or map may be initiated by: 
1.  The Kennesaw City Council; 
2.  Any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner of the property involved in petition for amendment, and further provided that the petition is accompanied by fees as per the City Master Fee Schedule payable to the City of Kennesaw to defray the normal cost of processing. 
3.  If a petition to amend this ordinance requires a special meeting of the Planning Commission, an additional payment to the City of Kennesaw shall be required. 
C.  Limitation of Amendment Initiations. A review of any petition to amend the zoning ordinance or map shall be conducted by the Zoning Administrator to insure compliance with all applicable provisions of the ordinance. If a petition to amend this ordinance or map does not comply with all provisions of the ordinance, the Zoning Administrator may hold the petition from action being taken by the City Council by holding the zoning amendment from public hearing before the Mayor and City Council. Upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the application complies with the requirements of this ordinance, the petition shall be initiated for public hearing before the Mayor and City Council in the following manner: 
1.  The application shall be marked received and approved for initiation of public hearing and the date of such action shall be affixed to the application and; 
2.  The petition shall be assigned a number in numerical sequence beginning with the number one with the first day of each calendar year, and further, that the petition shall be assigned numbers in sequence based on a chronological basis at the time of finding by the Zoning Administrator that the petition meets the requirements established for a petition to amend this ordinance. 
D.  Processing of Applications by Staff. After the filing of a proper application, the zoning department shall make a written recommendation and zoning analysis ("staff report") relating to the applicant. 
E.  Planning Commission. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for land use permit, special land use permit. The staff report on each application shall be submitted to and considered by the Planning Commission at the public hearing. The Planning Commission shall investigate and consider each of the matters listed in Section (G) below. 
2.  As to each application, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation for approval, denial, deferral, continuance, hold, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. Written minutes of the Planning Commission's recommendation to the Mayor and City Council shall be prepared and maintained. Additionally, the staff report and application shall be submitted to the Mayor and City Council. All documents shall thereafter become public record. 
F.  Mayor and City Council Rezoning. 
1.  Before taking action on an application for rezoning, and after receipt of the staff report, Planning Commission's recommendations, and the application where required, the Mayor and Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application. 
2.  So that the purpose of this section will be served and the health, public safety and general welfare secured, the Mayor and City Council may approve or deny the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning classification, district or category requested, add or delete conditions of the application, including but not limited to, site specific conditions, or allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with respect to the twelve (12) month limitation of this article. An action by the Mayor and City Council to defer, hold or continue the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice except posting is required. 
3.  Unless applicant requests or consents to additional time, within sixty (60) days following public hearing, the Mayor and City Council shall issue a decision on the zoning application. Such decision shall be issued to the applicant in writing with the reasons stated therein. In the event changes are made to the application, then the time period for decision as set forth hereunder shall be extended for an additional sixty (60) days. 
G.  Standards for Decision. The decision by the Mayor and City Council to approve in whole or part, reject, condition, or delete application for rezoning shall be based on, but not limited to, a consideration of the following criteria: 
1.  Would the proposed amendment be consistent and compatible with the city's land use and development plans, goals and objectives? 
2.  Would the proposed amendment tend to increase, decrease, or have no impact on traffic safety and congestion in the streets? 
3.  Would the proposed amendment tend to increase, decrease, or have no relationship to safety from fire and other dangers? 
4.  Would the proposed amendment tend to promote, diminish, or have no influence on the public health and general welfare of the city? 
5.  Would the proposed amendment tend to increase, decrease, or have no influence on the adequate [provision] of light and air? 
6.  Would the proposed amendment tend to cause, prevent, or have no influence on the overcrowding of land? 
7.  Would the proposed amendment tend to cause, prevent, or have no relationship on the population distribution within the city, thus creating any area so dense in population as to adversely affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the city? 
8.  Would the proposed amendment tend to impede, facilitate, or have no impact on the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, other public services, utilities or facilities? 
9.  Would the proposed amendment tend to be compatible with environmental conditions in light of surrounding developments? If compatible, what factors, if any, would diminish the value, use and enjoyment of surrounding properties? 
10.  Would the proposed amendment tend to require only reasonable expenditures of public funds, or would the amendment tend to require an excessive or premature expenditure of public funds? 
11.  Would the proposed amendment tend to promote, diminish, or have no influence upon the aesthetic effect of existing and future uses of the property and the surrounding area? 
12.  Would the proposed amendment have measurable adverse economic effect on the value of surrounding or adjacent property? 
13.  Would the proposed amendment create an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts? 
14.  In conducting a hearing, the Mayor and Council and the Planning Commission shall follow the lines of inquiry as hereinafter set out: 
a.  Existing uses and zoning of the subject and nearby property; 
b.  The extent to which property values are diminished by the existing zoning restrictions; 
c.  The adverse economic effect of existing zoning in relation to the promotion of the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
d.  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship, if any, imposed upon the individual property owner; 
e.  The suitability of the subject property for zoned purposes; 
f.  The length of time the property, if vacant, has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area and vicinity of the subject property. 
15.  The existing zoning classification shall be considered presumptively valid and it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to present evidence in rebuttal of this presumption. The Planning Commission and the Mayor and Council may determine from the evidence presented that the existing zoning classification is unduly burdensome to the petitioner and is not offset by the considerations of the public's health, safety, and general welfare, and may impose upon the property any appropriate zoning classification, including conditions which might be consistent with the considerations hereinabove set forth. 
H.  Zoning Approval does not Ensure Utilities or Infrastructure. Approval of an application for rezoning does not ensure the availability of utilities or other infrastructure in connection with development of the site. 
I.  Site Plan/Stipulation Amendments. On any rezoning which is conditioned upon a site plan, proposed minor modifications which do not alter or conflict with the basic intent of the plan may be approved by the Zoning Administrator after presentation and approval by the Mayor and City Council at any regularly scheduled meeting or hearing. All other modifications must be advertised and rezoned in accordance with the provisions set forth above. 
J.  Sale, Refinancing and Leasing. The sale, refinancing or leasing of any portion of commercially, office, or industrially zoned properties shall not be considered to constitute a subdivision of such property as long as all other applicable zoning, site specific, site development guidelines, approved site plans, and other imposed conditions are met and maintained. This provision shall not be applicable to grandfathered or nonconforming uses as defined herein. This provision is limited only to those portions of the property which are actually developed and shall not be construed as to allow expansions of modifications of existing sites. 
K.  Dedication of Property to City. 
1.  The Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission may, in all zoning and/or rezoning actions if deemed such to be necessary and proper and in the best interest of the City of Kennesaw, include in a recommendation to the City Council a condition that part of the property being zoned or rezoned be dedicated to the City of Kennesaw, County of Cobb or the State of Georgia for road, street, alley, highway, or other purpose(s). 
2.  The Mayor and City Council may in all zoning and/or rezoning actions, if deemed necessary and proper and in the best interest of the City of Kennesaw, include as a condition of the zoning amendment that part of the property being zoned or rezoned be dedicated to the City of Kennesaw, County of Cobb or the State of Georgia for road, street, alley, highway, or other purpose(s). 
3.  Any such dedication will be by warranty deed. Any condition imposed by the Mayor and City Council requiring that part of the property being zoned or rezoned be dedicated to the City of Kennesaw, County of Cobb or the State of Georgia for road, street, alley, highway, or other purpose(s), and said condition is the only requirement imposed by the City of Kennesaw, such dedication shall not constitute by its application to categorize the zoning use district as "conditional." 
L.  Attendance Requirement. The applicant or representative of the applicant shall be required to attend all public hearings on the application. The failure to attend may result in dismissal with prejudice, rejection of the application, or continuance of the hearing at the Commission or Council's sole discretion. Failure of the applicant or his/her or its representative to appear at the next regularly scheduled hearing shall result in automatic dismissal with prejudice. The Zoning Administrator may waive the attendance requirement for land use permits based upon medical hardship. 
M.  Withdrawal of Application. 
1.  An application may only be withdrawn upon a joint written request of the record titleholder and applicant. All requests to withdraw must be given at the zoning office at least seven days prior to the hearing. In no event shall an application be withdrawn more than once without prejudicing the right of the application or owner to apply for a land use or rezoning within twelve (12) months of the first application. 
2.  Applications which have been publicly heard by either the Planning Commission or the Council which have been withdrawn without permission of a majority of the applicable Council shall be deemed a rejected application with prejudice. 
N.  Rejected applications; time for resubmission. 
1.  If an application for rezoning is rejected or deleted to another zoning classification, then any portion of the same property may not again be considered for rezoning for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the original Council's hearing. An applicant may reapply for rezoning to a more restrictive classification than the application previously denied, or denied without prejudice, following the expiration of six (6) months in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and as may be amended from time to time. 
2.  The Council may only consider property for rezoning within the six (6) month time period in connection with settlement of litigation or pursuant to an order by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, the Council, if time permits, shall advertise, post the property, and notify the applicant and owner in writing prior to taking such action. 
10.01.03 - Procedures for Amending the Future Development Maps 
The Future Development Maps are composed of two, individual maps: 
A)  The Character Area Map, and 
B)  The Future Land Use Map. 
The Future Development Maps were developed over the course of two separate planning processes. The Character Area Map shows the character areas as identified for Kennesaw during the 2007 update to the Comprehensive Plan. The character areas function as broad, high level categories for planning and development concept formation. The Character Area Map was created in response to a requirement by the Department of Community Affairs and may be revised with each update to the Comprehensive Plan or as needed by staff and adopted by Mayor and Council. 
The Future Land Use Map presents the types of land uses allowed at the individual parcel level. The current Future Land Use Map was adopted in 2007 along with Future Land Use Category descriptions. The Future Land Use Map may be revised from time to time as recommended by city staff and adopted by Mayor and Council. 
The character areas correspond closely with the Future Land Use Map, but there are minor differences. In the event of a land use conflict, the most current Future Land Use Map will function as the controlling Future Development Map. 
10.01.04 - Procedures for Amending the Historic District Boundaries 
A.  Any amendment to the boundary of historic properties or the "Official Historic Properties Map of the City of Kennesaw" shall be recommended by the Commission and adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The City Council and the Commission shall hold a public hearing before taking action of any such proposed amendment. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing held by the Mayor and City Council and the public hearing held by the Historic Preservation Commission shall be advertised as follows: 
(1)  An advertisement providing notice of the hearing shall be published at least two times in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. 
(2)  The Commission shall cause written notice of the hearing to be mailed to all owners and occupants of the property(ies) proposed to be designated. 
(3)  All written notices to property owners or occupants of property(ies) shall be mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing before the Commission and again for the public hearing before the Mayor and City Council. 
(4)  At least one published notice shall appear in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the municipality not less than 15 days nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing before the Commission and again for the public hearing before the Mayor and City Council. 
The Commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and shall report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art proposed for designation or acquisition. This report shall be submitted to the historic preservation section of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor at least 30 days prior to any public hearing held to designate any property or any amendment thereto as a historic property. 
10.01.05 - Procedures for Administrative Appeals 
10.02.00 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 

10.02.01 - General 
A.  Jurisdiction of Chapter. This chapter shall govern the use of all land and developments thereof within the corporate limits of the city. 
B.  Purpose of Chapter. The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare and to require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the jurisdiction of the city. Further, the purpose of the regulation of the subdivision of land are to, among others: 
1.  Encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities; 
2.  Assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
3.  Assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
4.  Assure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of public land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and 
5.  Assure, in general, the wise development of new areas in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
C.  Conformance with Zoning Regulations. No subdivision shall be accepted for review which does not conform with the zoning regulations applicable to the land for which it is proposed. 
D.  Conformance with Chapter. Any sub-divider of land within the corporate limits of the city shall submit to the Planning Commission plats of the subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth in this chapter. 
E.  Approval Required Prior to Construction. No sub-divider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, before obtaining preliminary plat approval from the Planning Commission, as certified thereon, and approval of plans and profiles by the city engineer. 
F.  Installation of Improvements. Improvements may be made in a subdivision as are depicted on the preliminary plat previously approved by the Planning Commission, with final plat approval to be obtained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 10 of the UDC. 
G.  Final Approval Prior to Subdividing. No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for any other purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, or subdivision plat, or part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the Mayor and Council; and such approval shall be entered on the final plat. 
H.  Issuance of Building Permits. 
1.  No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the incorporated area of the city unless the street giving access to the lot upon which such building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time. Provided, however, the Mayor and Council, meeting in regular session, may, in their discretion, issue building permits for the purpose of model homes, up to five percent of the total number of lots in the phase unit of the subdivision approved by the Mayor and Council in the preliminary plat, after the bonds specified in this chapter have been posted by the owner or sub-divider and after all final engineering plans have been completed and before the actual installation of curbs, gutters and base and binder of the streets therein, where such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the preliminary subdivision plat as approved by the Mayor and Council or on a street located and accepted by the city. However, if the percentage is equal to less than two building permits, then two permits may be issued. Provided, however, that private streets and other private access ways may be approved under the terms of those rules and regulations in group development plans, condominium projects, apartment projects, townhouses, commercial developments, shopping centers or other development. 
2.  If permits are issued prior to street acceptance, it shall be the sole responsibility of the sub-divider/developer to ensure that all setback requirements as well as all other requirements as specified in this Code are upheld. 
I.  Approval by Individual Agencies. No subdivision plat shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court of the county without the plat having first been submitted to and approved by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall not approve any subdivision plat without such plat having first been reviewed and approved by the city engineer and the health department to the extent that each has jurisdiction. 
J.  Fees. 
1.  Fees are hereby established to cover the cost of administration expenses. All required fees and charges are specified by other ordinances and resolutions by the Mayor and Council. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the city clerk and may be altered or amended only by the Mayor and Council. 
2.  Upon the submission of any preliminary plat, final plat or other regulatory plan or plat required to be reviewed or approved under this chapter, any person who submits such plan shall deposit and pay to the city the fee as noted in the City Wide Master Fee Schedule. After the approval of any plat or plan required to be approved under this chapter, the actual cost of engineering and approval of the plan shall be determined, and any person submitting such plat or plan shall pay the fee as noted in the City Wide Master Fee Schedule of the actual cost of the engineering services for the approval of such plat or plan. The initial deposit shall be credited against the total cost determined in this subsection. This section shall also apply to plans for all commercial and industrial developments and shall be in addition to all other charges required by this Code. 
K.  Administration of Chapter. This chapter shall be administered by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may from time to time issue instructions and operating procedures to be followed in the administration of this chapter to inform the public and expedite plat approvals. 
L.  Amendments, Hearings, and Variances. 
1.  The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to amend this chapter after a public hearing thereon. 
2.  Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least three days prior to such meeting. 
3.  In cases of undue hardship under this chapter, any property owner may petition the Planning Commission for relief. The Planning Commission shall prepare and forward to the Mayor and Council any recommended amendments for the Mayor and Council's consideration. In cases where the Planning Commission fails to recommend amendments due to individual hardships, the property owner may then appeal to the Mayor and Council for relief. 
M.  Violation of Chapter; Penalty. 
1.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this UDC chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in the City of Kennesaw Code of Ordinance, Section 1-11. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any person who may have assisted in the Commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
2.  In any case in which any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter or amendment thereto adopted by the Mayor and Council, the legal counsel of the city or any owner of real estate within the district in which such land is situated, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate the unlawful use. 
10.02.02 - Pre-Application Conference Required 
A.  A pre-application conference is a meeting between an applicant and the City's Economic Development Director, the Planning and Zoning Administrator, or the Building Services Director for the purposes of: 
1.  Discussing the development/redevelopment goals and objectives of the City; 
2.  Exchanging information on the potential development of a site; 
3.  Providing information on permissible uses of the site proposed for development; 
4.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the design standards set forth in this UDC that are applicable to a potential application; 
5.  Providing information to an applicant regarding standards of regional, state, or federal agencies that may be applicable to a potential application; 
6.  Determining the need and requirements for supporting plans, documents, and studies; 
7.  Providing information to an applicant regarding infrastructure requirements and the construction of required improvements; and 
8.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the appropriate procedures and schedules for receiving and reviewing applications and rendering decisions regarding a potential application. 
B.  Prior to the submission of an application for a subdivision plat, development plan, or improvements plan, an applicant shall submit a written request for a pre-application conference. 
C.  A pre-application conference shall be held not more than two (2) weeks following the date of submission of the written request for such conference. 
D.  A pre-application conference shall be held not more than six (6) months prior to submission of an application. 
E.  It is the intent of the Mayor and Council that all requirements be identified during the pre-application conference. However, no person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed development, or any expression of any nature about the proposal, made by a participant at the pre-application conference, as a representation or implication the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. 
F.  A prospective applicant may bring members of his project team, such as, but not limited to, the project engineer, land planner, architect, surveyor, or other person who will assist in the preparation of an application. A prospective applicant may provide an informal sketch plan to aid in the discussion. However, such an informal sketch plan shall not be reviewed in any way for compliance with the standards and requirements of this UDC, and shall be used only as an aid to the conduct of the pre-application conference. A proposed subdivision plat, improvement plan, development plan, or other such plan shall not be considered or discussed during a pre-application conference. 
G.  Property owners or their agents introducing projects that involve modifications, removals or additions to existing property or structures that will not cause a change in zoning categories and land use classification or will not require a special land use permit, should contact the Planning and Zoning Administration, directly, for instructions. 
10.02.03 - Application for Preliminary Approval 
A.  Generally. Following the pre-application review of a proposed subdivision, the sub-divider shall submit to the Zoning Administrator no later than five days prior to the next Planning Commission meeting, an application for review and approval of a preliminary plat, which shall consist of: 
1.  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plan and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the Planning Commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
2.  Three copies of the preliminary plat and other documents as specified in Section 10.02.04 of this chapter. 
3.  Preliminary plat filing fees as specified by the city. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to safeguard the sub-divider from unnecessary loss of time and expense in preparation of a subdivision plat which does not conform to the specifications of this chapter. The preliminary plat only requires approximate accuracy of scale and dimension. Public agencies having jurisdiction will review the preliminary plat regarding matters within their jurisdiction. During the review process the sub-divider or his agent may be called upon for consultation. 
C.  Future Tract Plan. The sub-divider shall submit to the Planning Commission a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the tentative future street system for the entire tract. 
10.02.04 - Preliminary Approval 
A.  An application for preliminary plat approval shall be studied by the Planning Commission for compliance with this chapter and with other relevant governmental and public utility company regulations. 
B.  No preliminary plat shall be acted upon by the Planning Commission without review at a scheduled Planning Commission meeting. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall indicate on the plat, or by written memorandum attached thereto, comments and any suggested changes that are necessary to meet the intent of this chapter or to serve the best interests of the city. 
D.  Not more than 30 days after the submission of an application for preliminary plat approval, the Planning Commission shall provide recommendation to the applicant. The Planning Commission shall: 
1.  Issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval; 
2.  Issue a certificate of conditional preliminary plat approval, subject to any necessary modifications, the nature of which shall be indicated on the preliminary plat or attached to it in writing; or 
3.  Disapprove the preliminary plat or any portion thereof, in which case the Zoning Administrator shall so notify the sub-divider in writing, stating the reasons therefore. 
E.  Action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary plat. One copy shall be returned to the applicant, one made a part of the Planning Commission's records and the other zoning records. 
F.  Failure of the Planning Commission to take action on the preliminary plat within 30 days shall be deemed approval of the plat, and the plat shall be transmitted to the applicant, provided: 
1.  The plat is submitted for preliminary approval not later than five days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission; and 
2.  The sub-divider does not agree upon an extension of time, if requested in writing by the Planning Commission to further study the preliminary plat. 
G.  Approval of all preliminary plats shall be governed by the following qualifications: 
1.  Approval of a preliminary plat is only tentative pending submission of the final plat. 
2.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective and binding upon the city for a period not to exceed one year, and shall thereafter expire and be null and void except to the extent that work on the subdivision has progressed, unless a request for an extension of the time has been submitted to and is subsequently approved by the city. 
3.  No improvements, including clearing or grading, shall be undertaken until final engineering plans based on runoff calculations and three-line profiles for the subdivision, or unit division thereof, have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
H.  Tentative approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of a final plat. 
10.02.05 - Improvements Authorized 
A.  Approval of preliminary plat and the final engineering plans is authorization to proceed with installation of any improvements as required in the UDC, subject to the approval of agencies having proper authority, and the preparation of the final plat or unit division thereof as specified. Provided, however, no installation of improvements shall be made, and no work shall be commenced, in connection with such preliminary plat, or unit division thereof, until a contractor's performance bond, in an amount equal to the acquisition and developmental loan, shall be filed by the sub-divider in the office of the city clerk, which performance bond shall: 
1.  Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the sub-divider or developer of all work required to complete all improvements and installation for the subdivision, or unit division thereof, in compliance with this chapter within a specified time. 
2.  Be payable to and for the indemnification of the city. 
3.  Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state. 
4.  Contain a provision for the maintenance of installations and improvements required by this chapter in the subdivision for a period of two years following the date of final acceptance of streets by the Mayor and Council. 
5.  Be approved by the city engineer in writing on the preliminary plat and the city attorney. 
10.02.06 - Application for Final Approval 
A.  Generally. Whenever the provisions of this chapter have been complied with and while the certificate of preliminary plat approval is in effect, the sub-divider may submit to the Mayor and Council an application for review and approval of the final plat, which shall consist of: 
1.  An application requesting review and approval of a final plat. 
2.  Five copies of the final plat one digital/electronic version and other documents as specified in the UDC. The original shall be drawn in permanent ink on cloth or be plastic reproducible material. 
3.  Final plat filing fees as specified in the adopted City Master Fee Schedule. 
B.  Conformance. The final plat shall conform with the approved preliminary plat. If desired by the sub-divider, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat he proposes to record and develop at that time, provided that such portion conforms with all requirements of this chapter. 
10.02.07 - Final Approval 
A.  The final plat and other supplementary material required shall be transmitted to the Mayor and Council for final action. No final plat shall be considered by the Mayor and Council until all requirements of this Chapter have been met and the Plan Review Committee has certified by endorsement by an approval letter document. 
1.  All improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval under the terms of this UDC have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; or 
2.  A performance bond or cash deposit or escrow account has been provided by the sub-divider or developer to satisfy the requirements of UDC Section 10.02.05 
B.  Whenever a final plat has been submitted to the Mayor and Council and is in conformance with an approved preliminary plat and the provisions of UDC Section 10.03.08 the Mayor and Council shall consider and take action on the plat. 
C.  If action on a final plat is not taken by the Mayor and Council within 30 days of the date of the final plat submittal, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand, provided: 
1.  The plat is submitted for final plat approval not later than 15 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Council. 
2.  The sub-divider does not agree upon an extension of time if requested in writing by the Mayor and Council to further study the final plat. 
D.  The approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute an acceptance by the city of any street or other public areas so designated on the plat. 
E.  Approval by the Mayor and Council shall appear on the original tracing. 
10.02.08 - Recording of Final Plat 
A.  Upon final approval by the Mayor and Council, the approved final plat with all endorsements shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. 
B.  The sub-divider shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee. 
C.  Upon recording of the approved final plat, documents and copies of the final plat as specified in the UDC shall be provided by the sub-divider. 
D.  The map book, volume and page numbers where the plat is recorded shall be indicated on all copies. 
E.  If, however, the sub-divider requests the Mayor and Council to delay having the plat recorded, the sub-divider shall authorize the Council, in writing, to have the approved final plat recorded within 12 months from the date of the final plat approval; otherwise, the approved final plat shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
10.02.09 - Revisions to a Recorded Plat 
Proposed revisions which change the street and/or utility layout in any way shall be submitted as a preliminary plat in accordance with the UDC. Proposed revisions which do not change in any way the street and/or utility layout shall be submitted as a final plat in accordance with UDC Section 10.03.08. In addition, a revision to a recorded plat shall show the name, phase (if any), date of the recorded subdivision plat being revised and the exact citation with regard to the county land records and the book and page number wherein such plat is recorded. 
10.02.10 - Subdivision Completion 
Upon completion of the installation of the improvements required by this chapter, the sub-divider shall present to the Community Development office three complete sets of the construction plans and drawings showing the subdivision and its improvements. This set of plans and drawings shall include: 
1.  "As-built" plans of all streets and alleys showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines. 
2.  "As-built" centerline profiles of all streets. 
3.  Profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines as such improvements shall have actually been installed by the sub-divider. 
4.  A letter submitted by a registered professional engineer and/or registered surveyor certifying that all sewers, storm drains, curbing and paving have been placed according to grade stakes set by him or his representatives to conform with construction plans submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
10.02.11 - Public Acceptance of Improvements 
Streets and other public land as shown upon the final plat shall be accepted by the Mayor and Council on behalf of the public, when and only when the conditions as specified in the UDC are fulfilled. 
10.02.12 - Sale, Refinancing or Leasing of Portion of Property 
The sale, refinancing or leasing of any portion of a commercial, office or industrial zoned property shall not be considered to constitute a subdivision of such property as long as all other applicable zoning guidelines, site-specific guidelines, site development guidelines, approved site plans and other imposed conditions are met and maintained. This section shall not be applicable to grandfathered or nonconforming uses as defined in this chapter. This section is limited only to those portions of the property which are actually developed and shall not be construed as to allow expansions or modifications of existing sites. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 1-16-18) 
10.03.00 - APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 

10.03.01 - Submittal Requirements for All Applications 
Prior to processing any application for rezoning, special land use permit or land use permit, the applicant shall be required to file documentation and follow certain procedures as set forth below: 
A.  The applicant shall be required to file an application with the Planning and Zoning Department containing the following: 
1.  A completed application on forms provided by the Planning and Zoning Department. 
2.  The notarized signatures of the applicant and record titleholder upon the application. 
3.  The application fee which has been established from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the Planning and Zoning office. 
a.  Any special called meeting shall require an additional fee as adopted under the City Wide Master Fee Schedule. 
4.  A current boundary survey and plot plan, to scale, that bears the signature and seal of a registered surveyor, engineer, architect or landscape architect. Such plans shall also include such other information thereon as may be required by the zoning department, including preliminary plans for development, building locations, parking areas, access points, adjacent streets, land lot lines, buffer areas, future right-of-way, wetlands, floodplains, utilities, and retention. 
5.  Private sewage disposal must be approved by the Cobb County Health Department, and written approval from the health department must be filed with the application. 
6.  Any other information required by the zoning staff or other departments which they deem necessary or desirable in processing the application which is related to the present or proposed use of the property. 
7.  Disclosure forms as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq., and as may be required from time to time. 
10.03.02 - Determination of Application Completeness (Reserved) 
10.03.03 - Submittal Requirements for a Preliminary Subdivision Plat 
A.  Preliminary specifications. 
1.  The submittal to the Planning Commission shall consist of three black or blue-line prints on white background, and such other documents in three copies as are necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
2.  The preliminary plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one (1) inch. The Planning Commission may approve other scales as deemed appropriate. 
3.  The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or street in the county. If shown to the contrary, the Planning Commission may refuse to accept such subdivision and street names. The subdivision may use letter designations in place of street names on the preliminary plat. 
4.  The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
b.  Name and address of the owner of record. 
c.  Name, address and telephone number of the sub-divider. 
d.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of data, date of plat drawing and space for revision dates. 
e.  Preliminary certificates and statements specified. 
f.  Location (land district and land lot), acreage and lots. 
g.  A sketch locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as major thoroughfares, railroads or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
h.  Name of former subdivision, if any or all of the preliminary plat for land which had been previously subdivided. 
i.  Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving length and bearings. The boundary lines shall include the entire tract to be subdivided eventually and data as required in this section shall apply to the entire tract. 
j.  Contour lines based on sea level data. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than five feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. 
k.  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant features. On all watercourses leaving the tract the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract the direction and acreage of the drainage area above the point of entry shall be noted. Floodplains shall be outlined. 
l.  Cultural features within the proposed subdivision, including right-of-way and pavement widths and names of existing and platted streets, bridges, culverts, utility lines such as gas, electric, water and sewer lines, and structures, all easements, buildings, city and county lines, land lot lines, zoning districts and lines, and other significant information. 
m.  Proposed layout including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street and alley lines with letter designations for proposed street names, right-of-way widths, sites reserved through covenants, easements, dedication or otherwise for public uses, for nonpublic or community uses exclusive of single-family dwellings, for nonresidential uses and for multifamily dwellings. Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to mean that the city has accepted the above dedications for public use. 
n.  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the sub-divider. 
o.  Location and results of percolation tests for lots which will not be served by a public or community sanitary sewage system, as required by the health department. 
p.  Location, site plan and other information as may be required by the health department for all community sewage disposal plants. 
10.03.04 - Submittal Requirements for a Condominium or Multifamily Residential Preliminary Plat 
A.  General. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on Mylar or vellum at a scale no smaller than 1" = 100'. The plat shall not exceed 24" X 36". In no case shall sheet size be less than 8-1/2" X 11". The final plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of the project and street names. 
2.  Property address numbers (furnished by the Community Development Department). 
3.  Reference to record subdivision plats of adjoining land by record name. 
4.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, and north point. 
5.  Location of tract (land lot and district). 
6.  Location sketch at a scale of 1" = 2,000'. See note below. 
7.  Index map on each sheet when more than one sheet is required. 
8.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street, intersections, or other recognized permanent monuments or benchmarks. 
9.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest 1/10 foot and angles to the nearest minute shall be balanced and closed. The error of closure shall be stated, and further, the error of closure shall not exceed 1 to 10,000. The error of closure shall be stated. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field. 
NOTE: Unit plats shall provide a location sketch for location within the master plat. 
10.  Land lot lines shall be accurately tied to boundary lines of the subdivision by angles and distances when such lines traverse the subdivision; when the subdivision does not intersect a land lot line, then the lines of a major controlling street shall be projected and tied to a land lot line by angles and distances. In both cases, the measured distance from land lot tie to a respective land lot corner shall be shown with the magnetic bearing of the land lot line. No approximate land lot lines shall be shown on the subdivision plat. 
11.  Exact locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, and the exact locations and widths of all crosswalks. 
12.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curb data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
13.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest 1/10-foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii or rounded corners. 
14.  Building setback lines with dimension. 
B.  Requirements for Legal Descriptions. The legal description of individual condominium units shall be as follows: 
1.  The individual condominium unit shall be referenced as a lot by numeric data only (limited to 999 units). 
2.  Each building shall be referenced as Unit by numeric data only (limited to 99 units). 
3.  Each development phase shall be referenced as a block by alpha data. 
4.  Parcel numbers shall be assigned by the tax office. 
5.  Plats of the development shall be separated into different development phases when individual units or buildings reach the limits set forth above. 
6.  Locations, dimensions, drainage areas, and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements (including slope easements), flood hazard areas, public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
7.  Accurate locations, materials, and descriptions of monuments and markers. 
8.  A statement referencing the protective covenants by record book and page number. 
9.  Registered land surveyor's certification and stamp required for master plat. 
10.  Registered professional engineer certification and stamp accepted for "as built" condition on unit plats only. 
11.  Registered architect certification and stamp may be used to certify the acceptability of the structural work. 
12.  Variances (if any) and date approved by the City Council. 
13.  Recording of plats and plans; contents; completion of structural improvements; certification by registered architect or engineer. 
C.  Requirements for Conveyance. The following sections reflect the requirements for the recording of plats and plans, contents, the completion of structural requirements, and certification by registered architects or engineers as described in O.C.G.A § 44-3-83. Because State regulations may be modified from time to time, all parties interested in developing condominiums in the City of Kennesaw should be knowledgeable of the most current regulations described in Title 44, Chapter 3, Article 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The following regulations are accurate as of December 31, 2008. 
1.  Recording of plats and certification 
a.  Prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit, there shall be recorded one or more plats of survey showing the location and dimensions of: 
i.  the submitted property; 
ii.  the location and dimensions of all structural improvements located on any portion of the submitted property; 
iii.  the intended location and dimensions of all contemplated structural improvements committed to be provided by the declaration on any portion of the submitted property; and, 
iv.  to the extent feasible, the location and dimensions of all easements appurtenant to the submitted property or otherwise submitted to this article as part of the common elements. 
b.  With respect to all such structural improvements, the plats shall indicate which, if any, have not begun by use of the phrase "NOT YET BEGUN." No structural improvement which contains or constitutes all or part of any unit or units and which is located on any portion of the submitted property shall be commenced on any portion of the submitted property after the recording of the plats. 
i.  The declarant shall complete all structural improvements depicted on the plats, subject only to such limitations, if any, as may be expressly stated in the declaration with respect to those labeled "NOT YET BEGUN" on the plats, provided that, within six months after written notice from the association, the declarant shall be obligated to complete within a reasonable time every structural improvement actually commenced on the submitted property, notwithstanding any provision of the declaration, unless the declarant removes within a reasonable time all portions of any such structural improvement and restores the surface of the land affected thereby to substantially the same condition as that which existed prior to commencement of any such structural improvement; and provided, further, that nothing contained in this sentence shall exempt the declarant from any contractual liability to complete any such structural improvement. 
ii.  If the submitted property consists of noncontiguous parcels, the plats shall indicate the approximate distances between such parcels unless such information is disclosed in the declaration. If, with respect to any portion or portions, but less than all, of the submitted property, the unit owners are to own only a leasehold or estate for three years, the plats shall show the location and dimensions of any such portion or portions and shall label each such portion by use of the phrase "LEASED LAND." 
iii.  To the extent feasible, the plats shall show all easements to which the submitted property or any portion thereof is subject. 
iv.  The plats shall also show all encroachments by or on any operation of the submitted property. In the case of any units which have vertical boundaries lying wholly or partially outside of structures for which plans pursuant to subsection C.2 of this UDC section are recorded, the plats shall show the location and dimensions of the vertical boundaries to the extent that they are not shown on the plans; and the units or portions thereof thus depicted shall bear their identifying numbers. 
v.  Each plat shall be certified as to its accuracy and compliance with this subsection by a registered land surveyor. The specification within this subsection of items that shall be shown on the plats shall not be construed to mean that the plats shall not also show all other items customarily shown or required by law to be shown for land title surveys. 
2.  Recording of Plans and Certification. The following items shall be recorded prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit: 
a.  Plans which have been prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered architect or registered engineer of every structure which contains or constitutes all or part of any unit or units located on or within any portion of the submitted property, which plans shall show: 
i.  The location and dimensions of the exterior walls and roof of such structures; 
ii.  The walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings as constitute the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit, including convertible space, to the extent that such boundaries lie within or coincide with the boundaries of such structures; and 
iii.  The identifying numbers of all units or portions thereof depicted on the plans; and 
iv.  A certification by such architect or engineer to the effect that (s)he has visited the site and viewed the property and that, to the best of his/her knowledge, information, and belief: 
a.  The exterior walls and roof of each structure are in place as shown on the plans; and 
b.  Such walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings, to the extent shown on said plans, as constitute the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit, including convertible space, have been sufficiently constructed so as to establish clearly the physical boundaries of such unit. 
c.  Each convertible space depicted in the plans shall be labeled as such by use of the phrase "CONVERTIBLE SPACE." Unless the condominium instruments expressly provide otherwise, it shall be presumed that, in the case of any unit not wholly contained within or constituting one or more of the structures, the horizontal boundaries extend, in the case of each unit, at the same elevation with regard to any part of such unit lying outside of such structures, subject to the following exception: 
i.  In the case of any unit which does not lie over any other unit other than basement units, it shall be presumed that the lower horizontal boundary, if any, of that unit lies at the level of the ground with regard to any part of that unit lying outside of the structures. 
ii.  This subsection shall apply to any condominium created on or after July 1, 1980, or to the expansion of any such condominium. 
3.  Completion of Structural Improvements and Certification. The following items shall be recorded prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit: 
a.  Plans of every structure which contains or constitutes all or part of any unit or units located on or within any portion of the submitted property and a certification by a registered architect or registered engineer to the effect that (s)he has visited the site and viewed the property and that, to the best of his/her knowledge, information, and belief: 
b.  The foundation, structural members, exterior walls, and roof of each such structure are complete and in place as shown on the plans; 
c.  The walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings, to the extent shown on the plans, as constituting or coinciding with the vertical and horizontal boundaries of each unit, including convertible space, within each such structure, are sufficiently complete and in place to establish clearly the physical boundaries of such unit and that such physical boundaries are as shown on the plans; and 
d.  Each such structure, to the extent of its stage of completion at that time, is constructed substantially in accordance with such plans. 
The plans shall show the location and dimensions of the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit to the extent that such boundaries lie within or coincide with the boundaries of such structures, and the units, or portions thereof, thus depicted shall bear their identifying numbers. In addition, each convertible space depicted in the plans shall be labeled as such by use of the phrase "CONVERTIBLE SPACE." Unless the condominium instruments expressly provide otherwise, it shall be presumed that, in the case of any unit not wholly contained within or constituting one or more of the structures, the horizontal boundaries extend, in the case of each unit, at the same elevation with regard to any part of such unit lying outside of such structures, subject to the following exception: in the case of any unit which does not lie over any other unit other than basement units, it shall be presumed that the lower horizontal boundary, if any, of that unit lies at the level of the ground with regard to any part of that unit lying outside of the structures. This subsection shall apply to any condominium created prior to July 1, 1980, or to the expansion of any such condominium. 
e.  Prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit located on any portion of any additional property being or having been added to an expandable condominium, there shall be recorded new plats of survey conforming to the requirements of subsection C.1 of this UDC section and, with regard to any structures on the property being or having been added, plans conforming to the requirements of subsection C.2 of this UDC section or certifications, conforming to the certification requirements of subsection C.2 of this UDC section, of plans previously recorded pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-3-84. 
f.  When converting all or any portion of any convertible space into one or more units or limited common elements, the declarant shall record, with regard to the structure or portion thereof constituting that convertible space, plans showing the location and dimensions of the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit formed out of such space. The plans shall be certified by a registered architect or registered engineer in accordance with the certification requirements of subsection C.2 of this UDC section. 
g.  When any portion of the submitted property is withdrawn, there shall be recorded a plat or plats showing the portion of the submitted property withdrawn and the remaining submitted property, which plat or plats shall be certified as provided in subsection C.2 of this UDC section. 
10.03.05 - Submittal Requirements for a Non-Residential Preliminary Plat 
A.  General. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale no larger than 1" = 100'. The plat shall not exceed 24" X 36". In no case shall sheet size be less than 8-1/2" X 11". Subject to state law requirements, the preliminary or overall development plat shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect, land surveyor, or civil engineer and shall show the following: 
1.  Proposed name of the non-residential subdivision. 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of owner of record. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of the developer. 
4.  Date of survey, north point with magnetic north shown and graphic scale, source of data, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates. 
5.  Location (land lot and district) and gross acreage of tract. 
6.  Original vicinity map locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regards to well known landmarks such as major thoroughfares, railroads, or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to clearly show the information required, but not less than 1" = 2,000'. Photocopies of a local atlas are not acceptable. Previously developed non-residential properties must be reflected on the plat. 
7.  Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving the lengths and bearing. The boundary lines shall include the entire tract to be eventually subdivided and data as required herein shall apply to the entire tract. 
8.  Ground elevations on the tract based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic information shall be shown. Contour lines shall be drawn at intervals of 2 feet. 
9.  Natural features within the proposed non-residential development, including drainage channels, tributaries or state mandated buffers or corridors, bodies of water, wooded areas, and other significant features. On all water courses leaving the tract, the directional flow and acreage of the drainage area above the point of entry into the site shall be noted. Floodplains shall be outlined and elevations and total area of floodplain noted. Wetland areas should also be located on the plat and total area specified. Local benchmarks shall be established and properly described and the mean sea level elevation noted. 
10.  Cultural features, including cemeteries or other historic features, around and within the proposed non-residential subdivision, right-of-way, pavement widths, and names of existing and platted streets; all easements, city and county boundaries, and other significant information. Locations and dimensions of bridges, proposed and existing utility lines and structures, existing or proposed easements, street culverts, and other features are to be indicated. 
11.  Proposed layout including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, street and alley lines with proposed street names, right-of-way widths, buffers, open space, and easements dedicated for public use shall be noted. 
12.  Proposed outparcels, supported by internal utilities and interparcel access points, must be clearly shown. 
13.  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the owner or developer including but not limited to outparcel development. 
14.  Present zoning of the proposed development and the present zoning of abutting lands. 
15.  Zoning and variance conditions placed on the project by the City Council. 
16.  Each preliminary plat submitted shall carry the following certifications printed or stamped thereon substantially as set forth in UDC Section 10.03.06. 
17.  Development agreement recording information. 
18.  Show adjoining roadways, with names, pavement widths, lengths of streets, access locations, and right-of-way widths. Also include dimensions from the centerline of the existing street to the required right-of-way width. 
10.03.06 - Preliminary Plat Certificates 
Each preliminary plat submitted to the Planning Commission shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon substantially as follows: 
A.  Engineer and owner certificate: 
"I certify that all measurements are correct and were prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision, that monument locations are correctly shown and that the property will drain as shown. Monuments are shown by ________________. 
Signed _____ (Seal)  Date _________ 
________________ Engineer, (Surveyor), (Architect), Georgia Regis. No. ________ 
We, the undersigned, owner(s) and/or mortgagee(s) of the ________________ subdivision, hereby offer to dedicate and/or reserve for public use the rights-of-way, easements and other ground so shown on this plat." 

 
"The offer contained herein shall not constitute acceptance of the dedicated public rights-of-way, easement and other ground by the City of Kennesaw." 
B.  Certificate of preliminary plat approval. "All requirements of the Kennesaw UDC relative to the posting of a performance bond having been fulfilled, approval of the bond is hereby granted." 

 
"All requirements of the Kennesaw UDC relative to the preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted, subject to further provisions of said regulation and to such additional requirements as listed and attached hereto. This certificate shall expire _________ (date)" _________. 

 
"Preliminary Plat—Not to be recorded." 
The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following information when same is not shown in, or evident from, the preliminary plat: 
1.  A written summary of the proposal giving information as to the overall development plan, giving type of structures, number of housing units, types of business and industry, so the effects of the development can be determined by the Planning Commission. 
2.  Existing and proposed covenants and restrictions. 
3.  Source of water supply. 
4.  Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage, and flood control, as specified in UDC Chapter 4.06.02. 
5.  The sub-divider shall obtain letters or certificates of approval or disapproval from city, county or state agencies, as well as from the utility companies, as applicable. 
10.03.07 - Street Improvement Data 
An application for street improvements for the subdivision or for a unit division thereof shall be supported by the following, submitted to the Community Development Department: 
A.  A plat drawn to the preliminary plat specifications, prescribed in UDC Section 10.03.00, showing the following information: 
1.  Location and size of all proposed drainage structures, including catch basins, grates, headwalls and any extensions thereof. 
2.  Acreage of drainage area and constant used in determining size of structures by use of a formula approved by the city engineer. 
3.  Location of land subject to flooding, indicated by flood crest contour as provided by the city, county or other sources. 
4.  Location of all proposed sewer lines, and of any easements required therefore, together with sufficient dimensions to locate same on ground. 
B.  Engineering data as listed below: 
1.  Three-line profile as proposed streets, showing centerline elevations and elevations along right-of-way lines on either side of street, exposed rock to be indicated, drawn on standard plan and profile sheets with plan section showing street, layout, width, curvature and drainage required. 
2.  Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed, the grate, size of pipe and location of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
3.  Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall include elevations of fifty (50) feet intervals for a minimum distance of 300 feet back of beginning point and forward of ending point, or such additional distances as may be required by the city engineer. 
4.  All elevations shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Coastal and Geological Survey benchmarks, where feasible. 
5.  The submittals listed in this subsection shall be drawn to a scale no less than as follows: 
i.  Horizontal scale of one (1) inch to 100 feet. 
ii.  Vertical scale of one (1) inch to ten (10) feet. 
When a proposed road abuts the plat boundary, a properly executed slope easement shall be submitted. A slope easement shall also be submitted under such other conditions as may be required by the city engineer. 
10.03.08 - Submittal Requirements for Final Subdivision Plat 
A.  Final Specifications 
1.  The submittal shall consist of the original Mylar or vellum reproducible material and twelve (12) prints. 
2.  The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale of the final plat shall be 100 feet to one (1) inch (one inch equals 100 feet). Sheet size shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, such plat shall be shown on several sheets with an index map indicated on each sheet. In no case shall sheet size be less than 8-1/2" x 11"; provided, however, that space is thereby available for statements, approvals and certificates as required in this section. 
3.  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the sub-divider proposed to record and develop at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the staging established in preliminary plat procedure and to the requirements of this chapter. 
4.  The final plat shall contain the following information: 
i.  Name of subdivision and street names. 
ii.  Name and address of owner of record. 
iii.  Name and address of sub-divider. 
iv.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north or grid north, and indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings. 
v.  Location of tract, acres, number of lots. 
vi.  Name of former subdivision, if any or all of the final plat for any land which had been previously subdivided. 
vii.  Location sketch as provided for in UDC Section 10.03.05. 
viii.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street intersections or benchmarks or other recognized permanent monuments. Not less than three (3) shall be accurately described on the plat. 
ix.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by the heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one 1: 5,000. The error of closure shall be stated. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field. Surveys shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Geological Survey maps where same are available. 
x.  Municipal, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision. 
xi.  Exact locations, widths and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks. 
xii.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
xiii.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
xiv.  Building setback lines with dimensions. 
xv.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than ninety (90) degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown. 
xvi.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
xvii.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements, including slope easements, if required, and public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
xviii.  A statement of the private covenants, if they are brief enough to be put directly on the plat; otherwise, a statement as follows: 
"This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated _________, which hereby become(s) a part of this plat," recorded on _________ (date) and signed by the owner. 
xix.  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvement shall be designated as "future." 
xx.  Place for certificates and statements specified in subsection (Final Plat Certificates) of this UDC chapter. 
xxi.  Signature lines for the following departments: 
Mayor and City Council, Public Works, Planning and Zoning, City Engineer, Building Services, Cobb County Department of Transportation (if applicable) 
10.03.09 - Submittal Requirements for Final Condominium/Multi-Family Residential Plats 
A.  General. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on Mylar, vellum or paper at a scale no smaller than 1" = 100'. The plat shall not exceed 36" X 48". In no case shall sheet size be less than 8-1/2" X 11". The final plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of the project and street names. 
2.  Property address numbers (furnished by the Plan Review Section of Development and Inspections). 
3.  Reference to record subdivision plats of adjoining land by record name. 
4.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, and north point. 
5.  Location of tract (land lot and district). 
6.  Location sketch at a scale of 1" = 2,000'. See note below. 
7.  Index map on each sheet when more than one sheet is required. 
8.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street, intersections, or other recognized permanent monuments or benchmarks. 
9.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest 1/10 foot and angles to the nearest minute shall be balanced and closed. The error of closure shall be stated, and further, the error of closure shall not exceed 1:10,000. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field. 
NOTE: Unit plats shall provide a location sketch for location within the master plat. 
10.  Land lot lines shall be accurately tied to boundary lines of the subdivision by angles and distances when such lines traverse the subdivision; when the subdivision does not intersect a land lot line, then the lines of a major controlling street shall be projected and tied to a land lot line by angles and distances. In both cases, the measured distance from land lot tie to a respective land lot corner shall be shown with the magnetic bearing of the land lot line. No approximate land lot lines shall be shown on the subdivision plat. 
11.  Exact locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, and the exact locations and widths of all crosswalks. 
12.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curb data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
13.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest 1/10-foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii or rounded corners. 
14.  Building setback lines with dimension. 
15.  Signature lines for all applicable departments. 
B.  Requirements for Legal Descriptions. The legal description of individual condominium units shall be as follows: 
1.  The individual condominium unit shall be referenced as a lot by numeric data only (limited to 999 units). 
2.  Each building shall be referenced as Unit by numeric data only (limited to 99 units). 
3.  Each development phase shall be referenced as a block by alpha data. 
4.  Parcel numbers shall be assigned by the tax office. 
5.  Plats of the development shall be separated into different development phases when individual units or buildings reach the limits set forth above. 
6.  Locations, dimensions, drainage areas, and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements (including slope easements), flood hazard areas, public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
7.  Accurate locations, materials, and descriptions of monuments and markers. 
8.  A statement referencing the protective covenants by record book and page number. 
9.  Registered land surveyor's certification and stamp required for master plat. 
10.  Registered professional engineer certification and stamp accepted for "as built" condition on unit plats only. 
11.  Registered architect certification and stamp may be used to certify the acceptability of the structural work. 
12.  Variances (if any) and date approved by the City Council. 
13.  Recording of plats and plans; contents; completion of structural improvements; certification by registered architect or engineer. 
C.  Requirements for Conveyance. The following sections reflect the requirements for the recording of plats and plans, contents, the completion of structural requirements, and certification by registered architects or engineers as described in O.C.G.A § 44-3-83. Because State regulations may be modified from time to time, all parties interested in developing condominiums in the City of Kennesaw should be knowledgeable of the most current regulations described in Title 44, Chapter 3, Article 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The following regulations are accurate as of December 31, 2008. 
1.  Recording of Plats and Certification 
a.  Prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit, there shall be recorded one or more plats of survey showing the location and dimensions of: 
i.  the submitted property; 
ii.  the location and dimensions of all structural improvements located on any portion of the submitted property; 
iii.  the intended location and dimensions of all contemplated structural improvements committed to be provided by the declaration on any portion of the submitted property; and, 
iv.  to the extent feasible, the location and dimensions of all easements appurtenant to the submitted property or otherwise submitted to this article as part of the common elements. 
b.  With respect to all such structural improvements, the plats shall indicate which, if any, have not been begun by use of the phrase "NOT YET BEGUN." No structural improvement which contains or constitutes all or part of any unit or units and which is located on any portion of the submitted property shall be commenced on any portion of the submitted property after the recording of the plats. 
i.  The declarant shall complete all structural improvements depicted on the plats, subject only to such limitations, if any, as may be expressly stated in the declaration with respect to those labeled "NOT YET BEGUN" on the plats, provided that, within six months after written notice from the association, the declarant shall be obligated to complete within a reasonable time every structural improvement actually commenced on the submitted property, notwithstanding any provision of the declaration, unless the declarant removes within a reasonable time all portions of any such structural improvement and restores the surface of the land affected thereby to substantially the same condition as that which existed prior to commencement of any such structural improvement; and provided, further, that nothing contained in this sentence shall exempt the declarant from any contractual liability to complete any such structural improvement. 
ii.  If the submitted property consists of noncontiguous parcels, the plats shall indicate the approximate distances between such parcels unless such information is disclosed in the declaration. If, with respect to any portion or portions, but less than all, of the submitted property, the unit owners are to own only a leasehold or estate for years, the plats shall show the location and dimensions of any such portion or portions and shall label each such portion by use of the phrase "LEASED LAND." 
iii.  To the extent feasible, the plats shall show all easements to which the submitted property or any portion thereof is subject. 
iv.  The plats shall also show all encroachments by or on any operation of the submitted property. In the case of any units which have vertical boundaries lying wholly or partially outside of structures for which plans pursuant to subsection C.2 of this UDC section are recorded, the plats shall show the location and dimensions of the vertical boundaries to the extent that they are not shown on the plans; and the units or portions thereof thus depicted shall bear their identifying numbers. 
v.  Each plat shall be certified as to its accuracy and compliance with this subsection by a registered land surveyor. The specification within this subsection of items that shall be shown on the plats shall not be construed to mean that the plats shall not also show all other items customarily shown or required by law to be shown for land title surveys. 
2.  Recording of Plans and Certification. The following items shall be recorded prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit: 
a.  Plans which have been prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered architect or registered engineer of every structure which contains or constitutes all or part of any unit or units located on or within any portion of the submitted property, which plans shall show: 
i.  The location and dimensions of the exterior walls and roof of such structures; 
ii.  The walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings as constitute the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit, including convertible space, to the extent that such boundaries lie within or coincide with the boundaries of such structures; 
iii.  The identifying numbers of all units or portions thereof depicted on the plans; 
iv.  A certification by such architect or engineer to the effect that (s)he has visited the site and viewed the property and that, to the best of his/her knowledge, information, and belief: 
a)  The exterior walls and roof of each structure are in place as shown on the plans; and 
b)  Such walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings, to the extent shown on said plans, as constitute the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit, including convertible space, have been sufficiently constructed so as to establish clearly the physical boundaries of such unit. 
b.  Each convertible space depicted in the plans shall be labeled as such by use of the phrase "CONVERTIBLE SPACE." Unless the condominium instruments expressly provide otherwise, it shall be presumed that, in the case of any unit not wholly contained within or constituting one or more of the structures, the horizontal boundaries extend, in the case of each unit, at the same elevation with regard to any part of such unit lying outside of such structures, subject to the following exception: 
i.  In the case of any unit which does not lie over any other unit other than basement units, it shall be presumed that the lower horizontal boundary, if any, of that unit lies at the level of the ground with regard to any part of that unit lying outside of the structures. 
ii.  This subsection shall apply to any condominium created on or after July 1, 1980, or to the expansion of any such condominium. 
3.  Completion of Structural Improvements and Certification. The following items shall be recorded prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit: 
a.  Plans of every structure which contains or constitutes all or part of any unit or units located on or within any portion of the submitted property and a certification by a registered architect or registered engineer to the effect that he has visited the site and viewed the property and that, to the best of his knowledge, information, and belief: 
b.  The foundation, structural members, exterior walls, and roof of each such structure are complete and in place as shown on the plans; 
c.  The walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings, to the extent shown on the plans, as constituting or coinciding with the vertical and horizontal boundaries of each unit, including convertible space, within each such structure, are sufficiently complete and in place to establish clearly the physical boundaries of such unit and that such physical boundaries are as shown on the plans; and 
d.  Each such structure, to the extent of its stage of completion at that time, is constructed substantially in accordance with such plans. The plans shall show the location and dimensions of the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit to the extent that such boundaries lie within or coincide with the boundaries of such structures, and the units, or portions thereof, thus depicted shall bear their identifying numbers. In addition, each convertible space depicted in the plans shall be labeled as such by use of the phrase "CONVERTIBLE SPACE." Unless the condominium instruments expressly provide otherwise, it shall be presumed that, in the case of any unit not wholly contained within or constituting one or more of the structures, the horizontal boundaries extend, in the case of each unit, at the same elevation with regard to any part of such unit lying outside of such structures, subject to the following exception: in the case of any unit which does not lie over any other unit other than basement units, it shall be presumed that the lower horizontal boundary, if any, of that unit lies at the level of the ground with regard to any part of that unit lying outside of the structures. This subsection shall apply to any condominium created prior to July 1, 1980, or to the expansion of any such condominium. 
e.  Prior to the first conveyance of a condominium unit located on any portion of any additional property being or having been added to an expandable condominium, there shall be recorded new plats of survey conforming to the requirements of subsection C.1 of this UDC section and, with regard to any structures on the property being or having been added, plans conforming to the requirements of subsection C.2 of this UDC section or certifications, conforming to the certification requirements of subsection C.2 of this UDC section, of plans previously recorded pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-3-84. 
f.  When converting all or any portion of any convertible space into one or more units or limited common elements, the declarant shall record, with regard to the structure or portion thereof constituting that convertible space, plans showing the location and dimensions of the horizontal boundaries, if any, and the vertical boundaries of each unit formed out of such space. The plans shall be certified by a registered architect or registered engineer in accordance with the certification requirements of subsection C.2 of this UDC section. 
g.  When any portion of the submitted property is withdrawn, there shall be recorded a plat or plats showing the portion of the submitted property withdrawn and the remaining submitted property, which plat or plats shall be certified as provided in subsection C.2 of this UDC section. 
10.03.10 - Submittal Requirements for Final Non-Residential Plats 
A.  General. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on Mylar, vellum or paper sheets. The scale of the final plat shall not exceed 1 in. = 100 ft. The plat shall not exceed 36 in. X 48 in. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, several sheets with an index map indicated on each sheet shall be used. In no case shall sheet size be less than 8-1/2 in. X 11 in. 
The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the sub-divider proposes to record and develop at any time, provided that such portion conforms to the staging established on the preliminary plat procedure and to the requirements of these rules and regulations. 
The final plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  Names of the subdivision and streets. 
2.  Property address numbers furnished by City of Kennesaw Community Development Department 
3.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining land by record name. 
4.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, and magnetic north point. 
5.  Gross acreage of tract, square footage of out parcel. 
6.  Location of tract (land lot and district). 
7.  Former name of subdivision, if any or all of the final plat has been previously subdivided. 
8.  Vicinity map at a scale of 1" = 2000'. 
9.  Index map on each sheet when more than one sheet is required. 
10.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street, intersections, or other recognized permanent monuments or benchmarkers. 
11.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest 1/10-foot and angles to the nearest second, which shall be balanced and closed. The error of closure shall not exceed 1:10,000. The error of closure shall be stated. The tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field. 
12.  Land Lot lines shall be accurately tied to lines of the subdivision by angles and distances when such lines traverse the subdivision; when the subdivision does not intersect a land lot line, the lines of a major controlling street shall be projected and tied to a land lot line by angles and distance. In both cases, the measured distance from land lot tie to a respective land lot corner shall be shown with the magnetic bearing of the land lot line. No approximate land lot lines shall be shown on the subdivision plat. 
13.  Exact locations, widths, and names of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks within and immediately adjoining the plat and the exact locations and widths of all sidewalks. 
14.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data, design speeds, horizontal and vertical site distances. 
15.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest 1/10-foot, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
16.  Building setback lines with dimension. 
17.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical and clockwise order. Blocks shall be identified alphabetically. 
18.  Cultural features, including cemeteries and historic features. 
19.  Property/lease lines clearly delineated. 
20.  References to recorded and unrecorded access/cross parking, easements, utilities, and off-site stormwater management facility. 
21.  Location, dimensions, drainage areas, and purposes of all drainage structures, stormwater management structures, access easements, and any other easements, including slope easements, tributary and state mandated buffers and corridors, flood hazard areas and elevations, new or existing water and sewer easements with setback requirements that are or shall be maintained by the Water System, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. Delineation of protected wetlands with total acreage noted. 
22.  For purposes of dedication of stormwater management easements and facilities, reference should be made to the Cobb County Comprehensive Stormwater Management Quantity and Quality Ordinance. 
23.  Accurate locations, materials, and descriptions of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as "future". 
24.  Seal of appropriate design professional. 
25.  Zoning stipulations and variances (if any) and the date approved by the City Council. 
26.  State law prohibits the private construction, planting, or otherwise making improvements on the dedicated public right-of-way. The sole responsibility for repairing of any damage of any such improvement shall be the property owners. 
27.  Tabular chart which specifies the length of each public street or right-of-way. 
28.  Signature line for approvals from all applicable departments and Mayor and City Council. 
10.03.11 - Final Plat Certificates 
Each final plat submitted to the Mayor and Council for approval shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon substantially as follows: 
A.  Engineer and Land Surveyor Acknowledgement. "It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Kennesaw Subdivision Regulations have been fully complied with." 

 
B.  Owner's acknowledgement: "The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through duly authorized agents, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, parks, drains, easements and public grounds thereon shown, which comprises a total of ________ acres, for the purposes therein expressed." 

 
"Provided, however, that nothing herein nor acceptance shall create liability on the part of the City of Kennesaw, its officers, agents or employees for flooding or erosion from storm drains or from flooding from high water of natural creeks or rivers, and the City of Kennesaw is hereby specifically released from any such liability or from liability for the negligent construction or maintenance of all drainage structures, roads, sediment control facilities and all other work performed by the owner or developer of the property, their agent, servants, employees or contractors." 
C.  Place for approval by the City Engineer or authorized agent: 

 
D.  Place for statement of slope easement. 
E.  Place for approval of the Mayor and Council as follows: "Pursuant to the Land Subdivision sections of this UDC of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, all the requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given final approval by the Mayor and Council of Kennesaw, Georgia on _________ (Date). 
_______________________________________________  Mayor, Kennesaw, Georgia 
F.  Place for approval by the following Departments: 
•  Planning and Zoning 
•  Building and Construction 
•  Public Works 
•  City Engineer 
•  Mayor and City Council 
"Nothing herein shall be construed to mean that the City of Kennesaw has accepted the dedication of any rights-of-way, easements or other area as being dedicated to public use." 
G.  Place for certificate of recording. 
H.  Final plat distribution: 
1.  City records: Original Mylar, vellum or paper reproducible material and one (1) print. 
2.  City Engineer: Three (3) prints; two (2) to be filed and one (1) to the building inspector. 
3.  Cobb County Tax Assessor: One (1) print. 
4.  Cobb County Fire Department offering service to the proposed subdivision: One (1) print. 
5.  Total: One (1) original Mylar, vellum or paper reproducible material and twelve (12) prints. 
I.  Suitability of land. Land subject to flooding or erosion, and any land deemed to be unsuitable for development by the city engineer or health department, shall not be platted for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life or property unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
10.03.12 - Submittal Requirements for Amendments to Approved Development Plans and Zoning Conditions 
A.  Submittal requirements as established by the Plan Review Committee and the building services department. 
10.03.13 - Submittal Requirements for Certificate of Appropriateness through the Historic Preservation Commission 
A.  All applications to comply with submittal requirements of Kennesaw Design Review application process under Chapter One of the adopted Design Standards for the Historic District. 
B.  All applications to be submitted through the Planning and Zoning Department at least two weeks prior to the scheduled Historic Preservation Commission meeting. The Zoning Administrator will confirm completeness of the application. 
C.  All fees to accompany the completed application will be as per adopted master fee schedule adopted by the City of Kennesaw. 
D.  After confirmation that applications are deemed complete the Zoning Administrator and Planning and Zoning staff will post property referenced in application as part of the public notification process for any exterior changes to historic properties. 
E.  All applications require at least one consultation with Planning and Zoning staff to be conducted prior to submittal of applications. 
F.  All applications for demolition of structures within the historic district will require a public hearing before the Historic Preservation Commission. The Public hearing will be advertised in the local newspaper and adjoining property owners will be notified by mail by City of Kennesaw Planning and Zoning Department. A sign will be posted as part of this process. 
G.  The Zoning Administrator shall ask for any additional data as deemed necessary to add clarification to the request of all applications. 
H.  If project is located in the Central Business District but not located in the Historic District then a conceptual project approval by the Historic Preservation Commission will be required. 
I.  CBD (Central Business District) conceptual project approval will follow the same COA (Certificate of Appropriateness) application information submittal process to the City of Kennesaw. 
10.03.14 - Subdivision Construction Plan 
10.03.15 - Subdivision Record Plat 
10.04.00 - PENALTIES, AND REMEDIES 

10.04.01 - Penalties for Violation 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than the maximum amount as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5, as amended from time to time, for each offense. 
B.  Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
10.04.02 - Remedies 
A.  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this UDC, the Zoning Administrator or any other appropriate authority of the city may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice of at least ten (10) days to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of the City Code requiring the presence of the violator in the recorder's [municipal] court; institute injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
B.  Where a violation of these regulations exist with respect to a structure or land, the Zoning Administrator may, in addition to other remedies, notify the building inspector of such violation and require that public utility service be withheld there from until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
C.  In any case in which any sign shall be installed, erected, or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this ordinance, the building inspector shall notify by personal notice or registered mail the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign so as to comply with this ordinance and to secure the necessary permit therefore or to remove the sign. 
D.  If such an order is not complied with within ten days, the City shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
E.  In the event that such a sign or wall bulletin should become insecure, or in danger of falling, the person maintaining the same shall, upon written notice from the building inspector, forthwith in case of immediate danger, and in any case, within ten (10) days secure it in a manner approved by the building inspector. 
10.05.00 - APPEALS 

10.05.01 - Applicability 
A.  Appeals from Decisions of the Planning and Zoning Administrator. It is the intention of this article that all questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be presented first to the Planning and Zoning Administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the Mayor and City Council only on appeal from decision of such official; and, that from the decision of the Mayor and City Council, recourse shall be had to the superior court according to procedures outlined in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, No. 358, as amended, of the State of Georgia. 
B.  Appeals from the Decisions of the Mayor and City Council. 
1.  Any party desiring to appeal a decision by the Mayor and City Council as to any rezoning or variance petition shall file an appeal with the Superior Court of Cobb County within thirty (30) days from the date of the actual vote of the Mayor and City Council. The party appealing shall be entitled to a de novo appeal. 
2.  Any party desiring to appeal a land use permit or special land use permit decision shall file an appeal with the Superior Court of Cobb County within thirty (30) days from the date of the actual vote of the Mayor and City Council. The party appealing shall be limited to a record only appeal. 
C.  Appeal from Decisions of the Building Official. It is the intention of this UDC that all questions regarding interpretations and decisions regarding the administration and enforcement of the building and related safety codes referenced in the UDC and City of Kennesaw code of ordinances be presented first to the Building Official. The appeal of any decisions from the Building Official shall be presented to the Board of Construction Appeals. Any party desiring to appeal the final decision of the Board of Construction Appeals shall file an appeal with the Superior Court of Cobb County within thirty (30) days from the date of the actual vote of the Board of Construction Appeals. 
D.  Appeal from the Decisions of the Public Works Director. It is the intent of this UDC that all questions regarding interpretation, enforcement, and enforcement of applicable codes that are the responsibility of the Public Works Department are presented first to the Public Works Director. The appeal from the Public Works Director shall be presented to the Board of Construction Appeals. Any party desiring to appeal the final decision of the Board of Construction Appeals shall file an appeal with the Superior Court of Cobb County within thirty (30) days from the date of the actual vote of the Board of Construction Appeals. 
APPENDIX B - GEORGIA POWER COMPANY FRANCHISE[1] 
ORDINANCE GRANTING PERMISSION AND CONSENT to Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns, to occupy the streets and public places of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending poles, lines, cables, equipment and other apparatus for transmitting and distributing electricity, and for other purposes. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the ordinance granting a franchise to Georgia Power Company, as adopted by the mayor and council on August 18, 1975. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform, catchlines have been added to facilitate usage and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section I. - Granting of Authority. 
On August 18, 1975, the Mayor and Council adopted the Georgia Power Company franchise agreement for a term of thirty-five (35) years. In accordance with the City of Kennesaw Charter, Section 1.02(g), franchise agreements shall not exceed periods of twenty (20) years. Therefore, certain amendments shall be incorporated into this franchise as requested by the parties, with a term ending November 3, 2025. Pursuant to a 2006 amendment of the Charter by the General Assembly, the City is authorized to grant franchises not to exceed periods of thirty (30) years and has thereby extended this franchise agreement an additional ten (10) years, expiring November 3, 2035. 
Be it ordained by the governing authority of the City of Kennesaw (hereafter referred to as the "city"), that the authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns (hereafter referred to as the "company"), for a period of twenty (20) years by virtue of Ordinance No. 2005-35, plus ten (10) additional years by virtue of Ordinance No. 2006-19, 2006 to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the said city as from time to time the company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as it may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to ensure safe and efficient service. 
The term "Distribution Facilities" means poles, lines, wires, cables, conductors, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections, and other apparatus installed by or on behalf of the Company (whether before or after the adoption of this Ordinance Amending Franchise) in the streets, alleys, or public places of the City for the purpose of distributing electricity within the present and future limits of the City. Distribution Facilities do not include any of the following: (i) electric transmission lines with a design operating voltage of 46 kilovolts or greater (hereafter referred to as "Transmission Lines"); (ii) poles, towers, frames, or other supporting structures for Transmission Lines (hereafter referred to as "Transmission Structures"); (iii) Transmission Lines and related wires, cables, conductors, insulators, or other apparatus attached to Transmission Structures; (iv) lines, wires, cables, or conductors installed in concrete-encased ductwork; or (v) network underground facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, § I, 11-7-05; Ord. No. 2006-19, § I, 8-7-06) 
Section II. - Terms and Considerations. 
Be it further ordained that the rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions, to-wit: 
1.  The company shall pay into the treasury of the city on or before March 1st of each year, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential and commercial rate schedules (as prescribed or amended by the Georgia Public Service Commission from time to time) within the corporate limits of the city and such expanded limits as may be annexed and four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under industrial rate schedules (as so prescribed) within the corporate limits of the city during the immediate prior year. 
2.  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage of gross sales above provided for. 
3.  The company shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting there from, for which the said city would otherwise be liable. 
4.  The company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained herein, however, shall require the company to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
5.  In the event that the City of any other entity acting on behalf of the City requests or demands that the Company relocate any Distribution Facilities from their then-current locations within the streets, alleys, and public places of the City in connection with a public project or improvement, then the Company shall relocate, at its expense, the Distribution Facilities affected by such project or improvement. The Company's obligations under this paragraph 2 shall apply without regard to whether the Company has acquired, or claims to have acquired, an easement or other property right with respect to such Distribution Facilities and shall not affect the amounts paid or to be paid to the City under the provisions of the 1975 Ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph 2, the Company shall not be obligated to relocate, at its expense, any of the following: (i) Distribution Facilities that are located on private property at the time relocation is requested or demanded; (ii) Distribution Facilities that are relocated in connection with sidewalk improvements (unless such sidewalk improvements are related to or associated with road widenings, the creation of new turn lanes, or the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes); (iii) streetscape projects or other projects undertaken primarily for aesthetic purposes; or (iv) Distribution Facilities that are converted from an overhead configuration or installation to an underground configuration or installation. 
6.  The City and the Company recognize that both parties benefit from economic development within the City. Accordingly, when it is necessary to relocate any of the Company's facilities (whether Distribution Facilities, Transmission Lines, Transmission Structures, or other facilities) within the City, the City and the Company shall work cooperatively to minimize costs, delays, and inconvenience to both parties while ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the City and the Company shall communicate in a timely fashion to coordinate projects included in the City's five-year capital improvement plan, the City's short-term work program, or the City's annual budget in an effort to minimize relocation of the Company's facilities. Such communication may include, but is not limited to, (i) both parties' participation in the Georgia Utilities Coordinating Council, Inc. (or any successor organization) or a local utilities coordinating council (or any successor organization) and (ii) both parties' use of the National Joint Utility Notification System (or any successor to such system mutually acceptable to both parties). 
7.  With regard to each streetscape project undertaken by or on behalf of the City, the City shall pay the Company in advance for the Company's estimated cost to relocate any of the Company's facilities (whether Distribution Facilities, Transmission Lines, Transmission Structures, or other facilities) in connection with such project. For each streetscape project, the Company shall estimate in good faith the amount of incremental base revenue, if any, that the Company will realize as a result of new customer load or expansion of existing customer load attributable to such project; and such estimate shall be based on tariffs in effect at the time that construction of such project begins and shall not include fuel recovery charges, non-electric service billings, or taxes. If such estimate indicates that the Company will realize incremental base revenue, the Company shall do one of the following, whichever results in greater cost savings to the City: (i) reduce the City's advance payment to the Company for relocation costs by ten percent (10%); or (ii) where the City has developed a bona fide marketing plan within twelve months after construction of such project begins, either refund the amount of the Company's incremental base revenue during such twelve-month period to the City or credit such amount against any future payment due from the City to the Company. The City and the Company acknowledge and agree that the amount of any refund or credit calculated pursuant to clause (ii) of the foregoing sentence of this paragraph 4 shall not exceed the amount of the City's advance payment to the Company for relocation costs associated with such project. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, § II, 11-7-05; Ord. No. 2006-19, § II, 8-7-06) 
Section III. - Limits or Restricts. 
Be it further ordained that nothing contained in this Ordinance Amending Franchise shall limit or restrict the right of customers within the corporate limits of the City to select an electric supplier as may hereafter be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, § III, 11-7-05; Ord. No. 2006-19, § III, 8-7-06) 
Section IV. - Filing of written acceptance. 
Be it further ordained that the company shall, within 90 days from the approval of this ordinance, file its written acceptance of the same with the clerk of said city, so as to form a contract between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, § IV, 11-7-05; Ord. No. 2006-19, § IV, 8-7-06) 
Section V. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
Be it further ordained that upon such acceptance all laws and ordinances, and all agreements between the parties, in conflict herewith be and the same shall thereupon stand repealed and terminated, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, § V, 11-7-05; Ord. No. 2006-19, § V, 8-7-06) 
APPENDIX C - ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY FRANCHISE[1] 
AN ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE, GRANTING TO ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY, A GEORGIA CORPORATION, HEREINAFTER DESIGNATED AS "GRANTEE," ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT AND FRANCHISE TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS, AVENUES, ROADS, PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, ALLEYS, LANES, WAYS, PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF KENNESAW, GEORGIA, FOR CONSTRUCTING, MAINTAINING, RENEWING, REPAIRING AND OPERATING A GAS WORKS AND GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, AND OTHER NECESSARY MEANS FOR MANUFACTURING, TRANSMITTING, DISTRIBUTING AND SELLING OF MANUFACTURED, NATURAL OR COMMINGLED GAS WITHIN AND THROUGH THE CITY OF KENNESAW, GEORGIA; AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH GRANT. 
WHEREAS, the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "city," and the undersigned warrant and represent that, with the exception of the franchise granted to Atlanta Gas Light Company, its successors and assigns, by ordinance passed August 7, 1956; for a period of 30 years, which franchise was accepted by Atlanta Gas Light Company, Grantee, there is no franchise granted by the city and in force and effect, to any other person, firm or corporation and that the city is under no contract or obligation to any other person, firm or corporation in anywise relating to the installation of gas service in the City of Kennesaw, Georgia; now, therefore: 
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and council of the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, as follows: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the ordinance adopted May 19, 1986, which granted a franchise to the Atlanta Gas Light Company for operation of a gas distribution system in the city. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform, catchlines have been added to facilitate usage and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - [Granting of franchise.] 
The right is hereby granted to the Grantee, its successors and assigns, to lay, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace and repair gas pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages under, along, through and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, and to use and occupy the said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places for the purpose of therein laying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing mains, pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for the manufacture, transmission, distribution and sale of gas within and through the present or future territorial limits of the city, such right, when exercised as herein provided, to continue for 30 years after date of approval of this ordinance. 
Section 2. - [Rates.] 
Grantee shall be entitled to charge for gas furnished by it such rates as are prescribed by the Public Service Commission or other lawful regulatory body of the State of Georgia. 
Section 3. - [Grantee to pay percentage of receipts to city.] 
Grantee hereby agrees and covenants, for and in consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted to it, to pay within 60 days following the end of each quarterly period to the city three percent of the gas sales receipts received by grantee from customers served under all rate schedules, except for interruptible rate schedules or special contracts as defined and approved by the Georgia Public Service Commission (or any successor state regulatory group) within the territorial limits of the city during the preceding quarterly period. 
It is provided, however, that should the city require grantee to pay any license fee or tax, excise tax, indirect tax, occupation tax, franchise tax, privilege tax, regulation charge or related fees, taxes or charges, excepting ad valorem taxes and business license taxes for appliance sales, the aggregate amount of such fees, taxes and charges shall be deducted in full by grantee from the quarterly payment or payments subsequently accruing to the city. The quarterly periods for which such payments shall be made shall commence upon the first day of the month immediately following proper adoption, acceptance and effectiveness of this franchise ordinance. The mayor and council of the city, through its authorized representative or representatives, shall have the right to inspect and audit the books and records of grantee for the purpose of determining the amount of its revenues received from the sale of gas as set forth above within said territorial limits. 
Section 4. - [Rights governed by ordinance.] 
All rights herein granted and authorized shall subject to and governed only by this ordinance; provided, however, that the city expressly reserves unto itself all of its police power to adopt general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the general public in relation to the rights hereby granted, not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 5. - [Grantee to restore all public ways of city.] 
Grantee, upon making an opening upon any of the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, for the purpose of laying, repairing or maintaining gas mains, shall use due care and caution to prevent injury to persons, and shall replace and restore all public ways to their former condition as nearly as practicable, and within a reasonable time, and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other places of said city. 
Section 6. - [City harmless from liability.] 
Grantee shall save and keep harmless the said city from any and all liability by reason of damage or injury to any person or persons whomsoever, on account of negligence of the grantee in the installation, maintenance and repair of its mains and pipelines along said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, provided the grantee shall have been notified in writing of any claims against the city on account thereof and shall have been given ample opportunity to defend the same. 
Section 7. - [Ordinance effective upon acceptance.] 
This ordinance, after its passage according to law, in writing duly filed with the city clerk, shall become effective and in full force after the date of acceptance by Atlanta Gas Light Company. 
Section 8. - [Renewal of franchise.] 
Unless 120 days' written notice is given by one party to the other prior to the expiration date of this agreement, this franchise shall be considered as renewed and binding in all its provisions for ten years after such expiration, and this franchise shall so continue in operation and effect for a further and second term of ten years, unless such notice be given by either party prior to the expiration of the first such renewed term. 
Section 9. - [Repeal of conflicting ordinances.] 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
APPENDIX D - COBB ELECTRIC MEMBERSHIP CORPORATION FRANCHISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the ordinance adopted January 26, 1981, which granted a franchise to Cobb Electric Membership Corporation for the operation of an electrical distribution system in the city. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform, catchlines have been added to facilitate usage and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section I. - [Franchise granted.] 
Be it ordained by the governing authority of the City of Kennesaw (hereafter referred to as the "city"), that the authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Cobb Electric Membership Corporation, its successors, lessees and assigns (hereafter referred to as "CEMC"), for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the said city as from time to time CEMC may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as it may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of CEMC, to ensure safe and efficient service. The rights granted herein shall be subject to the rights held by the city in said streets, alleys and public places. 
Section II. - [Conditions of franchise.] 
Be it further ordained that the rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions, to-wit: 
1.  CEMC shall pay into the treasury of the city (a) on or before March 1 in each year following the granting of this franchise a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential and commercial rate schedules within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year and four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under industrial rate schedules within the corporate limits of the city during the period beginning on the first day of the month following granting of this franchise and ending on December 31 thereafter and (b) on or before March 1 of each year thereafter during the term of this franchise a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial and industrial rate schedules within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year, on condition that, in the event the city shall grant to any other entity the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy, shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions hereof. 
2.  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge on imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage of gross sales above provided for. 
3.  CEMC shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the said city would otherwise be liable. 
4.  CEMC shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained herein, however, shall require CEMC to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purposes at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
Section III. - [Acceptance to be filed.] 
Be it further ordained that Cobb Electric Membership Corporation shall, within 90 days from the approval of this ordinance, file its written acceptance of the same with the clerk of said city, so as to form a contract between the parties. 
Section IV. - [Repeal of conflicting provisions.] 
Be it further ordained that upon such acceptance all laws and ordinances, and all agreements between the parties, in conflicting herewith be and the same shall thereupon stand repealed and terminated, respectively. 
APPENDIX E - METRICOM FRANCHISE[1] 
ORDINANCE # 2000-12 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE CONDITIONS FOR AWARDING A FOUR-YEAR NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM WITHIN THE CITY OF KENNESAW; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANTING OF SAID FRANCHISE; PROVIDING THE CITY REGULATIONS AND USE OF THE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM; PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE PROVISIONS THEREFOR. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KENNESAW: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the ordinance granting a franchise to Metricom, Inc., as adopted by the mayor and council on June 20, 2000. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform, catchlines have been added to facilitate usage and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the same meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Affiliate means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person. 
Applicant shall mean any person submitting an application to the City of Kennesaw for a franchise to operate a fiber-optics telecommunication system and/or wireless communications system under the terms and conditions set forth by the city council. 
Cable Act shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Sec. 532, et seq., as now and hereafter amended. 
Cable operator means a telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the city as that term is defined in the Cable Act. 
Cable service, for the purpose of this ordinance, shall have the same meaning provided by the Cable Act. 
Certificate of compliance shall mean that approval required by the FCC in order for a Grantee of [a] fiber-optics telecommunication franchise to begin operation within the city. 
Channel shall mean a band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum, which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of non-video signals or several thousand non-video signals. 
City shall mean the City of Kennesaw, a municipal corporation in the State of Georgia. 
City property means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this ordinance, such telecommunications property owned or controlled by the city being subject to and in compliance with Section 253 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
Commercial subscriber shall mean a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who or which is not a residential subscriber. 
Council shall mean the present governing body of the city or any successor to the legislative powers of the present city council. 
Effective date means the day this agreement has been duly approved by the municipal authorities of the City of Kennesaw. 
FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level. 
Fee means any assessment, license, charge, fee, imposition, tax, or levy of general application to entities doing business in the city lawfully imposed by any governmental body (but excluding any utility users' tax, franchise fees, communications tax, or similar tax or fee). 
Grantee shall mean the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the city council under this ordinance or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
Gross subscriber revenues shall mean all revenue derived from the monthly charges from all subscribers and received by Grantee. 
Installation date shall mean the date that the first system is installed by Grantee pursuant to this agreement. 
Laws means any and all statutes, constitutions, ordinances, resolutions, regulations, judicial decisions, rules, tariffs, administrative orders, certificates, orders, or other requirements of the city or other governmental agency having joint or several jurisdiction over the parties to this agreement. 
Mayor shall mean the existing or succeeding chief administrative officer of the city, or his designate. 
Municipal facilities means city-owned street light poles, lighting fixtures, electroliers, or other city-owned structures and may refer to such facilities in the singular or plural, as appropriate to the context in which used. 
Overhead facilities shall mean utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, joint stock company, limited liability company or organization of any kind including their lessors, trustees and receivers. 
Radio means the radio equipment, whether referred to singly or collectively, to be installed and operated by Grantee hereunder. 
Residential subscriber shall mean a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
Services means the mobile digital communications services provided through Ricochet;reg; by Grantee. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Street shall mean the surface of and the space in, upon, along, across, and above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, or place, alleycourt, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights of way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and its Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting fiber optics system and/or wireless communications transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a wireless communications system. 
Telecommunications carrier means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service. 
Telecommunication facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances placed within the public right of way used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
Telecommunications provider means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities. 
Telecommunications service means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium. 
Telecommunications system. See Telecommunications facilities. 
Underground facilities means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities. 
Usable space means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Georgia Commerce Commission. 
Utility easement means any easement owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities. 
Utility facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. 
Section II. - Grant of authority. 
The city council of the City of Kennesaw is hereby authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a wireless communications system in the streets of the city for a period of four years from and after the passage, acceptance and effective date of this ordinance, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided; and said right, privilege and franchise may be offered for bid as a franchise agreement ordinance, hereinafter called the agreement, and let to the best bidder after bids have been examined by the city council. However, such agreement shall not affect this franchise agreement between Grantee and the city. The agreement shall contain all standards for performance, engineering and other parameters of public interest and shall be in ordinance form. 
Section III. - Franchise term. 
The franchise, authority, permit granted Grantee herein shall terminate four years from date of grant. The term of this agreement shall be renewed automatically for three successive terms of four years each on the same terms and conditions as set forth herein, unless Grantee notifies the of its intention not to renew not less than 30 calendar days prior to commencement of the relevant renewal term. 
Section IV. - Application for wireless communications system franchise. 
(a)  No wireless communications system franchise shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the city council. 
(b)  The form shall set forth such facts in detail as the city council may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership, or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignment for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment, or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this ordinance. 
(2)  If the applicant is a non-public corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, and shareholders of the said corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service; 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all wireless communications facilities; and shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost; 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the facilities to be employed and the location of the radios used in distributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A description of applicant's radios within the city. 
(8)  Information sufficient to determine whether applicant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under this ordinance. 
(9)  Information sufficient to determine whether the applicant is required to apply for and receive any certificate of authority from the Georgia Public Service Commission to provide wireless communications services or facilities within the city, and, if required, has applied for and received such certification. 
(10)  Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide wireless communications services or facilities within the city. 
(11)  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The location and route requested for applicant's proposed facilities. 
b.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route. 
c.  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers. 
d.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
e.  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted. 
f.  The proposed locations of Grantee's planned initial installation of radios, which shall be provided to the city promptly after Grantee's review of available street light maps and prior to deployment of the radios. Upon the completion of installation, Grantee promptly shall furnish to the city a list showing the exact location of the radios. 
(c)  The council may request such other information as it may deem reasonably appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the council, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)  All applications shall be considered firm offers to the city, shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(f)  An application for the privilege of a franchise shall be submitted to the city with an initial nonrefundable application fee of $2,500.00. This article shall not apply to renewals of existing franchises. 
(g)  Performance bond requirements, applicable to applications for new franchises, but not applications for renewals of existing franchises, include: 
(1)  Each Grantee shall file with its application for a franchise, and at all time thereafter until the completion of construction in accordance with section XII of this ordinance, Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, an acceptable corporate surety bond, in a form satisfactory to the city council, issued by a surety licensed therefore by the State of Georgia, in the amount of $5000.00, conditioned that a Grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform all terms and conditions of section XII of this ordinance and that, in case of any breach of a condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of a Grantee to well and faithfully observe, and perform under, section XII of this ordinance (including but not limited to compensation and costs of removal or abandonment of property and repair of streets and other public or private improvements) up to the full amount of the bond. 
Section V. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  The Grantee shall pay to the city, quarterly beginning on or before March 31 of each year, a three percent franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues received for services to subscribers with billing addresses in the city for the preceding calendar year. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed. A Grantee shall file with the city within 45 days after the expiration of each calendar quarter during the period the franchise shall be in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross subscriber revenues as defined herein of Grantee during the preceding quarter . It shall be the duty of a Grantee to pay to the city at the time for filing such statement the sum hereinabove prescribed. A Grantee shall also file within 90 days following the conclusion of each fiscal year of a Grantee an annual report prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards showing the yearly total gross subscriber revenues and payments to the city and any further relevant financial information in regard to the company as may be reasonably required by the mayor. 
(b)  In the event the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the initial term, a Grantee shall immediately submit to the city a financial statement prepared as before required, showing the gross subscriber revenues of a Grantee for the time elapsed since the last period for which a Grantee has paid to the city the required percentage of gross subscriber revenues, and a Grantee shall pay to the city not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise, a like percentage of such revenues and any other sums legally due and owing to the city. 
(c)  In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) hereof, interest on such payments shall apply from such date at the yearly rate of eight percent. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect a Grantee's records showing the gross subscriber revenues from which its franchise payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this ordinance or for any other performance or obligation of Grantee hereunder. 
(e)  Payments of compensation made by a Grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the State of Georgia, or the city. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this agreement, if the services are subject to a utility users tax, communications tax, or other similar tax or fee which accrues to the by operation of this Code or other applicable law, then the amount of the franchise fee shall be reduced by the amount of the applicable utility users tax, communications tax, or such other similar tax or fee. 
(g)  In consideration of the city's execution and delivery of this agreement, the city shall have the right throughout the term of this franchise to receive up to three free Ricochet Internet Access subscriptions. These subscriptions allow for Internet access and e-mail only. Service such as newsgroups, LAN access, and dial-in Internet access will not be provided by Grantee, but may be obtained through an authorized Ricochet;reg; service provider, at the city's expense. City shall designate one person who shall be responsible for ordering and receiving any subscriptions. To take advantage of this program, the designated individual should contact Grantee's local office (typically the local market manager). City's right to use the subscriptions shall commence at the time the Ricochet;reg; service is commercially available in the city and shall extend until the expiration of the term of this franchise or through the length of time that radios are deployed in, on or over the streets, whichever is shorter. City's use of the subscriptions shall be subject to the standard Ricochet;reg; terms and conditions of use together with those of the authorized Ricochet;reg; service provider from which the city obtains service. City understands and agrees that modems and equipment required to utilize the subscriptions and any additional service subscriptions or service options the city may desire will need to be obtained from an authorized retailer at market rates current from time to time. City shall use all subscriptions provided pursuant to this section solely for its own use and shall not be entitled to resell, distribute, or otherwise permit the use of same by any other person, excepting a local public entity that provides public service within the corporate boundaries of the city (e.g., municipal schools, public safety, or fire departments, etc.). 
Section VI. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the franchise, Grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the city executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payment of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general public liability insurance policy covering any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a Grantee under franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance for property damage occasioned by the operation of Grantee under the franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $1,000,000.00 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  $2,000,000.00 for all other types of liability. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a Grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the wireless communications system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in form, satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the State of Georgia and acceptable to the city and they shall require 30 days written notice of any cancellation to both the city and a Grantee herein, and a copy of said policy shall be filed with the city. 
(c)  Within 30 days after receipt by the city of said notice the Grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
Section VII. - Surety bond. 
(a)  A Grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise a faithful performance, license and franchise bond running in favor of the city, written by an approved corporate surety in the penal sum of $5000.00, conditioned that the Grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and surety thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of a Grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of the franchise. 
(b)  A Grantee shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and shall keep the same in force and effect at all times throughout the term of the franchise including the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the wireless communications system in the franchise. 
(c)  The bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 30 days after written notice to that effect is given to the city and a Grantee herein. 
(d)  The bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and a duplicate copy of it, along with written evidence of payment of the required premiums shall be filed with the city during the term of the franchise. 
Section VIII. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend, and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgements for damages directly or proximately resulting from the installation, operation or maintenance of Grantee's wireless communications system authorized herein, except to the extent arising from or caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees. The city shall give the Grantee immediate written notice of any such claims, suits or actions and the Grantee shall, at its option, have the right at its expense to assume the defense, including settlement, on behalf of the city or other aforementioned parties with regard to such claims, suits or actions. 
(b)  These damages or penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of the installation, operation, or maintenance of the wireless communications system authorized herein, except to the extent arising from or caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees. 
(c)  If the Grantee does not assume the defense of the city, Grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise, specifically agrees that it will pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out of pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other cost of litigation. 
Section IX. - Books and records of Grantee. 
(a)  A Grantee shall, upon request, file with the city engineer a copy, true and accurate, of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. Those maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer and shall be kept continuously up-to-date. 
(b)  A Grantee shall continually keep on file with the city a current list of its shareholders holding over three percent of the outstanding stock and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a Grantee concerning its operations within the city shall be made available for inspection and audit during normal business hours by the mayor or his designate within 30 days after any request for such inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a Grantee for the operation of its wireless communications system under the franchise shall be filed with the city, upon request, and at the nearest local office of a Grantee. 
Section X. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a Grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public streets, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of said streets. Grantee's system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted city and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Except when expressly permitted in writing by the city engineer, a Grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the public streets of the city for the conduct of its system but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a Grantee negotiates with those companies. The city shall cooperate with a Grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use such facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the wireless system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the City of Kennesaw until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of such cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys or highways within the City of Kennesaw where such installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a Grantee to the city engineer and approved by that department in writing. 
(d)  Should a Grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the city other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then in that event, before a Grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for Grantee any of such property in the street, the nature of such property shall be disclosed to the city engineer for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street and only installed under such conditions as he shall prescribe concerning such location or installation. The poles shall be of like design and consistency, and aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area. 
(e)  Whenever the city or state shall require the relocation or re-installation of any property of a Grantee in any of the streets of the city, it shall be the obligation of a Grantee upon notice of such requirement to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the city or state. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a Grantee shall be at the sole cost of a Grantee. 
(f)  Whenever in any place within the city, all the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a Grantee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the city after a Grantee shall have previously installed its property, nevertheless, a Grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in such places. Facilities of a Grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expenses paid by the property owner. 
(g)  Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a Grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of a Grantee. 
(h)  In case of disturbance of any street caused by a Grantee, a Grantee shall at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer replace and restore such street in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Provided, that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut a Grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut. A section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)  A Grantee shall maintain, repair, and keep in good condition for a period of one year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by Grantee. 
(j)  If at any time in case of emergency or disaster in the city it shall become necessary in the judgment of the mayor and the chief of the police department to cut or move any of the wire cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a Grantee, this may be done and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by a Grantee, at its own costs and expense and without charge against the city. The city shall attempt to notify Grantee in advance of such action, and if not practicable, then as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(k)  Grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
(l)  Attachment to municipal facilities. The city hereby authorizes and permits Grantee to enter upon city streets and to locate, place, attach, install, operate, maintain, remove, reattach, reinstall, relocate, and replace radios in or on municipal facilities for the purposes of operating Ricochet;reg; and providing services. In addition, as provided herein, Grantee shall have the right to draw electricity for the operation of the radios from the power source associated with each such attachment to municipal facilities. 
(m)  Attachment to third-party property. Subject to obtaining the permission of the owner(s) of the affected property, the city hereby authorizes and permits Grantee to enter upon city streets and to attach, install, operate, maintain, remove, reattach, reinstall, relocate, and replace such number of radios in or on poles or other structures owned by public utility companies or other property owners located within city streets as may be permitted by the public utility company or property owner, as the case may be. Upon request, Grantee shall furnish to the documentation of such permission from the individual utility or property owner responsible. City agrees to cooperate with Grantee, at no cost or expense to city, in obtaining, where necessary, the consents of such third-party owners of property. 
(n)  Annual fee. As compensation for the use of municipal facilities, Grantee shall pay to the city an annual fee (the "annual fee") in the amount of $60.00 for the use of each municipal facility, if any, upon which a radio has been installed pursuant to this agreement. The aggregate annual fee with respect to each year of the term shall be an amount equal to the number of radios installed on municipal facilities during the preceding 12 months multiplied by the annual fee, prorated as appropriate, and shall be due and payable not later than 45 days after each anniversary of the installation date. City represents and covenants that city owns all municipal facilities for the use of which it is collecting from Grantee the annual fee pursuant to this section. 
(o)  Electricity charges. Grantee shall be solely responsible for the payment of all electrical utility charges to the applicable utility company based upon the radios' usage of electricity and applicable tariffs. 
Section XI. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a Grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of Grantee's system. 
Section XII. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed and a Grantee shall be required by the city engineer to update this section of its proposal upon reasonable request. 
Section XIII. - Operational standards. 
(a)  Grantee's system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with generally accepted standards of the industry. 
(b)  In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this article, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)  That the system is installed and remains fully operational and capable of using all equipment. 
(2)  That the system as installed is capable of transmitting and receiving signals without material degradation. 
(3)  That the system is designed and capable of 24-hours-a-day continuous operation. 
(4)  That the system is capable of and will produce a signal upon any subscriber's system that is undistorted and accompanied by proper technical transmission. 
(5)  The system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength in all systems without cross modulation or interference with other systems. 
(6)  A Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for such good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
Section XIV. - Supervision by the city. 
(a)  A Grantee shall construct, operate and maintain its system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  Grantee's system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)  The city engineer may from time to time issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the system as are consistent with the provisions of this ordinance and all applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the city council or any agency or official of the city are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this ordinance or by law in the council or any agency or official of the city. 
Section XV. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a Grantee's commencement of service through and over its system, a Grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A Grantee ceases to operate the system for a continuous period of six months from the date of said occurrence. 
(2)  A Grantee fails to construct said system as hereinabove and hereafter provided. 
(3)  A franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided herein. 
(b)  A Grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the city setting forth one or more of the occurrences hereinabove enumerated or such other occurrence hereinbefore or hereinafter provided and shall have 90 days from the date upon which said notice is received to remove such properties as hereinabove required. 
Section XVI. - Operational reports. 
(a)  Within six months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a Grantee shall submit to the city engineer and the mayor an installation plan for the entire city, indicating the date on which a Grantee expects the installation of the system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the city. 
(b)  A Grantee shall furnish the city engineer with detailed progress reports at three-month intervals. The first report is to be made three months after the construction commencement date. 
Section XVII. - Emergency use of the facilities. 
In the event of an emergency or disaster, a Grantee shall, upon request of the mayor, make available its facilities to the city at no cost for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
Section XVIII. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)  A Grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof. In the event technological or regulatory conditions change so as to materially alter the terms and conditions of this agreement, the city or Grantee may, upon six months' written notice, request renegotiation of the terms altered by technological or regulatory changes since the effective date. The party requesting renegotiation, shall include in its notice a description of the technological or regulatory change giving rise to such request and the terms altered thereby. Upon receipt of such notice, the parties shall be required to meet and confer in good faith to negotiate new terms and such negotiations shall be completed within 90 days after receipt of the notice to request renegotiation. Such negotiations may be extended beyond 90 days upon written agreement by the parties. The terms and conditions of this agreement shall remain in full force and effect until an amendment is signed by both parties. 
(b)  Grantee shall be subject to all city ordinances as set forth herein and Grantee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(c)  If the council determines that a material provision of this ordinance is affected by such subsequent action, the council shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
Section XIX. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by Grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter pertinent to this franchise, shall also be submitted to the city, upon request. 
Section XX. - Restrictions against assignment. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest, or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a Grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the city council. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the transfer of the rights and obligations of Grantee hereunder to a parent, subsidiary, successor, or affiliate shall not be deemed an assignment for the purposes of this agreement. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the council to any assignment, lease, transfer, sub-lease, or mortgage of the franchise shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed and shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets. 
(c)  No change in control of Grantee, the radios or this agreement shall occur nor shall any of Grantee's rights or obligations in or regarding the radios or this agreement be assigned after the effective date without the express written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prior consent of the city shall not be required with respect to intracorporate reorganizations between or among entities wholly owned or wholly controlled by or in control of Grantee to the extent such transaction does not involve a material change in the management, day to day operations, or negatively change the financial condition of Grantee; provided the city shall receive 30 days advance written notice of such intracorporate reorganization and any additional information as may be required to confirm that the transfer is an intracorporate reorganization and not subject to the city's consent. For purposes of this section, "control" means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, but such that such person may determine corporate policies and operations, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the Grantee or its communications system. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than 50 percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by a Grantee from another person of said system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. Any such mortgage, pledge, or lease shall be made only with the prior approval of the council and shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city under this contract or applicable law. 
(e)  Upon receipt from the Grantee of a written request for approval of any transaction subject to this section, the city shall have 30 days within which to approve or disapprove such transaction and, if no such action is taken within said 30-day period, the transaction shall be deemed to be approved by the city. 
Section XXI. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
A Grantee shall not make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage. Nothing in this section shall prevent Grantee from taking reasonable business actions. 
Section XXII. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all of the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a Grantee hereunder in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A Grantee shall by act or omission violate in a substantial fashion any material term or condition of this ordinance, and, within 45 days following written demand by the city, shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  A Grantee becomes insolvent, or is adjudged a [to be] bankrupt, or all or part of Grantee's facilities should be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by Grantee within 45 days from said sale. 
(3)  A Grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city. 
(b)  A Grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this ordinance in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
Section XXIII. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any inquiry, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the city council in regard to the operations of Grantee's system other than as provided in subparagraph (c) of this section shall be taken only after 30 days public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city; a copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on Grantee; and, the Grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at hearing as may be specified by the city council, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person or persons in authority to whom such responses should be addressed, and such other procedure as may be specified by the city council. If a hearing is to be held, the pubic notice shall give the date and time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such participation may be obtained. The Grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint shall be submitted to the city manager in writing and shall contain: (1) the name and address of the complainant; (2) the name of the system against which the complaint is made; and (3) complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(1)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the city manager will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within such time as may be prescribed by the city manager, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the city manager of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the city manager in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (c) hereof. The city manager will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the city manager, and the city manager will forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(2)  If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the city manager, a statement must be filed with the city manager setting forth when and how the complainant has been satisfied. 
(3)  When a complainant has not been satisfied pursuant to subparagraph (b) hereof, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the city council in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the city council must be filed within six months from the date of the city manager's statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice of refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the city council must make reference to the date of the complaint filed with the city manager and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the city manager. If no complaint is filed with the city council within the six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
Section XXIV. - Grantee's remedies. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a Grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the city nor for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise, unless arising from or the result of the city's negligence or willful misconduct. 
(b)  A Grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A Grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition on the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  A Grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions. 
Section XXV. - Failure to enforce this franchise no waiver of the terms thereof. 
Neither party shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the other party upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
Section XXVI. - Time is of the essence of this agreement. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of either party, such time shall be deemed of the essence. 
Section XXVII. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A Grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the city in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the city had not power or authority to make such term or condition under applicable laws and regulations as they exist at the time of the adoption of this ordinance. 
Section XXVIII. - Rights reserved to the city. 
(a)  Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the said city. 
(2)  To determine through the council any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(3)  To grant additional franchises within the city to other persons for the conduct of fiber optics telecommunication and/or wireless communications under the terms and conditions of this ordinance. 
Section XXIX. - Acceptance. 
(a)  This ordinance and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a Grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by Grantee and filed with the clerk of the city council. Said agreement shall incorporate Grantee's written application to the city for the franchise and shall bind Grantee to the provisions of said application. The council may require a Grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
Section XXX. - Extension of city limits. 
Upon the annexation of any territory to the city (other than through a governmental consolidation process, as to which the city makes no agreement), the right and franchise hereby granted shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent the city has authority; and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by Grantee, located within, under, or over streets of the territory so annexed shall thereafter be subject to all terms hereof. The city shall provide Grantee written notice describing the annexed areas and reflecting the effective date of such annexation. Under all events, this shall be expressly subject to the provisions of any intergovernmental agreement with surrounding jurisdictions. 
Section XXXI. - Local office. 
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Grantee shall maintain within the city a local business office or agent. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if Grantee maintains a local business headquarters office within __ airline miles of the center of the city; and provides the city manager's office with the name, address and phone number of an individual who will act as Grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. 
Section XXXII. - Employment regulations. 
A Grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, creed, color or national origin. A Grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their sex, race, creed, color or national origin. This requirement shall apply to, but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training. 
Section XXXIII. - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this ordinance is for any reason held to be illegal, invalid, unconstitutional or void, all other sections, sentences, clauses, phrases or parts not so held shall be and remain in full force and effect. 
Section XXXIV. - Notices. 
All notices which shall or may be given pursuant to this agreement shall be in writing and delivered personally or transmitted (a) through the United States mail, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid; (b) by means of prepaid overnight delivery service; or (c) by facsimile or email transmission, if a hard copy of the same is followed by delivery through the U.S. mail or by overnight delivery service as just described, addressed as follows: 
If to the City of Kennesaw: 
City Manager  City of Kennesaw  2529 J.O. Stephenson Avenue  Kennesaw, Georgia 30144-2797 
If to Grantee: 
Metricom, Inc.  Attn: Network Real Estate  980 University Avenue  Los Gatos, CA 95032 
Notices shall be deemed given upon receipt in the case of personal delivery, three days after deposit in the mail, or the next business day in the case of facsimile, email, or overnight delivery. Either party may from time to time designate any other address for this purpose by written notice to the other party delivered in the manner set forth above. 
APPENDIX F - MEDIAONE OF COLORADO, INC. FRANCHISE[1] 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF KENNESAW, GEORGIA, RENEWING THE NON-EXCLUSIVE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE FO MEDIAONE OF COLORADO, INC. 
THE SIGNATORIES DO HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the ordinance adopted November 19, 2001, which granted a franchise to MediaOne of Colorado, Inc. for the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable television system in the city. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provisions remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform, catchlines have been added to facilitate usage and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

[Section] 1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this agreement, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense and vice versa, words in the plural number include the singular number, and vice versa, and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender and vice versa. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly contrary to the context, terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended, and regulations issued pursuant thereto, and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. For convenience, federal definitions are set forth in the glossary to this agreement. For further convenience, the first letter of terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations defined in this agreement or by federal law have been capitalized, but an inadvertent failure to capitalize such letter shall not affect meaning. 
Cable act shall mean Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
City shall mean the City of Kennesaw, Georgia, and its its officials, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners and employees acting within their respective areas of authority. 
Mayor and council or council shall mean the governing body of the city. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
Franchise agreement shall mean a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of the city Code of Ordinances between the city and MediaOne that sets forth the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be exercised. 
Franchise area shall mean the city limits of Kennesaw, Georgia including any areas annexed by city during the term of the franchise. 
Franchise transfer shall mean any transaction in which: (a) any ownership or other right, title, or interest of more than 50 percent in a franchisee or its cable system is transferred, sold, assigned, leased, sublet, mortgaged, or otherwise disposed of or encumbered directly or indirectly, voluntarily or by foreclosure or other involuntary means, in whole or in part; or (b) there is any change in or substitution of, or acquisition or transfer of control of, the franchisee or any person which has more than a 50 percent interest in a franchisee or has responsibility for or control over a franchisee's operations or over the system; or (c) the rights or obligations held by the franchisee under the franchise are transferred, directly or indirectly, to another person. 
(1)  Control means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments, or negative control, as the case may be, of the cable system, the franchise or the company. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, "franchise transfer" does not include: 
a.  Disposition or replacement of worn out or obsolete equipment, property or facilities in the normal course of operating a cable system, including the renewal or extension of equipment or property leases and contracts; or 
b.  Acquisition, transfer, sale or other disposition of leases, licenses, easements, and other interests in real property in the normal course of operating a cable system and not involving the relinquishment of any right or power affecting the franchisee's ability to provide services in whole or in part; or 
c.  Acquisition, transfer, sale or assign of the franchisee's right, title, or interest in the franchise to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the franchisee; or 
d.  Transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, 
Franchisee shall mean MediaOne of Colorado, Inc. 
Gross revenues shall mean all revenue, including local advertising revenue, received, directly or indirectly, by the franchisee, by any affiliated person, and any other person from, or in connection with, the operation of the cable system to provide cable services. Gross revenue shall include revenue from received from the provision of cable modem service to the extent such is deemed to be a cable service under applicable federal law. Gross revenue shall exclude taxes or fees collected by the franchisee on behalf of the city or other local, state or federal government entities. Gross revenue shall also exclude revenue generated from the provision of non-cable services over the cable system, which may be subject to other authorizations as may be required under applicable federal, state or local laws. 
Normal business hours means 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
Normal operating conditions means those service conditions that are within the control of a franchisee. Conditions that are not within the control of a franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, acts of war, strikes, civil disturbances, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Conditions that are within the control of a franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, maintenance or upgrade of the cable system, and power outages of two hours or less in length. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization, corporation, or other entity, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof, but such term does not include the city. 
Public right-of-ways shall mean the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the city now or hereafter holds any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a cable system. No reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to a "public right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the city and as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
RFP stands for request for proposal. 
Sale shall mean any sale, exchange, or barter transaction. 
Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
Subscriber shall mean any person who legally receives any cable service delivered over a cable system and the city in its capacity as a recipient of such service. 
[Section] 2. - Grant of authority; limits and reservations. 
(a)  Grant of authority: The franchise issued to the franchisee is subject to the terms and conditions of this franchise agreement, the provisions of city Code of Ordinances, federal and state law. The franchise grants the franchisee the right to construct, operate, upgrade and maintain a cable system along the public rights-of-way within the franchise area, for the purpose of providing cable services. No privilege or power of eminent domain is bestowed by this grant; nor is such a privilege or power bestowed by this agreement. This agreement does not confer any rights other than as expressly provided herein or as mandated by federal, state or local law. To the extent the franchisee provides non-cable services, including telephony services, over the cable system, the city reserves its rights under applicable federal, state or local law to require a franchise for such services. 
(b)  Franchise area: The franchise is issued for the entire present territorial limits of the city. In the event the city annexes territory in which franchisee provides cable services, such annexed territory shall be incorporated into the franchise area and made subject to this franchise agreement upon the city's notifying the franchisee. The city shall on written request from franchisee make reasonable allowances for any technical differences if the annexed territory is served by a distinct and different set of facilities. Franchisee shall not be required to apply for or pay fees regarding modification of the franchise to accommodate such an annexation. 
(c)  Term: The franchise and this franchise agreement shall expire at 12:01 a.m. on November 19, 2011, unless the franchise is earlier revoked or its term extended as provided herein. 
(d)  Grant not exclusive: The franchise and the right it grants to use and occupy the public rights-of-way are not exclusive and do not explicitly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems or other communications systems within the city, affect the city's right to authorize use of public rights-of-way by other persons to operate cable systems or other communications systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate, or affect the city's right to itself construct, operate or maintain a cable system or other communications system, with or without a franchise. 
(e)  Franchisee subject to other laws, police power. 
(1)  The franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, including this agreement. The franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercises of the police power of the city, including but not limited to all rights the city may have under 47 U.S.C. § 552, all powers regarding zoning, supervision of construction, assurance of equal employment opportunities, control of public right-of-ways, and consumer protection and the ability to adopt and enforce regulations or ordinances of general applicability pursuant thereto. 
(2)  No course of dealing between a franchisee and the city, or any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder, shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the city or acquiescence in the actions of a franchisee in contravention of such rights except to the extent expressly waived in writing or expressly provided for in this agreement. 
(3)  The city shall have full authority to regulate cable systems, franchisees, and franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully permissible. Except where rights are expressly waived by a franchise agreement, they are reserved, whether or not expressly enumerated. 
(f)  Interpretation of franchise terms. The provisions of this franchise agreement shall be liberally construed in accordance with generally accepted rules of contract construction and to promote the public interest, while preserving the intent of the parties when entering this agreement. The express provisions of the franchise agreement constitute a valid and enforceable contract between the parties. In the event of a clear conflict between the Code of Ordinances and this agreement, the agreement shall prevail, except where the conflict arises from the lawful exercise of the city's police power. 
(g)  Approval and effective date: This franchise agreement shall be effective upon its approval by the mayor and council and execution by the city and MediaOne of Colorado, Inc. 
(h)  Effect of acceptance: By accepting the franchise and executing this franchise agreement, the franchisee: (1) acknowledges and accepts the city's legal right to grant the franchise, to enter into this franchise agreement, and to enact and enforce ordinances and regulations related to the franchise; (2) agrees that it will not oppose participation by the city in any proceeding affecting the franchisee's cable system; (3) accepts and agrees to comply with each provision of this agreement; and (4) agrees that the franchise was granted pursuant to processes and procedures consistent with applicable law, and that it will not raise any claim to the contrary. 
(i)  Claims related to prior franchise: The prior franchise is terminated as of the effective date of this franchise and superseded prospectively. 
(j)  No waiver: 
(1)  The failure of the city on one or more occasions to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this franchise agreement, city Code of Ordinances or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance by the franchisee, unless such right or such compliance or performance has been specifically waived in writing. 
(2)  Waiver of a breach of this agreement shall not be construed as a waiver of any other breach, whether similar to or different from that waived. Neither the granting of the franchise, nor any provision herein, nor any action by the city hereunder shall constitute a waiver of, or a bar to, the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city, including the right of eminent domain. 
(k)  No recourse: The franchisee shall have no recourse against the city for any loss, cost, expense, claim, liability or damage arising out of any action undertaken or not undertaken by franchisee pursuant to the franchise, this franchise agreement or the city Code of Ordinances, whether or not such action or non-action was required by the franchise, the agreement or the city Code of Ordinances, arising out of the enforcement or non-enforcement by the city of any provision or requirement of this agreement or the city Code of Ordinances, or otherwise arising out of the franchise, the agreement or the city Code of Ordinances, except as otherwise expressly permitted by federal law or this agreement. 
(l)  Amendment of franchise agreement: The city shall liberally amend this franchise agreement upon the application of the franchisee whenever necessary to enable the franchisee to take advantage of developments in the field of cable communications which, in the city's opinion, will afford the franchisee an opportunity to serve its subscribers and potential subscribers more efficiently, effectively and economically. Such amendments shall be subject to such conditions as the city determines are reasonably necessary to protect the public interest and consistent with applicable law. 
(m)  Regional equity: In the event franchisee or any of its affiliates shall enter into any other cable television franchise with any political subdivision in Cobb County, Georgia, in which franchisee or its affiliate commits to make technological improvements or upgrade not currently available in the city, or otherwise provide such improvements or upgrade in any such other political subdivision, franchisee shall notify the city of same within 30 days of the effective date of the other franchise, or if such improvements or upgrade are not required by a franchise then within 90 days prior to the commencement of such improvements or upgrade. In the notification, franchisee shall submit a schedule for providing these system enhancements in the city; provided, however, that franchisee is able to recoup its costs in a manner consistent with the terms in the other community(ies). 
(n)  Level playing field: The city shall not authorize or permit any person, including the city itself, to provide video programming service and/or cable service using the public rights-of-way on terms, which on balance, are more favorable or less burdensome to such person than those applied to the franchisee pursuant to this agreement, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. 
(o)  Franchise transfers. 
(1)  City approval required. No franchise transfer, as such is defined in this agreement, shall occur without prior written application to and written approval of the city council by an ordinance or resolution enacted after a public hearing, and only then upon such terms and conditions as the city council reasonably deems necessary and proper. Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any purported franchise transfer made without such prior approval shall be void and shall be cause for the city to revoke the franchise agreement. A grant of a franchise involves personal credit, trust, and confidence in the franchisee, and franchise transfer without the prior written approval of the city council shall be considered to impair the city's assurance of due performance. The granting of approval for a franchise transfer in one instance shall not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent franchise transfer. In the event of an acquisition, transfer, sale or assign of the franchisee's right, title, or interest in the franchise to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the franchisee, the franchisee shall provide written notification of the transaction and any supporting documentation the city may reasonably require to verify that the transaction does not constitute a franchise transfer as defined in this agreement. 
(2)  Application. 
a.  The franchisee shall promptly notify the city clerk in writing of any proposed franchise transfer. If any franchise transfer should take place without prior notice to the city, the franchisee will promptly notify the city clerk in writing that such a franchise transfer has occurred. 
b.  At least 120 calendar days prior to the contemplated effective date of a franchise transfer, the franchisee shall submit to the city clerk an application for approval of the franchise transfer. Such an application shall provide information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the transferee. 
c.  Within 30 days of receiving a franchise transfer request, the city shall notify the franchisee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial, and technical qualification of the transferee. 
(3)  Determination by city. 
a.  In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny, or grant subject to conditions an application for approval of a franchise transfer, the city council shall consider the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the system and any other considerations allowable under federal law. 
b.  The city shall make its determination in accordance with any time limits imposed by federal law, including under 47 U.S.C. § 537. 
(4)  Transferee's agreement. No application for approval of a franchise transfer shall be granted unless and until the proposed transferee submits an agreement in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and liabilities, known and unknown, of the previous franchisee under this franchise agreement for all purposes, including renewal, unless the city council approves a modification of the franchise agreement in conjunction with its approval of the franchise transfer, in which case the proposed transferee's agreement shall refer to the franchise agreement as so modified. 
(5)  Approval does not constitute waiver. Approval by the city council of a franchise transfer does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the franchise transfer; however, upon approval of a franchise transfer, the former franchisee shall be released from prospective liability under the franchise. 
[Section] 3. - Regulation and oversight. 
(a)  Inspection of records: The city shall have the right to inspect and copy at any time during normal business hours at an office of the franchisee located in the metropolitan Atlanta area, all books, receipts, maps, plans, financial statements, contracts, service complaint logs, performance test results, records of requests for service, computer records, codes, programs, and disks or other storage media and other like material which are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this franchise agreement, or applicable law, except such records as are privileged or protected from disclosure under applicable law. The franchisee shall be required to maintain such books and records for a period of three years. 
(b)  Files for public inspection: The franchisee shall maintain a file of records open to public inspection in accordance with applicable FCC rules and regulations. 
(c)  Performance evaluation: The city may, at its discretion, hold performance evaluation sessions, but not more frequently than once every three years except as otherwise agreed to by franchisee. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public, and announced in a newspaper of general circulation. Franchisee shall be notified by mail. Topics that may be discussed at such evaluation session may include, but are not limited to: System performance and construction, franchisee compliance with this franchise agreement, customer service and complaint response, Subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions. 
(d)  Confidential and proprietary information: The city agrees to protect any information disclosed by the franchisee pursuant to this agreement and designated as "confidential and proprietary" to the fullest extent permitted by the Georgia Open Meetings Law, Georgia Open Records Law and other applicable state and federal laws. 
(e)  Franchisee to comply: The franchisee shall take all reasonable steps required, if any, to ensure that it is able to provide the city all information which must be provided or may be reasonably requested under this franchise agreement. Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this franchise agreement shall be read to require the franchisee to violate 47 U.S.C. § 551. 
(f)  Customer complaints: Within seven business days of receiving a customer complaint from the city, the franchisee shall provide the city with a report on the status of its resolution and the corrective steps, if any, being taken by the franchisee. 
(g)  Customer service standards: The franchisee shall at all times comply with the FCC customer service standards. 
[Section] 4. - Provision of cable service. 
(a)  Service availability: The franchisee shall make cable service available to all persons requesting service located within 150 feet from the termination of the cable system, or the number of potential subscribers to be passed by such extension is equal to or greater than six potential households per quarter mile measured from any point on the system. Plant extensions of 150 feet or less shall be completed within 90 days from the franchisee's receipt of the request from a potential subscriber. 
(b)  Extended service availability: In the event that the requirements set forth in the foregoing paragraph (a) are not met, the franchisee shall upon the agreement of the potential subscriber extend its cable system based upon the following cost-sharing formula. The franchisee shall contribute an amount equal to the construction costs per mile multiplied by the length of the extension in miles, multiplied by a fraction where the numerator equals the number of households per quarter mile at the time of the request and the denominator equals six. Households requesting service as of the completion of construction can be required to bear the remainder of the total construction costs on a pro rata basis. The "construction costs" are defined as the actual turnkey cost to construct the entire extension including lines, materials, electronics, pole make-ready charges, and labor, but not the cost of drops. Plant extensions greater than 150 feet shall be completed within six months of the franchisee's receipt of payment of at least 50 percent of the requesting subscriber's cost. 
(c)  Service to government facilities: 
(1)  The franchisee shall, upon written request of the city, install, at no charge, at least one service outlet at all city buildings and all primary and secondary education public and private schools within the franchise area and shall install and charge only its reasonable costs for any additional service outlets requested for such locations, so long as such additional installations will not interfere with the quality and operation of the franchisee's system or signal thereon, and the quality and manner of installation of such additional outlets shall have been approved by the franchisee (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld) and shall comply with all city, state and federal laws and regulations. The city agrees to pay for the costs to extend plant to any city buildings, public or private schools to the extent they are located more than 150 feet from the existing feeder cable. The franchisee shall provide basic cable service and expanded basic cable service to all outlets in such buildings free of charge. The cable service provided hereunder shall not be used for commercial purposes and shall not be located in areas open to the public. 
(2)  Cable modem service: Franchisee will install one cable modem and provide free internet access service to city hall, the city police station, the city public works department, the city parks and recreation department, and the Southern Museum of Civil War and Locomotive History and at each consenting public library and public and private elementary and secondary school within the franchise area at no charge. The city agrees to pay for the costs to extend plant to the facilities listed above to the extent they are located more than 150 feet from the existing feeder cable. Franchisee will provide initial training in conjunction with such additional equipment and services at no charge. The city hereby agrees that such service shall be subject to the franchisee's standard residential service agreement as such may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Franchisee held harmless: The city shall hold the franchisee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of the provision and use of cable modem service and cable service required by this agreement. 
[Section] 5. - System facilities, equipment and services. 
(a)  System: The franchisee's cable system shall at all times meet or exceed its capacity and quality as of the last day of the prior franchise. Upon completion of the upgrade pursuant to section 5(c) of this agreement: 
(1)  The system shall have a rating of at least 750 MHz on all active components and a capacity of at least 80 6-Mhz analog channels downstream to all subscribers. 
(2)  The system shall at a minimum utilize a fiber-optic backbone trunk configuration and an active two-way, status-monitored hybrid fiber/coaxial (HFC) network. A single fiber node will serve no greater than 2,000 households. The system shall include a fiber management distribution system, with fiber transmission panels, fiber distribution frames and fiber terminating connection modules. It shall be sized to accommodate migration to smaller node sizes of 500 to 1,000 homes passed and the dedication of a laser per two nodes. 
(3)  There shall be no more than ten active components in a cascade as measured from the headend to the subscriber. 
(4)  The franchisee shall provide, install, maintain the equipment necessary for the downstream delivery of PEG access programming. The city shall be responsible for the quality of any upstream PEG access signals. 
(5)  The system shall be capable of continuous 24-hour daily operation without severe material degradation of signal except during extremely inclement weather or immediately following extraordinary storms that adversely affect utility services or damage major system components. 
(6)  The system shall be capable of operating over an outdoor temperature range of -20 degrees F to +120 degrees F and over variation in supply voltages from 105 to 130 volts AC without catastrophic failure or irreversible performance changes. 
(7)  The system shall meet all specifications as set forth herein over an outdoor temperature range of 0 degrees F to 100 degrees F and over variation in supply voltages from 105 to 130 volts AC. 
(8)  The system shall be operated in such a manner as to avoid causing interference with the reception of off-the-air signals by a subscriber. 
(9)  Except to the extent the city may construct and maintain the upstream connection for PEG access signals, the franchisee shall maintain the upstream and downstream capacity of the system at a level commensurate with the applicable FCC technical standards. 
(10)  The system shall use equipment generally used in high-quality, reliable, modern systems of similar design, including but not limited to back-up power supplies capable of providing power for two hours in the event of an electrical outage. The obligation to provide back-up power supplies requires franchisee to provide back-up power supplies at each fiber optic node and the headend. The obligation to provide backup power supplies requires the franchisee to install equipment that will (a) cut in automatically on failure of commercial utility AC power, (b) revert automatically to commercial power when it is restored, and (c) prevent the standby power source from powering a "dead" utility line. In addition, the design and construction of the system shall include modulators, antennae, amplifiers and other electronics that permit and are capable of passing through the signals received at the headend without substantial alteration or deterioration. 
(11)  The headend shall be capable of providing at least 200 channels using a mix of analog, digital, or other transmission technologies and generate signals of high quality throughout the franchise area (including on channels retransmitting upstream signals received through the headend), and the headend shall have adequate ventilation and space to be able to meet or exceed applicable design and technical requirements. It shall be a master headend capable of delivering similar services throughout the areas of Cobb County served by franchisee and its affiliates as of the completion of the cable system upgrade required herein in all such areas. The headend shall be interconnected with hub sites by means of a high speed transport network, on a redundant basis. 
(12)  The cable system shall allow all analog channels on the basic broadcast service tier to be received by cable-ready television sets without the aid of a converter, and shall minimize to the maximum extent feasible, interference with consumer electronic equipment. This section 5(a)(12) shall not apply to premium, pay-per-view or ala carte service offerings by the franchisee. 
(13)  The capability must exist for subscribers to be able to block out audio and video at least on all premium and pay-per-view channels, and video on all channels. 
(14)  All closed-caption programming retransmitted by the system shall include the closed-caption signal. 
(15)  All system connectors shall have waterproofing, all system expansion loops shall be properly formed, all components including drops shall be properly grounded, and adequate spacing shall be maintained from power conductors. 
Notwithstanding this paragraph 5(a) and the subsections therein, the transmission technology and design of the system may be subject to change at the discretion of the franchisee so long as the system remains in compliance with FCC technical standards. 
(b)  System upgrade process and term adjustment: The franchisee commits to completing an upgrade that meets the technical requirements of this section 5. The franchisee will provide the city with a construction schedule for the upgrade as soon as such a schedule is available, and will provide the city with any updates necessary to keep the schedule accurate. Franchisee will stage its construction in accordance with sound and reasonable engineering practices and non-discriminatory business practices. In the event franchisee substantially completes the upgrade in the city within 12 months from the effective date of this franchise, the term of this franchise shall be automatically increased by five years. In the event franchisee substantially completes the upgrade in the city within 24 months from the effective date of this franchise, the term shall be automatically increased by two years. 
(c)  Interconnection: The franchisee's cable system shall remain interconnected with other systems operated in Cobb County and the greater Atlanta Metropolitan area, at least to the extent such interconnection was in place on the last day of the prior franchise, and to the extent other cable operators agree to continue interconnection on such terms as were in place on the last day of the prior franchise. The upgraded system shall be designed so that it may be interconnected with any or all other systems or similar communications systems in the area. Interconnection of systems may be made by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate methods. 
(d)  Basic tier: Franchisee shall comply with federal law pertaining to the availability of local broadcast and PEG access channels on the basic programming tier. 
(e)  Emergency alert systems: The franchisee shall comply with federal rules and regulations pertaining to emergency alert systems. 
[Section] 6. - Channels and facilities for public, educational and governmental use. 
(a)  Access channels: 
(1)  The franchisee shall continue to provide and maintain channels, facilities, personnel, and financial support for public, educational, and governmental (PEG) use at least to the same extent as was being provided on the last day of the prior franchise, including but not limited to TV23 as such is produced by Cobb County. The franchisee shall provide for the timely repair and replacement of all of its access equipment being used by the city, schools, other public institutions, or any of their designated providers, in producing or providing public, educational, or governmental programming, including equipment provided under or used during the prior franchise. Franchisee will not be responsible for repairing or replacing equipment owned by the city or other entities not affiliated with franchisee. 
(2)  Once the franchisee has increased the channel capacity of its system pursuant to the upgrade required in section 5, in addition to the requirements of subsection 6(a)(1), the city may require the franchisee to make available one additional standard (6 MHz) video channel for public, educational or governmental programming. The city shall provide the franchisee at least six months advance written notice of its decision to exercise the authority under this section 6(a)(2). 
(3)  Upon six months advance written notice from the city, the franchisee shall provide local audio/video insertion capability (including hybrid fiber/coax connection to headend, splice panel, modulator, reverse laser transmitter, and headend switching hardware), at a site in the franchise area as designated by the city, for purposes of PEG programming so that such programming may be delivered to subscribers within the franchise area. Within 60 days of receipt of such notice from the city, the franchisee and the city shall enter into good faith negotiations to determine the responsibility for the costs associated with such insertion capability. 
(4)  The dedicated access channels to be provided under this franchise agreement shall be in use and programmed with qualified PEG access programming during at least 80 percent of the cumulative time between the test hours of 5:00 p.m. and midnight, Monday through Friday, for a period of ten consecutive weeks. All qualified programming shall count in this measurement for actual running time shown. Repeat programs are qualified programming only to a maximum of 25 percent of total qualified programming. Programs that are neither locally produced nor programming related to the franchise area are qualified programming only to a maximum of 50 percent of total qualified programming. Any program broadcast locally within three years of the measurement period is not qualified programming. 
For purposes of this section: 
Broadcast locally means transmitted on the signal of a local commercial television station or a qualified local noncommercial educational television station with signal carriage rights on the franchisee's system pursuant to 4 U.S.C. § 535, as in effect on the effective date of this agreement. 
Repeat program means the running time of any program only to the extent it is shown more than two times during the test hours over the ten week measurement period. 
Locally produced programming means programming produced within the franchise area or produced by a resident or local business, or any agency, public or private, which provides services to businesses or residents within the franchise area regardless of the location at which the programming was produced. 
Programming related to the franchise area means programming which addresses the educational, political, social or cultural interests of any segment of the businesses or residents of the franchise area. 
Qualified PEG access programming includes video bulletin board material only if the material consists of multiple and different text (or video and text) screens transmitted to different subscribers simultaneously. The term does not include video bulletin board material such as character generated or similar material to the extent the same text (or video and text) screen is sent simultaneously without variation to all system subscribers; or non-video, data uses of the system by subscribers. 
To avoid under-utilization of PEG access channels other than the first channel dedicated, upon 30 days notice to city, franchisee may make use of any access channel for its own purposes if, for a period of ten consecutive weeks, said channel no longer fits the above criteria. Upon 180 days notice, the city may reclaim use of such channel(s) for transmission of access programming. 
(b)  Access and program support: Upon the request of the city, the franchisee shall provide up to 20 hours of training in the use of PEG access equipment and assistance in the production of PEG programming. 
(c)  Management of channels: The city and other franchising authorities using PEG access channels may designate one or more entities, including a nonprofit access management corporation, to manage the use of all or part of the public, educational, and governmental access channels. 
(d)  Capital equipment grants: Upon 90 days advance written notice by the city, franchisee shall provide the city with grants not to exceed an amount equal to ten cents ($.10) per month per subscriber within the franchise area, to be used in the city's discretion but solely for government and educational access equipment. Such grants shall be payable quarterly on the same schedule as the franchisee's franchise fee payments. Franchisee's obligation to make such grants shall be contingent upon the city committing to match such grants with equal funds to be used for the same purposes and to hold such funds in a special account for such purposes and representing that all previous grants and matching funds shall have been expended for government and/or educational access purposes no later than 60 days following each calendar year. The city shall make such documentation available upon request. 
(e)  Costs and payments not franchise fees: For the purposes of this agreement, the parties agree that any costs to the franchisee associated with the provision of support for public, educational or governmental access pursuant to this franchise agreement, including but not limited to the grants described in Section 6(d), do not constitute and are not part of a franchise fee, and fall within one or more of the exceptions to 47 U.S.C. § 542. 
(f)  Editorial control: Except as expressly permitted by federal law, the franchisee shall not exercise any editorial control over the content of programming on the designated access channels (except for franchisee's own programming cablecast on those channels). 
(g)  Hold harmless: The city agrees to hold the franchisee harmless from and against any and all liability resulting from the use of the city's designated channel for PEG by the city or its designee. 
[Section] 7. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Franchise fee payments: Each year during the franchise term, as compensation for use of public rights-of-way, the franchisee shall pay to the city, on a quarterly basis, franchise fees in the amount of five percent of the franchisee's gross revenues. Revenue from the provision of non-cable services over the cable system shall not be subject to the franchise fee required hereunder but may be subject to fees or taxes under a separate franchise or authorization as may be required under applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(b)  Franchise fee report: The city shall be furnished at the time of each payment with a statement certifying the franchisee's gross revenues for the payment period. Payments shall be made to the city no later than 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter. 
(c)  Interest on late payments: In the event any franchise fee or other payment is not made on or before the date specified herein, the franchisee shall pay interest charges computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to one percent per month. 
(d)  No accord or satisfaction: No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as franchise fees under this agreement or for the performance of any other obligation of the franchisee. 
(e)  Franchise fees subject to audit: The city shall have the right to inspect all reasonably necessary records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this franchise agreement up to two years from the date the payment is received by the city. The franchisee shall be responsible for providing the records to the city at an office located within the metropolitan Atlanta area. Such records shall be maintained for at least two years. Should the audit reveal underpayments in excess of ten percent of the total franchise fees paid by the franchisee for the audit period, the franchisee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable audit costs, such costs not to exceed $5,000.00. Any additional amounts due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the franchisee by the city of the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If recomputation results in additional revenue to be paid to the city, such amount shall be subject to interest as specified in section 10(d)(2). 
(f)  Franchise fees not a tax: The franchise fee is not a tax, license or fee subject to any requirement of voter approval, but rather is a rental charge for special and individualized use of public property and the administrative costs of such use and the franchise under which such use is granted. The franchise fee is in addition to all other fees and all taxes and payments that a franchisee or other person may be required to pay under any federal, state, or local law, including any applicable property and amusement taxes, except to the extent that such fees, taxes, or assessments are a franchise fee under 47 U.S.C. § 542. 
[Section] 8. - Insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  Insurance required: Franchisee shall maintain throughout the entire length of the franchise period, at least the following liability insurance coverage insuring the city and the franchisee: worker's compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Georgia law and comprehensive general liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable system, and the conduct of the franchisee's business in the city, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  $1,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; 
(2)  $2,000,000.00 for personal bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident; and 
(3)  $2,000,000.00 for all other types of liability. 
Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the city shall be construed to limit the liability of franchisee for damages under the franchise. 
(b)  Qualifications of sureties: All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the State of Georgia, with an B+7 or better rating of insurance by Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, and in a form approved by the city, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(c)  Policies available for review: The franchisee shall keep on file with the city certificates of insurance. 
(d)  Additional insureds; prior notice of policy cancellation: The franchisee's general liability insurance policies shall list the city, its officials, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners and employees as additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days' prior written notice thereof has been given to the city clerk. Franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance reasonably satisfactory to the mayor and council which complies this franchise agreement. 
(e)  Failure constitutes material violation: Failure to comply with the insurance requirements set forth in this section shall constitute a material violation of the franchise. 
(f)  Indemnification: 
(1)  Franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the construction, maintenance, or operation of its cable system; copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by the cable system; the conduct of the franchisee's business in the city; or in any way arising out of the granting of the franchise or franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of this franchise, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this franchise agreement. 
(2)  Specifically, but not by way of limitation on the scope of (1) above, franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, and in their capacity as such, the officers, and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgments for damages or otherwise subject to Section 638 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 558, arising out of or alleged to arise out of the installation, construction, operation, or maintenance of its system, including but not limited to any claim against the franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark, or patent, or of any other similar right of any person. This indemnity does not apply to programming carried on any channel set aside for public, educational, or government use, or channels leased pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 532, unless the franchisee was in any respect engaged in determining the editorial content of the program, or prescreened the programming for the purported purpose of banning or regulating indecent or obscene programming. 
(3)  The aforesaid indemnification provisions include, but are not limited to, the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit, or proceeding prior to franchisee assuming such defense. The city shall notify franchisee of claims and suits as soon as practicable, but failure to give such notice shall not relieve franchisee of its obligations hereunder. Once franchisee assumes such defense, the city may at its option continue to participate in the defense at its own expense. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this agreement, the city shall not be so indemnified or reimbursed in relation to any amounts attributable to the city's own comparable or proportionate negligence, willful misconduct, intentional or criminal acts, including in the performance of its obligations under this franchise agreement. 
(g)  Performance bond: 
(1)  Prior to the cable system upgrade, the franchisee shall establish in the city's favor a performance bond to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of the upgrade. The amount of such performance bond shall be equal $50,000.00. 
(2)  In the event a franchisee subject to such a performance bond fails to complete the cable system upgrade in the public right-of-ways in a safe, and competent manner, after notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, or the cost of restoring or repairing the public right-of-ways. 
(3)  Upon receipt of written certification of the completion of the system upgrade and any further information the city may reasonably require to verify such, the franchisee shall replace the $50,000.00 bond with a performance bond in the amount of $10,000.00. Such $10,000.00 shall remain in place for the remainder of the franchise term or such time as the city provides written notice releasing the franchisee from the bond obligation. 
(4)  The performance bond shall be issued by a surety with an B+7 or better rating of insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(5)  Failure to maintain the performance bond shall constitute a material violation of a franchise. 
[Section] 9. - Enforcement and termination of franchise. 
(a)  Notice of violation: In the event that the city believes that the franchisee has not complied with the terms of the franchise agreement, the city shall informally discuss the matter with franchisee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the city shall notify the franchisee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 
(b)  The franchisee's right to cure or respond: The franchisee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in section 9(a): (1) to respond to the city, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (2) to cure such default, or (3) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the city of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
(c)  Public hearing: In the event that the franchisee fails to respond to the notice described in subsection 9(a) pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection 9(b), or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 30 days or the date projected pursuant to 9(b)(3) above, if it intends to continue its investigation into the default, then the city shall schedule a public hearing. The city shall provide the franchisee at least ten days prior written notice of such hearing, which specifies the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and provide the franchisee the opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  Enforcement: Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the city, after the hearing set forth in subsection 9(c), determines that the franchisee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the city may: 
(1)  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or 
(2)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or 
(3)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, seek to revoke the franchise in accordance with subsection 9(e). 
(e)  Revocation: Should the city seek to revoke the franchise after following the procedures set forth in subsections 9(a)-(d) above, the city shall give written notice to the franchisee of its intent. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The franchisee shall have 90 days from such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the city has not received a satisfactory response from the franchisee, it may then seek termination of the franchise at a public hearing. The city shall cause to be served upon the franchisee, at least 30 days prior to such public hearing, a written notice specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke the franchise. 
At the designated hearing, the city shall give the franchisee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. The franchisee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the city de novo. Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within 60 days of the issuance of the determination of the city. 
The city may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the city's rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise. 
[Section] 10. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Governing law: This franchise agreement was made in and shall be governed in all respects by the law of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Notices: Unless otherwise expressly stated herein, notices required under this franchise agreement shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid, to the addressees below. Each party may change its designee by providing written notice to the other party, but each party may only designate one entity to receive notice. 
(1)  Notices to the franchisee shall be mailed to: 
AT&T Broadband  2925 Courtyards Drive  Norcross, Georgia 30071  Attention: Legal Department 
(2)  Notices to the city shall be mailed to: 
City Clerk  City of Kennesaw  2529 J. O. Stephenson Ave.  Kennesaw, Georgia 30144 
(c)  Time of essence: In determining whether the franchisee has substantially complied with this franchise agreement, the parties agree that time is of the essence. 
(d)  Captions: The captions and headings of this agreement are for convenience and reference purposes only, and shall not affect in any way the meaning and interpretation of any provisions of this agreement. 
(e)  Integration: This agreement sets forth the entire agreement between the parties respecting the subject matter hereof. No other agreements, covenants, representations or warranties, express or implied, oral or written, have been made by any party to another with respect to the subject matter of this agreement. All prior and contemporaneous conversations, negotiations, possible and alleged agreements, representations, covenants and warranties with respect to the subject matter hereof are waived, merged herein and therein and superseded hereby and thereby. 
(f)  Severability: In the event that a court or agency of competent jurisdiction declares by final decision that any provision of this franchise agreement is unenforceable according to its terms or is otherwise void, said provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this agreement, and such declaration shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions of this agreement. Alternatively, the city and the franchisee may agree to modify any such provisions to the reasonable extent necessary to make such provision enforceable in light of any ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction if such modifications are consistent with the full intent and purposes of this agreement. 
(g)  Preemption: In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this agreement, then, subject to the city's rights under the foregoing subsection, the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and for the time, but only to the extent and for the time, required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city. 
(h)  Notification of conflict: As soon as reasonably practicable following knowledge thereof, the franchisee shall notify the city of any point of conflict believed to exist between this agreement and any other provisions of law. By executing this agreement, franchisee represents that they are not aware of any such conflict at the time of such execution. 
(i)  Force majeure: The franchisee shall not be deemed in default of provisions of this franchise agreement where performance was hindered by war or riots, civil disturbances, floods, strikes or natural catastrophes beyond the franchisee's control, and a franchise shall not be revoked or a franchisee penalized for such noncompliance, provided that the franchisee takes prompt and diligent steps to bring itself back into compliance and to comply as soon as reasonably possible under the circumstances with its franchise without unduly endangering the health, safety, and integrity of the franchisee's employees or property, or the health, safety, and integrity of the public, public right-of-ways, public property, or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2001-33, § 1, 11-19-01) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1986 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1986 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1986 Code, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1986 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1986 Code. Ordinances adopted since the 1986 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 