PUTNAM COUNTY CODE OF ORDINANCES 
____________ 
Adopted May 4, 2001 
____________ 
Published in 2000 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
OF 
PUTNAM COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Steve H. Layson, Chairman 
Sandra Adams 
Jimmy Davis 
Sylbie Yon 
Howard McMichael, Sr. 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
William A. Clack 
County Manager 
____________ 
Dorothy J. Adams 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Helen J. Carnes 
County Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
PUTNAM COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Billy Webster, Chairman 
Kelvin Irvin, District 1 Commissioner 
Daniel W. Brown, District 2 Commissioner 
B. W. "Bill" Sharp, District 3 Commissioner 
Trevor J. Addison, District 4 Commissioner 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Paul Van Haute 
County Manager 
____________ 
Fleming & Nelson 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Lynn Butterworth 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Putnam County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Helen Carnes, County Clerk, and Ms. Dorothy Adams, County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Putnam County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Putnam County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Putnam County, Georgia. 2000. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR PUTNAM COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Putnam County Code of Ordinances," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 66, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances not included in the Code are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or sixty (60) days imprisonment, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective when adopted. 
Passed and adopted by the board of commissioners this 4th day of May, 2001. 



ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Code of Ordinances to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Putnam County Board of Commissioners was created and established by an act of the Georgia General Assembly as set forth in 1879 Ga. Laws, page 334, and has been amended several times since. By final judgement and decree dated April 5, 1982 (amended April 23, 1992) the United States District Court in Civil Action No. 76-199 MAC modified previous provisions relating to the number, election and terms of the members of the board of commissioners. This judgement increased the number of county commissioners to five members, of which four were to be elected from new single-member voting districts with a chairman to be elected at large. Copies of the entire final judgement and amendment are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Code reference— Board of commissioners, § 2-31 et seq. 

ARTICLE II. - PUTNAM DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1968 Ga. Laws, page 1860, which amended the state constitution to create the Putnam Development Authority. The constitutional amendment was continued in force and effect by 1985 Ga. Laws, page 3955. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Development Authority of Putnam County, § 2-86 et seq.; Lake Oconee Area Development Authority, § 2-116 et seq. 

Section A. - Created. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in the County of Putnam to be known as the Putnam Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Putnam County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the `Authority.' 
Section B. - Members, etc. 
The Authority shall consist of five members who shall serve for a term of five years and who shall be eligible for reappointment. The members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County. The initial members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of five years. Members shall serve until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the Authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Authority to act. No member of the Authority shall be a member of the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County, but there shall be no other disqualifications to hold public office by reason of membership on the Authority. The Authority shall elect a Chairman and such other officers as they may deem necessary at its first meeting in each calendar year. 
Section C. - Taxes. 
The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Putnam County. The exemptions from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants nor lessees of the Authority. The right of any private person to use or occupy any real estate of the Authority for a period of one year or longer under any lease or other agreement for the purpose of taxation shall be classed as an interest in the real estate and as real property and shall be taxed as real property as now provided by law, or may be taxed as the General Assembly may hereafter provide by general or local law. The tax exemption herein provided shall not include exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the Authority or for use of the Authority. 
Section D. - Powers. 
The powers of the Authority shall include but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To buy, acquire, develop, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease as lessor and lessee, and mortgage land, buildings, and property of all kinds within Putnam County. 
(2)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and donations and to administer trusts. 
(3)  To grant, loan and lease without adequate consideration or without any consideration and with and without security, any of its funds and property to private persons and corporations operating or proposing to operate any industrial plant or establishment within Putnam County. The provisions of this clause shall not be construed to limit any other power of the Authority. 
(4)  To borrow money and to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates therefor and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor. 
(5)  To contract with Putnam County and other political subdivisions and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name. 
(6)  To have and exercise usual powers of a private corporation except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the Authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the Authority. 
(7)  To encourage and promote the expansion of industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation in Putnam County, and to make long range plans therefor. 
(8)  To exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it by the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Putnam County. 
(9)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(10)  To designate officers to sign and act for the Authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(11)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the Authority as herein stated. 
Section E. - Debts. 
The Authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against Putnam County or the State of Georgia. 
Section F. - Tort and contract liability. 
The Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability from torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents and employees of the Authority, when in performance of the work of the Authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia when in performance of their public duties or work of the State. The Authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the Authority. 
Section G. - Compensation. 
The members of the Authority shall receive only such compensation for their services to the Authority as shall be authorized by the Authority and approved by the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County and such compensation shall be paid from funds of the Authority. 
Section H. - Funds. 
The Board of Commissioners of Putnam County is hereby authorized to levy an annual tax on all taxable property located within the county not to exceed two mills per dollar on assessed valuation for the support of the Authority and for its use and purposes, and all funds raised by such tax shall be paid to the Authority and shall become a part of its funds and may be used by the Authority for any of its purposes and powers as herein stated, or as may hereafter be provided by law. The tax authorized herein shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by law. 
Section I. - Bonds. 
In order to finance any undertaking with the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the Authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the Authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respect in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as amended, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60, as if said obligation had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal, of the Authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the Authority. The Authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bond issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement, or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the Authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize said Authority to issue any bond resulting in the creation of a lien against the tax digest of Putnam County. 
Section J. - Property. 
The property of the Authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the Authority and any such property, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the Authority to enforce payments of the obligation. 
Section K. - Construction. 
This amendment is adopted for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare of Putnam County and its citizens, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources and vocational training, and the making of long range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion within its territorial limits. This amendment and any law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the development of this purpose. 
Section L. - Effective date. 
This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor. 
Section M. - General Assembly. 
The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the Authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the Authority. 
Section N. - Debts. 
There shall be no limitations upon the amount of debt which the Authority may incur, but no debt created by the Authority shall be a debt of Putnam County or the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE III. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[3] 
Part 1 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1994 Ga. Laws, page 4974, which provides for homestead exemptions from county ad valorem taxes for county purposes and from county school district ad valorem taxes. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Taxation, ch. 54. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this part [1], the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Putnam County including, but not limited to, taxes to retire bonded indebtedness but not including county school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
Section 2. - Amounts enumerated. 
Each resident of Putnam County is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Putnam County ad valorem taxes for county purposes the following amounts: 
(1)  For the taxable year beginning on January 1, 1995, $4,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead; 
(2)  For the taxable year beginning on January 1, 1996, $6,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead; 
(3)  For the taxable year beginning on January 1, 1997, $8,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead; and 
(4)  For all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1998, $10,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. 
The value of the homestead in excess of the amount exempted by this section shall remain subject to taxation. 
Section 3. - Application forms. 
The tax commissioner of Putnam County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this part [1] and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
Section 4. - Claim and return; renewal; notice of ineligibility. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this part to notify the tax commissioner of Putnam County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
Section 5. - Application of provisions of part 1. 
The exemptions granted by this part [1] shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, or county school district taxes for educational purposes. 
Section 6. - In lieu of, not in addition to, other homestead exemptions for county purposes. 
The exemptions granted by this part [1] shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption from Putnam County ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
Section 7. - Application of exemptions. 
The exemptions granted by this part [1] shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1995. 
Section 8. - Reserved. 
Part 2 
Section 9. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act [part 2], the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Putnam County school district including, but not limited to, taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
Section 10. - Amounts enumerated. 
Each resident of the Putnam County school district is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Putnam County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the following amounts: 
(1)  For the taxable year beginning on January 1, 1995, $4,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead; 
(2)  For the taxable year beginning on January 1, 1996, $6,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead; 
(3)  For the taxable year beginning on January 1, 1997, $8,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead; and 
(4)  For all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1998, $10,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. 
The value of the homestead in excess of the amount exempted by this section shall remain subject to taxation. 
Section 11. - Application forms. 
The tax commissioner of Putnam County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this part and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
Section 12. - Claim and return; renewal; notice of ineligibility. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this part [2] to notify the tax commissioner of Putnam County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
Section 13. - Application of provisions of part 2. 
The exemptions granted by this part [2] shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, or county taxes for county purposes. 
Section 14. - In lieu of, not in addition to, other homestead exemption for educational purposes. 
The exemptions granted by this part [2] shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption from Putnam County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
Section 15. - Application of exemptions. 
The exemptions granted by this part [2] shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1995. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR PERSONS 65 OR OLDER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1984 Ga. Laws, page 4657, which provides a homestead exemption to residents of the county who are age 65 or older. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Taxation, ch. 54. 

Section 1. - Granted; amounts enumerated. 
Each resident of Putnam County who is 65 years of age or over is granted an exemption from Putnam County ad valorem taxation for county purposes in the amount specified by this section on a homestead owned and occupied by the resident as a residence if the resident's net income, together with the net income of the resident's spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, as net income is defined by Georgia law, from all sources except as hereinafter provided, does not exceed $8,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year for income tax purposes. For the purposes of this section, net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual under the federal Social Security Act; and income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this section. The amount of the exemption granted by this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  The exemption granted by this section shall be $6,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for the tax year beginning January 1, 1985; 
(2)  The exemption granted by this section shall be $7,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for the tax year beginning January 1, 1986; and 
(3)  The exemption granted by this section shall be $8,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for the tax year beginning January 1, 1987, and for all tax years thereafter. 
Section 2. - In lieu of, not in addition to, exemptions granted by state law. 
The exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the $4,000.00 exemption from county ad valorem taxation granted by the general provisions of the Constitution and laws of this state to persons who meet the age and income qualifications set out in Section 1 of this Act. If the amount of said exemption granted by the general provisions of the Constitution and laws of this state is increased above the amount of the exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act, then such increased exemption shall apply rather than the exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act. 
Section 3. - Application of exemptions. 
The exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act shall not apply to or affect any taxes levied to retire bonded indebtedness, county taxes for school purposes, state taxes, or municipal taxes. 
Section 4. - Application; notice of ineligibility. 
Any person who as of January 1, 1985, has applied for and is eligible for the $4,000.00 exemption from county ad valorem taxation granted by the general provisions of the Constitution and laws of this state to persons who meet age and income requirements corresponding to those set out in Section 1 of this Act shall be eligible for the exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act without applying therefor. Thereafter, application for the exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act shall be made in the same manner as the application for said exemption granted by the general provisions of the Constitution and laws of this state. It shall be the duty of any such person to notify the tax commissioner or tax receiver in the event such person becomes ineligible for the exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act. 
Section 5. - Residence value in excess of exemption subject to taxation. 
The value of any residence in excess of the amount exempted by Section 1 of this Act shall remain subject to taxation. 
ARTICLE V. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[5] 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3998, which provides for the terms and appointment of members of the hospital authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Hospital authority created, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72. 

Section 1. - Membership; terms. 
(a)  The members of the Hospital Authority of Putnam County who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue to serve for the terms for which appointed and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  Thereafter, members of the hospital authority shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County pursuant to the requirements and procedures of O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72 for terms as follows: 
(1)  Posts 1 and 2 shall be filled for terms of three years beginning March, 1991, and expiring the last day of February, 1994; thereafter, members from Posts 1 and 2 shall be appointed for terms of four years; 
(2)  Posts 3 and 4 shall be filled for terms of one year beginning March 1, 1991, and expiring the last day of February, 1992; thereafter, members from Posts 3 and 4 shall be appointed for terms of four years; 
(3)  Posts 5 and 6 shall be filled for terms of two years beginning March 1, 1993, and expiring the last day of February, 1995; thereafter, members from Posts 5 and 6 shall serve for terms of four years; and 
(4)  Post 7 shall be filled for a term of four years beginning March 1, 1993, and expiring the last day of February, 1997; thereafter, the member from Post 7 shall be appointed for a term of four years. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances and resolutions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Putnam County Code of Ordinances," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Putnam County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "code" means the Putnam County Code of Ordinances, as designated in section 1-1. 
Commissioners. The term "commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Putnam County. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" means Putnam County, Georgia. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing body. The term "governing body" means the board of commissioners of Putnam County, Georgia. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. The term "keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Land, real estate. The term "land" or "real estate" includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The initials "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials and officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "chairman of the board of commissioners," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of Putnam County, Georgia, and their authorized agents, assistants and representatives. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place where the public is invited to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the county which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges, as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Effect of repeal of ordinance or resolution. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinances or resolutions in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance or resolution repealed. 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(11)  Any ordinance creating an airport authority. 
(12)  Any ordinance creating a library board. 
Sec. 1-5. - Applicability of Code. 
The provisions of this Code, unless otherwise clearly specified, shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances and resolutions. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines of sections; notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances and resolutions passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included in this Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances or resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(c)  The enactment of a resolution or ordinance, in the absence of language to the contrary, shall not repeal any resolution or ordinance theretofore passed dealing with the same matter, except where in direct conflict therewith. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  On or before January 15 of each year, the county clerk shall prepare a compilation of all resolutions, ordinances or other provisions enacted during the previous year which may amend, repeal, modify or supplement provisions of the county Code. 
(b)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on at least an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners of the county during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(c)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(d)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners of the county, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners of the county that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-12. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; additional penalties. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both, except as otherwise provided by general law. The fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(b)  Subject to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92, in every case in which any superior court, probate court, magistrate court or any court within the county shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of the state, or any ordinance of the county, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(c)  Subject to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92, at the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the state or an ordinance of the county, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted, and in every case in which any superior court, probate court, magistrate court or any other court within the county shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid over as provided under subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Such sums required by subsection (b) and subsection (c) of this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund or O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 concerning the judges of the probate courts retirement fund of the state. 
(e)  The sums provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the board of commissioners by the tenth day of the month following the month in which such sums are collected. Such sums paid over to the board of commissioners shall be deposited by such governing authority into a special account to be known as the county jail fund. 
(f)  Monies collected pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended by the board of commissioners solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and staffing county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county, or for the purpose of contracting for such facilities with other counties, the state, municipalities or other political subdivisions as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § III, ¶ I. The county jail fund and monies collected pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section to be placed in the county jail fund may be pledged as security for the payment of bonds issued for the construction of county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1989, §§ 1—5) 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-14. - An ordinance for the purpose of creating, amending, or deleting an ordinance of Putnam County. 
The ordinances of Putnam County may only be created, amended, or deleted in the following manner: 
(a)  The county manager or any commissioner may propose a new ordinance, amendment to an ordinance, or the deletion of an ordinance. 
(b)  The proposal shall be made to the board of commissioners at a regularly held meeting for the purpose of discussion. 
(c)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners, a notice of public hearing on the proposed ordinance shall be advertised in the legal county organ for two consecutive publications prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  A public hearing on the ordinance shall be held at the next regular meeting following the last published notice. 
(e)  The public hearing shall be held as follows: 
(1)  Individuals desiring to address the board of commissioners regarding an agenda item are required to sign in prior to the commencement of the meeting or public hearing. Such comments by any one person should not exceed three minutes. No demonstrations will be permitted. 
(2)  Written comments on the subject of the meeting or hearing may be submitted by any person at any time prior to the adjournment of the hearing. 
(3)  Following the presentation of positions by members of the public, a recommendation from the county staff shall be presented. 
(4)  Following the staff recommendation, members of the board of commissioners may ask of anyone present questions pertinent to the issue, and also may discuss the issue amongst themselves. 
(5)  No official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least three members of the board of commissioners. 
(6)  Minutes of the meetings of the board of commissioners shall be maintained and any written or other tangible materials presented at the hearing must be kept as a permanent record. Any person desiring a transcript of the hearing must arrange for a court reporter at their own expense. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(1); Amend. of 11-6-2009(1); Ord. of  9-17-2013(1) ) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(10); civil emergencies, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 38; planning, ch. 42; administration of collection and disposal solid waste, § 50-33; taxation, ch. 54; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 66-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e); supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-29. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-30. - Governing body. 
Putnam County shall be governed by a board of county commissioners consisting of a chairman elected by the electorate of Putnam County and four commissioners, one from each district, all as provided for in House Bill 248, Act Number 22, signed by the governor on May 14, 2003. 
The board of commissioners shall be a policy making body and oversee the executive functions of the county and assign the day-to-day duties of the executive role to the county manager as set forth in section 2-36.1. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(2)) 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Related laws reference— Board of commissioners, art. I. 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq.; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; county officers; election; term; compensation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III. 

Sec. 2-31. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.01) 
Sec. 2-32. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chairperson to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairperson if he or she believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner or commissioners leave and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting may not continue. If a quorum is not attained within ten minutes, the meeting may be rescheduled by the chairperson with the approval of the commissioners present. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.02; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
Sec. 2-33. - Voting majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners then in office. When a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the commissioners present and voting. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.03; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1) ; Amend. of 2-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-34. - Abstentions. 
All commissioners shall vote on all motions unless he or she has a conflict of interest which would prevent him or her from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his or her decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.04; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1) ; Amend. of 2-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-35. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairperson shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairperson shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chairperson may not introduce motions but may second motions. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.05; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1) ; Amend. of 2-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-36. - Vice-chairperson. 
The chairperson shall select a vice-chairperson from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairperson shall fulfill the duties of the chairperson if the chairperson is not in attendance and shall vote on all matters in order to represent his or her district. 
If the chairperson and the vice chairperson are absent and a quorum is present the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chairperson of the meeting until either the chairperson or vice-chairperson is present at the meeting. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.06; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
Sec. 2-36.1. - Form of government. 
(a)  Putnam County shall have a commission-manager form of government. 
(b)  The county manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of county government. The county manager shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. The Board of Commissioners of Putnam County shall select and appoint a county manager, who shall receive such compensation as may be prescribed by the board of commissioners. The county manager must devote all of his/her working time and attention to the affairs of the county and shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the county over which he/she has jurisdiction. 
(c)  No person shall be chosen as county manager before he/she shall have attained his/her 21st birthday. He/she shall be of good character, of proven executive ability and experience. The county manager shall be chosen by the board of commissioners solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his/her actual experience in or his/her knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the duties of his/her office as hereinafter outlined. No person elected to membership on the board of commissioners shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as county manager until one year has elapsed following the expiration of the commissioner term for which he/she was elected. 
(d)  The county manager shall be appointed for a definite term pursuant to a written employment contract and shall serve according to the terms of that contract which shall be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The board of commissioners will designate a person or persons to perform the functions and duties of the county manager during his/her absence, disability, or suspension. Vacancies in the office of county manager shall be filled by the board of commissioners as early as practicable and, until such vacancy is filled, the board of commissioners shall have full powers to make a temporary appointment. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the county manager to supervise the administration of the affairs of the county and to see that the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the board of commissioners and the laws of the state are faithfully executed and enforced. 
(1)  The county manager shall have the power to hire and/or remove all employees of the county. 
Dismissal of department heads: The county manager shall have the right to remove a department head. Upon removal the department head shall have appeal rights as outlined in the Putnam County Personnel Manual. The terminated department head shall have the right to waive this appeal. 
(2)  Those appointments made by the board of commissioners under current legislation and members of the boards, commissions, and authorities shall be appointed and/or removed by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  To execute administrative authority and supervision over all departments and other personnel under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(4)  To require reports from heads of departments and other employees entrusted with administrative duties and exercising discretion. The county manager shall have at all times the authority to examine all books and records of every officer and department of the county under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(5)  To attend all meetings of the board of commissioners with a right to take part in the discussions but having no vote. 
(6)  To recommend to the board of commissioners for adoption such measures, as he/she may deem necessary or expedient. 
(7)  To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person, company, or corporation for work done for the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. 
(8)  The county manager, or his/her authorized designee, shall be the purchasing agent of materials and supplies for the county under such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the board of commissioners or as set out in the current purchasing policy. 
(9)  To act as budget officer and submit to the board of commissioners for their approval as set out in state law a proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year showing budget revenues and expenditures during the preceding fiscal year; appropriations and estimated revenue and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year; recommended salaries, proposed capital expenditures; recommended tax levy; and such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the board of commissioners. 
(10)  To keep the board of commissioners fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the county. 
(11)  To serve as personnel director in the supervision and administration of the county's personnel system for county employees. 
(12)  To delegate purely administrative duties to subordinates in the county government whose work the county manager shall supervise and direct; provided, however, the delegation or assignment of duties to subordinates shall not relieve the county manager from his/her responsibilities for administration of county affairs. 
(13)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this act [article] or other duties as may, from time to time, be required by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(2); Amend. of 10-18-2011(1)) 
Sec. 2-36.2. - Operating policies. 
The county manager shall be responsible for proposing to the board of commissioners operating policies as necessary. They shall be proposed and discussed at a regular board of commissioners meeting and discussed and acted upon at the following regular board of commissioners meeting. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(2)) 
Sec. 2-36.3. - County departments. 
It is hereby established for Putnam County Government, the following departments: 
(a)  Animal control. 
(b)  County clerk's office. 
(c)  Finance. 
(d)  Public safety (ambulance, fire, rescue). 
(e)  Uncle Remus golf course. 
(f)  Oconee Springs Park. 
(g)  Planning and development. 
(h)  Public buildings. 
(i)  Public works. 
(j)  Recreation. 
(k)  Senior citizens center. 
(l)  Transit. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(2)) 
Sec. 2-37. - Agenda. 
The county manager shall prepare a detailed agenda on the subjects to be covered or acted on and/or objectives to be met for each regular scheduled meeting, called meeting, public hearing, work session, or any other special meeting. The detailed agenda shall be made available to each commissioner at least three business days before each regular scheduled board meeting, called meeting, public hearing, work session, or any other special meeting. 
A commissioner may add items to the agenda at any time. Any item requiring action must be added at least four business days prior to a meeting. An action item added less than four business days may be discussed at the meeting and laid on the table for action at the next meeting. In case of an emergency, the board may waive this requirement. 
A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.07; Ord. of 4-3-2009(1); Amend. of 9-20-2011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e). 
Sec. 2-38. - Consent agenda. 
A consent agenda may be prepared by the county manager for the board to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairperson shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairperson shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairperson will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.08) 
Sec. 2-39. - Minutes. 
The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes shall serve as the official written record of the board meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board but in no case not later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. The minutes specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the name of the commissioner who proposed each motion, the name of the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
The board must approve the minutes before they may be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least three business days before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be brought to the clerk's attention prior to the board meeting and that section of the digital recording will be made available at the meeting prior to adoption of the minutes. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairperson and attested by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.09; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e). 
Sec. 2-40. - Order of business. 
All regular board meetings shall substantially follow an established order of business. The order shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Invocation; 
(3)  Pledge of allegiance; 
(4)  Special presentations; 
(5)  Public comments; 
(6)  Approval of agenda; 
(7)  Consent agenda; 
(8)  Other agenda items; 
(9)  Closed session, if necessary 
(10)  County manager report; 
(11)  County attorney report; 
(12)  Commissioner announcements; 
(13)  Adjournment. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.10; Amend. of 3-5-2010; Amend. of 6-19-2012 ) 
Sec. 2-41. - Decorum. 
All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairperson and not to individual commissioners, staff, or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner may not speak at a meeting until he or she has been recognized by the chairperson. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
The chairperson shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he or she may raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson can rule on the question or he or she can allow the board to debate the issue and decide by majority vote. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.11) 
Sec. 2-42. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(a)  Public comments. The board may allow public comments on agenda items and any non-agenda items, except personnel. Individuals desiring to address the board of commissioners are required to sign in prior to the commencement of the meeting or public hearing. Such comments by any one person should not exceed three minutes. The chairperson shall have the right at any time to stop all public comments, when, in the chairperson's discretion, such input violates the provisions of this section. In addition, or as an alternative to speaking, written materials may be submitted to the board. 
(b)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals violating any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairperson or on a point of order made by a commissioner. The chairperson will rule on the point of order. An individual violating the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairperson. 
(c)  Public hearings. The board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held immediately prior to, during or following a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. The rules of public participation described in subsection (a) above shall apply at any public hearing. Hearings on zoning decisions shall be governed in accordance with the zoning policies and procedures of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.12; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1); Amend. of 6-19-2012 ) 
Sec. 2-43. - Parliamentary procedures. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners will be conducted in accordance with Roberts's Rules of Order (most recent edition of Webster's New World, Simplified and Applied, by Robert McConnell Productions). 
(Amend. of 11-16-2009(1)) 
Sec. 2-44. - Parliamentarian. 
General counsel shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings or in the absence of general counsel the chairman will so designate the parliamentarian. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.13; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1) ; Amend. of 2-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-45. - Amendments to the rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.14; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
Sec. 2-46. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held at 9:00 a.m. on the first Friday of each month and at 6:30 p.m. on the third Tuesday of each month. The regular meeting place will be the Putnam County Administration Building, at 117 Putnam Drive, Room 203 or such facility as established by the board of commissioners. Any change in meeting place will be advertised as required by law. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board. Meeting agenda will be posted 24 hours in advance. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.15; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1); Amend. of 8-17-2010; Amend. of 6-19-2012 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-47. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county by the chairperson for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the chairperson or at the request of a majority of commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting at the regular meeting place. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ, as well as to each member of the county governing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.16; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1); Amend. of 6-19-2012 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-48. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with general circulation of at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county governing authority as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.17; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-49. - Executive sessions. 
Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. 
No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session shall be recorded but shall not be open to the public. Such minutes shall specify each issue discussed in executive session. In the case of executive sessions where matters subject to the attorney-client privilege are discussed, the fact that an attorney-client discussion occurred and its subject shall be identified, but the substance of the discussion need not be recorded and shall not be identified in the minutes. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall be kept and preserved for in camera inspection by an appropriate court should a dispute arise as to the propriety of any executive session and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
Staff is authorized to make an audio recording of the executive session proceedings and the county attorney is assigned as custodian of that record, to be retained for a period of 180 days following any executive session proceeding from the board. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.18; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1); Amend. of 6-19-2012 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4. 
Sec. 2-50. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires a two-thirds vote of the board. Rules governing quorums (section 2-32), voting methods and requirements (sections 2-33 and 2-34), the notification to commissioners of meetings (sections 2-46 and 2-47) and rules necessary for compliance with state law may not be suspended. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.19; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
Sec. 2-51. - Committees. 
The chairperson, with the concurrence of the board, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to board members, committees may include other county elected officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places, and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairperson with the concurrence of the board. The chairperson or designee shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.20; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
Sec. 2-52. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2002, § 1.21; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(c). 
Sec. 2-53. - Appointment procedures. 
Appointments to all boards, authorities, and commissions shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures contained in this section. 
(a)  The county clerk shall cause to be published in the county's legal organ an advertisement announcing any vacancies at least 14 days prior to any appointment. 
(b)  Following the appropriate advertising period, the county clerk, or designee, shall prepare and provide to the commission, a spreadsheet format list of all qualified candidates whose applications were received timely by the county clerk. 
(c)  Immediately after the agenda item has been called, the clerk will verbally announce the qualified candidates and present their resume. A visually projected image of the spreadsheet prepared in subsection (b) above may be substituted. 
(d)  For each vacant position, except as outlined in chapter 14-4(b) and 66-150(b), each commissioner may nominate anyone on the qualified list. Each nomination must receive a second to be considered for a later vote. While it is desirable to have each district represented on all county boards, authorities, and commissions as well as to have as much representation across the entire county and its constituents as possible, the greater need is to have interested, qualified, and responsible applicants who will provide the greatest contribution to Putnam County in carrying out the necessary functions of these boards, authorities, and commissions. All candidates who have received a nomination and a second can be discussed by the commissioners. Following discussion, a roll call vote will be taken. The proper response, to the call for a vote, is the name of the preferred candidate. The person receiving the majority vote of the commissioners will be the candidate selected. In those cases where there is not a tie and no one has received a majority vote, a second round of voting may be directed by the chairman. 
(e)  No member of any board, authority, or commission shall be an employee of Putnam County as defined in Section I.D. of the Putnam County Personnel Manual. 
(Amend. of 9-15-2009; Amend. of 11-6-2009(1); Amend. of 11-30-2009(1); Amend. of 10-18-2011(1) ; Amend. of 3-1-2013 ) 
Secs. 2-54—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance creating an airport authority saved from repeal, § 1-4(11); any ordinance creating a library board saved from repeal, § 1-4(12). 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-66—2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF PUTNAM COUNTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Related laws reference— Putnam Development Authority, art. II. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-86. - Determination of need; purpose. 
It is hereby resolved by the board of commissioners of the county that there is hereby determined and declared a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority, as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county, thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the furtherance of that purpose, to finance projects permitted thereby including projects for air and water pollution control facilities by industries. 
(Res. of 3-23-1973) 
Sec. 2-87. - Activation; creation. 
There is hereby activated in the county the public body corporate and politic known as the Development Authority of Putnam County, which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) and particularly section 2 of such law. 
(Res. of 3-23-1973) 
Sec. 2-88. - Composition of board of directors; terms; qualifications. 
The initial board of directors shall consist of seven members who shall serve for terms of two, four and six years, and thereafter for staggered terms of six years. Each member of the board of directors shall be a taxpayer of the county and no member of the board of directors shall be an officer or employee of the county. 
(Res. of 3-23-1973) 
Sec. 2-89. - Vacancies; succession. 
If at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected, then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Res. of 3-23-1973) 
Sec. 2-90. - Organization of board of directors. 
The board of directors shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 3-23-1973) 
Sec. 2-91. - Effect and scope of division provisions. 
The action taken by the board of commissioners as specified in this division is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development or payroll authority heretofore created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Res. of 3-23-1973) 
Secs. 2-92—2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LAKE OCONEE AREA DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Related laws reference— Putnam Development Authority, art. II. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-116. - Declaration of need. 
In accordance with the provisions of the Development Authorities Law of Georgia, codified in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., the county hereby declares that there is a need for a regional development authority to function in Greene County, Georgia and Putnam County, Georgia. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1, there is activated and created jointly a development authority for Greene County and Putnam County, Georgia. The development authority shall be known as Lake Oconee Area Development Authority. 
(Res. of 12-20-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 2-117. - Membership; composition; qualifications; terms. 
The area development authority shall consist of six members from Greene County and six members from Putnam County. Each participating governmental unit within Greene County shall have equal representation within the six member Greene County membership. Each governmental unit participating in Putnam County shall have equal representation among the six members from Putnam County. The members from each governmental unit shall be appointed by such governmental unit and must be residents of the county in which such governmental unit is located which they represent. One-half of the members from each county shall serve for an initial term of two years, and one-half of the members from each county shall serve for an initial term of four years. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for terms of four years. 
(Res. of 12-20-1994, § 2) 
Secs. 2-118—2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Sept. 19, 2000, repealed §§ 2-141—2-144, which pertained to the recreation commission, and derived from Ord. No. 89-006, adopted July 7, 1989. 

Secs. 2-141—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in the county personnel policies and procedures manual, adopted April 20, 1989. The retirement plan for county employees became effective January 1, 1984, and is administered through the Association County Commissioners of Georgia. Official copies of the referenced documentation are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-4(4). 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; civil service system for county employees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; civil service system for county employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 

Sec. 2-176. - Workers' compensation. 
Volunteer firefighters of the county shall be covered under the Association County Commissioners of Georgia group self-insured workers' compensation fund. While performing their duties they shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1. 
(Res. of 4-7-1992, § I; Res. of 2-16-1993, § I) 
Secs. 2-177—2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-4(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-4(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-4(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); taxation, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; county finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; designation of depository, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-236. - Cap on probate judge's fees. 
Fees received by the probate judge of the county shall be limited to the amount equal to the fees collected or $7,500.00, whichever is less, in any calendar year. 
(Res. of 1-7-1997) 
Sec. 2-237. - Quarterly reports by probate judge. 
The probate judge of the county shall prepare a report for each quarter specifying the amounts received during the quarter for which the report is submitted. Each such report shall be submitted to the clerk of the board of commissioners of the county no later than 15 calendar days following the completion of the quarter and shall contain an affidavit sworn to by the probate judge certifying the accuracy of the report submitted. At his discretion, the probate judge may provide such reports on a more frequent basis. 
(Res. of 1-7-1997) 
Secs. 2-238—2-260. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amend. of 2-18-2003 amended ch. 6 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former ch. 6 derived from Policy of 8-15-1989, § 3; Ord. of 3-20-1990, §§ 2, 3, 5, 6, 8; Ord. of 3-5-1992; and Ord. of 9-5-1995. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Standards and regulations. 
In accordance with the laws of the state, it is necessary and expedient for the county to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale, tax and control of alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated areas of the county. The rules, regulations, licenses, taxes and standards shall be effective once passed, and until amended and modified thereafter. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage license means and shall include: 
(1)  License for the retail package sale of malt beverages; 
(2)  License for the retail package sale of wine; 
(3)  License for the retail package sale of distilled spirits; 
(4)  License for the retail consumption on premises of malt beverages and/or wine; 
(5)  License for the retail consumption on premises of distilled spirits. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Governing authority or county means the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County, Georgia. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(b)  All other words and phrases in this chapter shall be as defined in O.C.G.A. title 3, pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003; Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated limits of the county without first complying with this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-13. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-4. - Compliance with chapter. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of this chapter, each licensee doing business in the county under this regulation shall comply with all laws of the state, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state, and any violation of same shall subject the licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his license and also shall subject the licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the regulations of the county. In the event of conflict between this chapter and state statutes, the more restrictive regulation shall apply to the extent allowed by law. 
(b)  The granting or refusal and the suspension or revocation of licenses shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
(c)  In addition to the other remedies provided in this chapter, the violation of any one or more of the requirements in this chapter or of any related regulation noted in this chapter, shall authorize the board of commissioners after due process to: 
(1)  Immediately revoke the license; 
(2)  Immediately suspend the license pending a hearing regarding the alleged violation; 
(3)  Revoke a license effective as of a day certain; 
(4)  Suspend a license pending receipt of evidence of compliance with the regulations in this chapter or of termination of those activities in violation of these or related regulations noted in this chapter; or 
(5)  Impose such conditions upon continued approval of the license as it shall deem proper to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003) 
Secs. 6-5—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Requirements; excise tax. 
(a)  The requirements for all alcoholic beverage licenses are as follows: 
(1)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(2)  Any person, partnership, or corporation desiring to conduct a business to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application therefore on a form to be furnished by the board of commissioners, and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits and other supporting data as required thereby. Any untrue, misleading or omitted statement or information 
contained in any such application shall be cause for denial or suspension of the license and if a license has been granted, shall be cause for revocation of the same. Each application shall be filed together with the payment of the license fee: 
a.  Where the owner of such business is an individual (a natural person), the application shall be made in the name of that person and shall include the complete address of that person, together with that person's date of birth and Social Security number. 
b.  Where the owner of such business is a partnership, the application shall be made in the names of all partners and shall include their complete addresses, together with their respective dates of birth and Social Security numbers. 
c.  Where the owner of such business is a domestic corporation lawfully registered and doing business under the laws of the State of Georgia, or any foreign corporation lawfully registered under the laws of the State of Georgia to do business in this state, it may be permitted to apply for such license in the name of the corporation as registered in the Office of the Secretary of State. The corporation shall provide the board of commissioners with the name of its agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of this state and with the address of its registered office. The corporation shall also provide the name, complete address, date of birth and Social Security number of its managing agent. The managing agent shall be defined as the person who controls and manages the day-to-day operations of the business on behalf of the corporation. 
d.  The written application for a license on file with the board of commissioners shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current with correct information at all times. The failure to maintain a current license application shall be grounds for revocation of a license. 
e.  The board of commissioners may, in the exercise of its discretion, require a personnel statement that identifies any and all employees of a licensee for licensing purposes. 
f.  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction for any felony offense or any offense involving moral turpitude under federal, state or local laws of the person, any partner, the corporation, the corporation's managing agent, or any employee or proposed employee. 
g.  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction for any misdemeanor offense pertaining to the sale or illegal possession of alcoholic beverages, gambling, tax laws, controlled substances and/or dangerous drugs under federal, state or local laws of the person, any partner, the corporation, the corporation's managing agent, or any employee or any proposed employee. 
h.  The license application shall list the names of any persons having an interest in the operation of a proposed licensed premises or control over or ownership interest in such proposed license premises. Such persons must meet the same requirements as set forth in this article for the licensee. 
i.  If the proposed licensed premises is not in existence on January 6, 2010, the initial application shall include an accurate sketch or diagram showing the location of the building, the area thereof to be used, and the property lines of the real property where the licensee proposes to carry on the business of selling alcoholic beverages. The diagram shall also show the location of all churches or recognized places of worship and schools in the immediate area, and the distance between the property line of the proposed place of business and the property line of schools, churches or recognized places of worship as measured along a straight line. 
j.  The license application shall contain a statement as to whether licensee holds any other license for the sale of alcoholic beverages and the location thereof. 
k.  If the proposed licensed premises is not in existence or requires substantial renovation, the applicant shall submit a detailed set of plans and working drawings showing the exact location of the proposed licensed premises and the construction proposed to be carried out by the licensee and the anticipated time for completion of said construction or renovation. 
l.  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, the person, partners, or corporation's managing agent shall furnish a complete set or sets of his/her/their fingerprints to the board of commissioners. Said fingerprints shall be obtained under the direction of the board of commissioners or their designee. The board of commissioners will request the Sheriff of Putnam County to obtain a fingerprint-based criminal history records check from the Georgia Crime Information Center and Federal Bureau of Investigation for purposes of determining the suitability of the individual(s) fingerprinted and to return an appropriate report to the board. Fingerprints shall be in such form and of such quality as prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center and under standards adopted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Any fees charged by the Georgia Crime Information Center or the Federal Bureau of Investigation to cover the cost of the records search shall be paid by the individual(s) fingerprinted. 
m.  In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, the following factors, in addition to all other provisions of this ordinance, shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
1.  The person's, partners', corporation's, corporation's managing agent's, or employees' reputation, character, mental capacity to conduct the business, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which they have resided or conducted business in, and whether or not they are likely to maintain the operation of the business in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
2.  If the person, any partner, corporation, corporation's managing agent, or employees are previous holders of a license to sell alcoholic beverages and whether or not they have violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
3.  If the person, any partner, corporation, corporation's managing agent, or employees are a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which they conducted the business thereunder as it pertains to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
4.  Whether the person, any partner, corporation, corporation's managing agent, or employees have previously had a similar license suspended or revoked and the reason therefore. 
5.  The board of commissioners shall also give consideration to such other factors as may affect the health and general welfare of the unincorporated area of Putnam County, to include the type of license applied for, the effect that license will have on schools, public parks and churches in the area, the effect the granting of the license will have on existing land uses in the area, the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for the particular use sought, and the congestion of roads and streets. These items shall receive reasonable consideration with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhood property values. 
6.  When any application is denied or any license is revoked because of a decision by the board of commissioners that such license or application fails to meet any of the factors or requirements of this ordinance or in any case where such a decision was made because of the undesirability of the location itself, no application can be made again until at least one year has elapsed from the date the previous application was denied or revoked or, if that decision was appealed to any court, until one year after a final, unappealed or unappealable disposition was made of such appeal. 
n.  A license shall not be issued to: 
1.  A person or partner who is not a citizen of the United States or a legal resident of the United States, or any corporation whose managing agent is not a citizen of the United States or a legal resident of the United States. 
2.  A person, partner, corporation, or corporation's managing agent who has in Georgia or any other jurisdiction been convicted of a felony, unless said person has received a full restoration of their civil and political rights by the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles or the Federal equivalent thereof, or a person, partner, or corporation's managing agent is presently serving a first offender sentence pursuant to the Laws of Georgia for a felony offense. 
3.  A person, partner, corporation, or corporation's managing agent who has been convicted or pleaded nolo contendre or forfeited bond for a violation of any law or ordinance pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, gambling, tax offenses, sale or possession of controlled substances and/or dangerous drugs or any offense wherein the person, any partner, corporation, or the corporation's managing agent knowingly used a licensed premises to facilitate the violation of any federal, state or local law. 
4.  A person, partnership, or corporation whose place of business is managed, operated or owned by a person acting as a mere nominee in an effort to circumvent licensing requirements of this ordinance. 
5.  A person, partner, corporation, or corporation's managing agent whose license to sell alcoholic beverages has ever been revoked by any licensing authority. 
o.  The board of commissioners shall revoke any license of: 
1.  A person, partnership, or corporation wherein the person, any partner, corporation, or corporation's managing agent is convicted of a felony offense of any federal or state law, unless said person has received a full restoration of their civil and political rights by the Georgia Board of Pardons and Parole or the Federal equivalent thereof, or a person, any partner, or corporation's managing agent is presently serving a first offender sentence pursuant to the Laws of Georgia for a felony offense. 
2.  A person, partnership, or corporation wherein the person, any partner, corporation, or corporation's managing agent is convicted or pleaded nolo contendre or forfeited bond for a violation of any law or ordinance pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, gambling, tax offenses, or the sale or possession of controlled substances and/or dangerous drugs, or any offense wherein the premises of the licensee was knowingly used by the licensed person, any partner, corporation, or corporation's managing agent to facilitate the violation of any federal, state or local law. 
p.  The board of commissioners may revoke any license of a person, partnership, or corporation for the violation of any provision of this ordinance. 
(3)  Applications for any alcoholic beverage license and renewal requests shall be made on forms furnished by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  No licensee shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in such licensee's place of business. 
(5)  No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages, and there shall be no consumption on the premises, at any of the following times: 
a.  At any time on Christmas Day; 
b.  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the board of commissioners; 
c.  Within 250 feet of a polling place during the time period on any day during which any state, primary, general, local or special election is being held in the unincorporated areas of the county; 
d.  For retail package alcohol licensees, on any day before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:45 p.m.; 
e.  For retail consumption on premises licensees, on any day before 8:00 a.m. or after 1:00 a.m. on the succeeding day; 
f.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, licensees may conduct their business on election days subject to the restrictions provided in this article. 
(6)  The sale of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is authorized on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served. 
(7)  Package sales of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits by retailers are authorized on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(8)  The business premises of the holder of a license shall be open to inspection during business hours by officers, agents, employees or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. The business premises of all licensees must comply with all applicable building, safety and fire codes. 
(9)  The making of any false statement on an application for a license under this article shall constitute grounds for revocation of such license. 
(10)  Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which such licenses were issued. 
(11)  No license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. In the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the new owner or occupant to apply for a new license. 
(12)  A license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon, and no such license may be automatically renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next year shall make a renewal request reporting all changes since the last application on or before December 31. 
(13)  No license shall be granted to any person unless such person is at least 21 years of age and has been a resident of the state for a minimum of one year prior to the filing of an application for such license. In the case of a corporate applicant, the corporation shall have been in existence in the state for a minimum of one year, or the holders of more than 80 percent of the stock shall have been such residents. 
(14)  No licensee shall knowingly, directly or through another person furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under 21 years of age, or who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or who is an habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee. Proper identification regarding age shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(15)  All licensees shall keep a copy of this article and appropriate state statutes and regulations on the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and all shall be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in violation of this article or the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(16)  The annual license fees provided for in this article shall be submitted with the application or request for renewal, and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license. 
(17)  In addition to the annual license fees required in this article, there is hereby levied an excise tax on each licensee. 
(b)  The excise tax shall be the maximum provided by state law, and as defined by the Georgia Department of Revenue. Such tax shall be paid to the board of commissioners by the wholesale distributor on all alcoholic beverages sold to licensees in the county as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering alcoholic beverages to any licensee, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Such summary shall show the amount of excise tax paid. No distributor shall sell, deliver or ship any alcoholic beverages to any person in the unincorporated limits of the county who does not hold a current applicable license from the county. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003; Ord. of 4-3-2009(2); Amend. of 11-30-2009(2); ; Amend. of 1-17-2012; Amend. of 4-17-2012(1); Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 6-32. - Payment of taxes and fees. 
Prior to issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter, an applicant must be in compliance with all applicable requirements under federal, state, and/or county ordinances. Compliance with state and county statute and ordinances shall specifically include the requirement that the applicant or business of the applicant is not delinquent in the payment of any tax or fee owed the county, including, but not limited to, personal or real property taxes, any occupational taxes, sales and use taxes, or payment for any required permit necessary for operation of applicant's business. For purposes of this section, any tax that has been paid, formally appealed to the proper authorities, or is being paid pursuant to a plan authorized and approved by the appropriate tax or revenue commissioner shall not be deemed delinquent. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Secs. 6-33—6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 19, 2016 changed the title of Div. 2 from "Retail sales of malt beverages and wine" to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 6-61. - Additional requirements applicable to licenses for the retail package sale of malt beverages and/or wine. 
(a)  Before any retail package sale of malt beverages and/or wine license is granted, the applicant must post with the board of commissioners, along with his application, a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Such bond is to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this division. Upon the violation of this division, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the board of commissioners. Such bond is to be approved by the board of commissioners and shall be properly executed. Such bond shall be in the amount of $300.00. 
(b)  The annual fee for a retail package sale of malt beverages license shall be $150.00 per annum or in the case of a new business, a portion thereof based on the number of months remaining in that initial calendar year. 
(c)  The annual fee for a retail package sale of wine license shall be $150.00 per annum or in the case of a new business, a portion thereof based on the number of months remaining in that initial calendar year. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003; Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 19, 2016 changed the title of § 6-61 from "Additional requirements applicable to licenses for the sale of retail malt beverages and/or wine" to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 6-62—6-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 19, 2016 changed the title of Div. 3 from "Retail sales of liquor" to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 6-91. - Additional requirements applicable to licenses for the retail package sale of distilled spirits. 
(a)  No retailer shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock, at his place of business where distilled spirits are offered for sale, any other products or commodity except the following: 
(1)  Malt beverages and wines, when properly licensed; 
(2)  Beverages containing no alcohol commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(3)  Tobacco products; 
(4)  Ice to be sold in sealed containers only; 
(5)  Paper, styrofoam or plastic cups. 
(b)  No beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in such place of business. 
(c)  Only one retail package sales of distilled spirits license shall be issued to any one person in the county. 
(d)  All licensed retailers shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken package only. 
(e)  The annual fee for a retail package sale of distilled spirits license shall be $2,400.00 per annum or in the case of a new business, a portion thereof based on the number of months remaining in that initial calendar year. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Any applicant for a retail package sale of distilled spirits license must maintain, to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners, financial responsibility. Financial statements may be required with each completed application as prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003; Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 19, 2016 changed the title of § 6-91 from "Additional requirements applicable to licenses for the sale of retail liquor" to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 6-92—6-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RETAIL CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES OF MALT BEVERAGES, WINE, AND DISTILLED SPIRITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 19, 2016 changed the title of Div. 4 from "Alcoholic beverage sales by the drink and for consumption on the premises" to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 6-121. - Additional requirements applicable to licenses for the retail consumption on premises of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits. 
(a)  The annual fee for a retail consumption on the premises of malt beverages and/ or wine license shall be $300.00 per annum or in the case of a new business, a portion thereof based on the number of months remaining in that initial calendar year. Nonprofit organizations that have been approved by the Internal Revenue Service for tax-exempt status are exempt from this fee. 
(b)  The annual fee for a retail consumption on the premises of distilled spirits license shall be $500.00 per annum or in the case of a new business, a portion thereof based on the number of months remaining in that initial calendar year. Nonprofit organizations that have been approved by the Internal Revenue Service for tax-exempt status are exempt from this fee. 
(c)  No person or corporation who holds a retail consumption on the premises license shall operate a business or other enterprise involving the sale of any alcoholic beverage in such a manner so as to create, promote, suffer or otherwise permit the disruption or disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of the owners of properties located in the same vicinity and general neighborhood of the business premises of the licensee. 
(d)  The using, operating or permitting to be played, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, tape player, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for the convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the area, room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, player, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(e)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity shall constitute a violation of this code section. 
(f)  No person or corporation who holds a retail consumption on the premises license shall operate a business or other enterprise involving the sale of any alcoholic beverage in such a manner which results in a public nuisance or which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort of the citizens of the county. 
(g)  Each licensee shall ensure and make provision for adequate parking for licensee's patrons on or in close proximity to the licensed premises and shall take such action as is necessary and required to ensure that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and from licensee's business premises does not unduly disrupt normal traffic flow on the public roadways in the vicinity of the business premises and neither the public nor private property is obstructed by parking by patrons of the licensee. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003; Amend. of 11-6-2009(2); Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 19, 2016, changed the title of § 6-121 from "Additional requirements applicable to licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink; consumption only on the premises" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 6-122. - Disturbance of the peace, obscenity prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity or public indecency on the premises licensed to sell alcohol by the drink or otherwise licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Amend. of 2-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-123. - Off-premises consumption of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits for catered functions. 
Within the county, malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits may be served at a catered function by the holder of a caterer license issued by Putnam County pursuant to this Section. For purposes of this section, the term "catered function" shall include a function held inside a publicly or privately owned building or structure or a function held outside such a building or structure that is located within the unincorporated areas of the County where food and alcohol is served. An applicant may apply for and be issued either a temporary caterer license or permanent caterer license pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  Temporary caterer license. 
a.  The applicant must already hold a valid and effective alcohol license for the sale of malt beverages, wine, and/or distilled spirits for on-premises consumption from either Putnam County or another local government within the State of Georgia, the same being evidenced by copy of such license attached to the application. 
b.  The licensee shall be limited to service of the alcoholic beverage allowed by the underlying alcohol license for on-premises consumption. 
c.  A temporary caterer license will allow the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond the premises described in the annual license only in the area specifically described in the application and only during the specific timeframe applied for in the application. 
d.  Food must be served during any period of time that alcoholic beverages are served. 
e.  The hours of service must be between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday, with the exception that service shall be allowed on December 31 between 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. 
f.  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statute governing the sale of alcoholic beverages and all sections of this Code and other ordinances relating to distance requirements and alcohol license permits. 
g.  A temporary caterer licensee shall designate, appoint, and continuously maintain a resident agent who resides within Putnam County who shall accept notice and/or service. The licensee shall include the name of such registered agent, along with the written consent to serve of such agent, with the application for a temporary license. 
h.  A temporary caterer licensee shall be limited to no more than service at two catered functions within a calendar year. 
i.  The fee for a temporary caterer license shall be payable to Putnam County, and shall be paid in addition to and remitted with the filed application. Fees shall be based on a schedule developed by Putnam County Planning and Development. 
(2)  Permanent caterer license. 
a.  An applicant for a permanent caterer license shall comply with all requirements established in section 6-31, with the exception of the following sections; section 6-31(a)(2)(i), 6-31(a)(2)(k), 6-31(a)(10). 
b.  The licensee shall be allowed to serve malt beverages, wine, and/or distilled spirits, as applied for in the application. 
c.  A permanent catering license shall allow a licensee to serve alcoholic beverages at catered functions within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
d.  Food must be served during any period of time that alcoholic beverages are served. 
e.  The hours of service must be between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday, with the exception that service shall be allowed on December 31 between 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. 
f.  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statute governing the sale of alcoholic beverages and all sections of this Code and other ordinances relating to distance requirements and alcohol license permits. 
g.  A permanent caterer licensee shall designate, appoint, and continuously maintain a resident agent who resides within Putnam County who shall accept notice and/or service. The licensee shall include the name of such registered agent, along with the written consent to serve of such agent, with the application for a permanent license. 
h.  The fee for a permanent caterer license shall be payable to Putnam County, and shall be paid in addition to and remitted with the filed application. Fees shall be based on a schedule developed by Putnam County Planning and Development. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Secs. 6-124—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED SEXUAL CONDUCT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 

Sec. 6-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages establishment means any restaurant, lounge or supper club holding a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. 
Substantially nude means dressed or undressed in a manner so as to plainly expose to view any portion of a male's or female's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals, or any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola. 
(Ord. of 9-5-1995) 
Sec. 6-152. - Substantial nudity prohibited on licensed premises of alcoholic beverage establishment. 
(a)  No person shall appear substantially nude in any alcoholic beverage establishment, and no owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to appear substantially nude on the licensed premises. 
(b)  No owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to perform acts of or acts which constitute or simulate the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(2)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, provided that random acts of patrons or employees, whose actions do not constitute actions taken pursuant to encouragement or acquiescence of the management of the establishment and are not for the purposes of entertainment, promotion, publicity, or notoriety shall not constitute violations of this section. 
(c)  No person shall engage in any of the acts identified in subsection (b) of this section on the premises of an alcoholic beverage establishment. 
(d)  The restrictions of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all persons physically present on the licensed premises regardless of whether such persons are categorized as employees, patrons, independent contractors or otherwise. 
(e)  In addition to prosecution of any person for violation of this section, the business license of any premises upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation action shall follow the procedures outlined in this Code. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the county magistrate court or any other court having jurisdiction of such charges to a charge of violating this section shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(f)  Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor in the county magistrate court or any other court having jurisdiction of violations of county ordinances and it shall be in the discretion of the court in which a violation is found, to suspend the license of the violator, provided, that the failure of the magistrate court to suspend the license of a violator shall not preclude the board of commissioners from doing so. 
(Ord. of 9-5-1995; Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Secs. 6-153—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLICY REGARDING SALES TO MINORS 

Sec. 6-181. - Sale to minors. 
(a)  If a person or business that holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages, issued by the county, is found to have knowingly, directly or through another person, furnished or caused to be furnished or permitted any person in such person's employment to furnish any alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years of age, at any time after August 15, 1989, that person's, or that business's, license to sell alcoholic beverages in the county, will be revoked. 
(b)  If a court of this state finds such a violation against the individual holder of the license, no further hearing shall be required for revocation, otherwise revocation shall be in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The person or business whose license has been revoked under this section may apply for a new license to sell alcoholic beverages under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  If the action causing the revocation of the license in question is the first offense of the person or business, such person or business may apply for a new license after the expiration of 120 days from the revocation of his or its license. 
(2)  If the action causing the revocation of the license in question is the second offense of the person or business, such person or business may apply for a new license after the expiration of six months from the revocation of his or its license. 
(3)  If the action causing the revocation of the license in question is the third offense of the person or business then the person or business shall not be eligible to be issued a license to sell alcoholic beverages within the county. 
(Policy of 8-15-1989, § 3; Ord. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amend. of 3-18-2003 amended ch. 14 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former ch. 14 derived from Res. of 07-06-1999, §§ 14-1—14-20, 14-41, 14-43; and Rev. of 11-1-2000. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30; collection and disposal of dead animals, § 50-42; AG agricultural district, § 66-111 et seq.; sign regulations in AG agricultural districts, § 66-522. 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abuse or cruelty to animals or fowl means knowing and willful failure by an owner or any other person charged with an animal's or fowl's care to care for that animal or fowl in a humane manner; or, by act, omission or neglect, causing or inflicting unjustified physical suffering, pain, harm, or death to an animal or fowl. 
Animal means any and all types of animals, domesticated, male and female, singular and plural. 
Animal control officer means an employee of Putnam County under the direct supervision of the animal services director authorized by local law or by the governing authority of Putnam County to carry out the duties imposed by O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 11 or imposed by local ordinance. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, animal auction, kennel, performing animal exhibition, or animal shelter, except this term shall not include veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities, facilities operated by government agencies, or licensed animal dealers regulated by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
Animal services director means an individual selected by the governing authority of Putnam County to aid in the administration and enforcement of duties imposed by O.C.G.A. Title 4 or imposed by local ordinance. 
Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the board of commissioners for the purpose of impounding and/or caring for animals. 
At large means off the premises, and not under the immediate control, of the owner or custodian of the animal. 
Board of commissioners and board mean the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. 
Confined means in an enclosure or secured by a leash which shall have a length not less than five times the length of the animal and which is free from obstructions. All shall be provided with protection from the elements and have food and water provided daily. 
Dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by unprovoked assault or by biting so as to cause serious bodily harm or an animal trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of animal fighting. An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if: 
1.  It bites, attacks or menaces: 
a.  Anyone assaulting the owner 
b.  A trespasser on the property of the owner 
c.  Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it. 
2.  It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person. (O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20) 
Domestic animal means any dog, cat, or other legally owned animal not defined as wildlife, livestock or nontraditional livestock. 
Domesticated fowl means any and all birds, male and female, singular and plural, kept as pets or kept, maintained, bred or harvested for agricultural purposes. 
Enclosure means in a building, pen or fenced area or other structure to prevent intrusion or escape by an animal. 
Feral animal means a domestic animal displaying aggressive and/or wild like behavior; not tame. 
Fowl means any and all birds, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural. 
Guard dog or attack dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal approval command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected by the owner to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Humane manner means care of an animal to include adequate protection from heat or cold, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and clean water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, or boarding more than three dogs or three cats (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) for commercial purposes or engaging in training of dogs or cats for commercial purposes. 
Licensing authority means the county agency or designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this chapter. 
Livestock means cattle, swine, equines, poultry, sheep, goats, ratites, nontraditional livestock, and ruminants. 
Neutered/spayed means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. 
Nuisance means a dog or cat which: 
(1)  Damages, soils, or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner or caregiver; 
(2)  Causes a disturbance or annoyance to others by excessive barking or other noise making or offensive odors; 
(3)  Chases vehicles or molests, attacks, or interferes with persons, domestic animals or domesticated fowl. 
Owner means any person who owns, keeps, harbors, possesses or otherwise keeps any domestic, nontraditional livestock, or livestock animal for a period of seven days or any person who knowingly permits any domestic, nontraditional livestock, or livestock animal to be kept, harbored, possessed, or otherwise kept upon his premises for a period of seven days, or who has any animal under his or her care or responsibility, either temporarily or permanently, at any time, within the county. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal which without provocation bites a human being, domesticated animal or domesticated fowl at any time after March 31, 1989. No animal shall be deemed to be a "dangerous animal" or "potentially dangerous animal" based solely on incidents in which the animal: 
(1)  Inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer in connection with the law enforcement officer's official duties; and 
(2)  Inflicts an injury if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was attacking the animal's owner or owner's family member, committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal confined in a manner suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the animal from escaping. A proper enclosure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and a secure bottom. If the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. All gates shall be constructed so that they are self-closing and self-latching. All gates shall be locked or securely fastened at all times. A proper enclosure also shall provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal services agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an animal control officer as provided in this chapter or by the laws of the state. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones, death, cosmetic surgery, or lacerations requiring medical treatment. 
Stray animal means any animal not wearing a collar with a tag and/or license. 
Under control means any animal that is controlled by a leash when off the property of the owner, or is within the passenger area of a vehicle driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner and is confined or attended by its owner, or confined within the property limits of another with the permission of the person in control of the property. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-2. - Duties and prohibitions relating to the control of animals. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner not to have his domestic animal under control at all times while in the county. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring an animal into the confines of any park located in the county that is not on a leash or under the direct control of the person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a domestic animal under his ownership or possession to do the following: 
(1)  Go upon the property other than [that of] its owner or keeper without the express consent of such owner or occupant. 
(2)  Attack or act so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways. 
(3)  Disturb the peace of any person by loud, persistent, habitual, barking, howling, growling, yelping, whining or other noise making. Note: No one shall be charged with violating this subsection unless written warning has been previously issued by an animal control officer within 30 days of the violation. No citation for violation of this section shall be issued unless there are at least two complaining witnesses who shall have signed a written statement stating the animal owner's address, description of the animal, and the date(s), time(s) and location(s) of the offense. 
(4)  Defecate or urinate upon the property of another. 
(5)  Be in heat and not be confined in a secure enclosure on the property of the owner or keeper. 
(6)  Animals under three months of age must be confined on the owner's property to prevent the spread of communicable diseases. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-3. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person who does anything prohibited by this chapter as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who fails to do anything required by this chapter as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. Prosecution of violations of any provision of this chapter shall be pursuant to and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-4. - Animal services director; animal services board. 
(a)  Primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal services director. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall be authorized to create an animal services board which shall operate under the following bylaws: 
(1)  Created. An animal services advisory board is hereby created and established in Putnam County. This animal services advisory board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the board of county commissioners on matters relating to the welfare and control of the domesticated animal population within the county. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the animal services advisory board is to provide information, advice and counsel to the board of county commissioners, county manager and the director of the animal services department with respect to the appropriate means and methods by which the county may adequately provide for the welfare of its domesticated animal population and for the protection of its citizens in relation to uncontrolled and/or dangerous dogs. The stated purpose of the advisory board shall not be construed as delegating to such animal services advisory board or any of its members any power or authority of a governmental, legislative or administrative nature, but merely is the establishment of an official instrument by which the board of county commissioners may receive the benefit of accurate, comprehensive information, advice and counsel concerning all matters relating to animal service programs which may be necessary for the appropriate action by the board of county commissioners. 
(3)  Duties and functions. The animal services advisory board shall have the duties, functions and responsibilities to: 
a.  Serve in an advisory capacity to the board of county commissioners, county manager and the director of the animal services department with respect to all matters pertaining to animal welfare and control policies and programs conducted within the county; 
b.  Carry out continuing study of animal services facilities and services in the county and report to the board of county commissioners recommended improvements in such services as needed by the county in respect to animal welfare and control; 
c.  Devise means and methods by which animal services facilities and services may be improved and more fully utilized to provide better service and availability to the general public; 
d.  Make a continuing study and periodic reports and recommendations for sound, feasible programs for financing the cost of improving animal services facilities and services; 
e.  Review all laws, ordinances, resolutions and regulations governing animal services programs and services and make recommendations concerning appropriate action that may be taken to improve same; 
f.  Participate in hearings and in the disposition of dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs as required by O.C.G.A. title 4, chapter 8, article 2; 
g.  Formulate plans and programs for the coordination of the activities of all the governmental entities and nongovernmental agencies, as well as corporations for profit or not for profit and individuals, relating to animal welfare and control programs, facilities and services within the county; 
h.  Formulate comprehensive, feasible plans or programs for providing an adequate animal welfare and control service to the unincorporated areas of the county and to those municipalities who have entered into any local agreements with the county to provide animal control services; and 
i.  Perform and carry out such other duties and functions of an advisory nature as may be assigned to the animal services advisory board by the board of county commissioners. 
(4)  Membership. 
a.  This board shall be composed of county citizens who are dedicated to the purpose of providing a sound animal welfare and control policy; 
b.  The animal services advisory board shall be composed of six members, with five voting members appointed by the board of county commissioners and one ex-officio nonvoting member. All members shall serve on a voluntary basis without compensation. The board members shall be selected according to the following: 
1.  One member shall be a member of a regional nonprofit animal welfare organization and shall be nominated by the chairperson of the board of county commissioners; 
2.  Four members shall be nominated from the citizens of the county; their nomination shall reflect their manifested interest in animal welfare and control programs conducted by the county. Each district commissioner shall have the opportunity to nominate one member as outlined in section 2-53; 
3.  The director of the animal services department shall serve as an ex-officio member of the board and as such will serve as a nonvoting member. 
c.  Each voting member shall be appointed for a four-year term; 
d.  The ex-officio nonvoting member of the advisory board shall serve consecutive terms without interruptions. 
(5)  Meetings. 
a.  The animal services advisory board shall meet at least every quarter. The meetings may be called by the chairperson or by written notice signed by three members of the said board in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); 
b.  Special meetings may be called in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d) by the director of the animal services department in order to conduct hearings needed to make disposition of dangerous and potential dangerous dogs; 
c.  The presence of three voting members is required to constitute a quorum sufficient to the holding of a meeting or a taking of any action. A majority vote of those members present at any meeting shall be sufficient to enable the taking of any action; 
d.  The committee shall keep adequate records of its meetings, including the minutes, attendance records and records of formal committee action regarding animal services program review and monitoring; 
e.  The animal services advisory board shall select its chairperson and such other officers as may be deemed necessary or desirable and shall establish a time and procedure for the election of such officers on an annual basis; 
f.  Members shall attend meetings regularly in order to remain a member of the animal services advisory board in good standing. Absences shall be authorized by the chair of said board; 
g.  Additional procedures for the conduct of meetings, bylaws and regulations shall be developed by the animal services advisory board. 
(6)  Limitation on powers. The animal services advisory board shall have no power or authority to commit the county government to any policies or to incur any financial obligation or to create any liability on the part of the county. No actions or recommendations of the advisory committee shall be binding on the county until approved or adopted by the board of county commissioners. 
(7)  Amendments to bylaws. The provisions set forth herein may be amended by a majority vote of the voting members of the animal services advisory board. Any amendments shall be voted on at a regular meeting and all members shall receive a minimum of ten days' prior notice. The amendments approved by said board will require the concurrence of the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-18-2010(1) ; Amend. of 3-1-2013 ; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted May 19, 2015, changed the title of § 14-4 from "Animal control director; animal control board" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 14-5. - Obstruction of an animal control officer. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any officer of the Putnam County Animal Services Department in the performance of his or her duties as provided for in this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to relocate, interfere with, or alter the operation of any device, equipment, or item of the Putnam County Animal Services Department. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place their own animal into or remove any animal confined within a trap or cage operated by the Putnam County Animal Services Department. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false name, address, or date of birth to any officer, employee, or agent of the Putnam County Animal Services Department in the lawful discharge of his/her official duties with the intent to mislead such officer, employee or agent in any way. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-6. - Identification and inoculation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation. 
(b)  Any such dog or cat shall be microchipped or wear at all times a securely attached collar about its neck displaying such current rabies tag. Proof of a current vaccination shall rest with the owner. 
(c)  No person shall vaccinate dogs/cats for rabies who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Georgia. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-7. - Animals at large. 
A person owning or having animals in his custody and control shall at all times control such animals so as to prevent the animals from going at large to the injury, nuisance or endangerment to the safety of others. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper of any hog, cattle, mule, sheep, goat, fowl or any other livestock or nontraditional livestock animal to permit it to run at large in the county or to stray from the property of the owner or keeper or to go upon the premises of any other person. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-8. - Removal of animal wastes. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to refuse or fail to immediately remove any feces deposited by such animal upon public sidewalks, public streets, public parks, or other public property in the county. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on private property within the county any animal excrement. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-9. - Impoundment by animal control officer. 
The animal control officer shall be authorized to impound any domestic animal in violation of this chapter, whether on public or private property. In lieu of impoundment, the animal control officer may issue a citation for violation of this chapter. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-10. - Impoundment by property owner or injured party. 
Any person finding any domestic animal upon his/her property may contact the animal control officer to impound such animal 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-11. - Impoundment; liability for costs. 
The owner of an animal impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for the cost of maintenance of such animal during such impoundment. Such costs shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk and shall be payable upon redemption of such animal. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-12. - Impoundment; disposition of unredeemed animals. 
(1)  All incoming animals shall be checked for a microchip pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.2. 
(2)  Except for sick, injured, feral or owner surrender, animals shall be impounded for a minimum of seven days before disposition of the animal. At the end of seven days, if no owner has been found, the animal services director may: 
(a)  Release for adoption. 
(b)  Release the animal over to a humane society/rescue organization for adoption. 
(c)  Euthanize the animal. 
(3)  Owner surrender animals shall have no minimum impound requirements. 
(4)  Any domestic animal displaying feral behavior shall be impounded for a minimum of three days. 
(5)  Sick or injured animals. (See section 14-15.) 
(6)  No animal in the possession of Putnam County Animal Services shall be released to any individual or institution for the purposes of medical and/or scientific research. 
(7)  The animal services director may, at his or her sole discretion, extend the time for which an animal is retained at the shelter. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-13. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
If an impounded animal can be identified (rabies tag, ID collar, etc.), it shall be the responsibility of the Putnam County Animal Services Director to attempt to notify the owner by phone, if possible, or by mail within two working days of impoundment. The owner must claim his/her animal within five days after notification. After seven days from impound, with no contact from the owner, the animal will be disposed of in accordance with section 14-12. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-14. - Fees and penalties. 
(1)  Any person reclaiming a neutered/spayed animal shall pay a fee for the first impoundment, the second impoundment and for each subsequent impoundment. In addition a day boarding fee will be assessed. Any veterinary costs will be added to the fees. All dogs and cats must have a rabies shot before they will be released to their owner. 
(2)  Any person reclaiming an unneutered/unspayed animal shall pay a fee for the first impoundment, the second impoundment, and for every subsequent impoundment. In addition a day boarding fee will be assessed. Any veterinary costs will be added to the fees. All dogs or cats must have a rabies shot before they are released to their owner. 
(3)  Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be punished by a fine. Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(4)  All fees shall be set as per policy of the animal services department. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-15. - Disposition of a sick or injured animal. 
When an animal does not bear a tag identifying the owner, the animal services director or licensed veterinarian shall have the authority to humanely dispose of diseased or injured animals, whenever it shall appear that any such animal has been severely injured and is suffering great pain. Whenever a sick or injured animal can be identified, the animal control officer will attempt to notify the owner and transport the animal to an appropriate veterinarian. All medical fees incurred are the sole responsibility of the owner of the animal. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-16. - Adoptions. 
The animal services director may, at his or her sole discretion, deny adoption to any individual. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-17. - Abandonment or abuse of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone knowingly to abandon, abuse or fail to keep any domesticated animal or domesticated fowl in a humane manner within the county. Each animal so abandoned or abused, and each day the violation of this chapter exists, shall constitute a separate offense. 
Putnam County Animal Services shall be authorized to enforce this provision of O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 11, Article 1, titled "The Georgia Animal Protection Act" (O.C.G.A. § 4-11-2 et seq.) 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Secs. 14-18—14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 14-41. - Sections incorporated by reference. 
O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-22 through 4-8-30 are incorporated herein by reference thereto, except as set out in this article. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-42. - Notice to public of guard dogs and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant, or custodian of an enclosure, building or any residential or commercial property [at] which a guard or attack dog, a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is kept for security purposes to post a notice in a prominent and conspicuous location on such property. Such a notice shall comprise the words: "WARNING: GUARD DOG", "WARNING: ATTACK DOG", "WARNING: DANGEROUS DOG" or "WARNING: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG", or "BEWARE OF DOG". Such letters shall be not less than one inch in width and six inches in height. If a guard dog is confined within a fence area or in a building, such notice shall be conspicuously posted at each entrance and exit of the fence or building. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 14-43. - Regulation of dangerous dogs. 
The animal services director and any animal control officers under the direct supervision of the animal services director shall be the designated authority to carry out the duties of dog control officer imposed by O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 8 or imposed by local ordinance. It shall be the duty of the animal services board to conduct hearings and make disposition of dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-44. - Financial responsibility. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25, the owner of a dangerous dog, guard dog or attack dog shall register such animals with the county clerk and present to the county clerk evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state and insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $50,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state and payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(b)  Dogs owned by or used by law enforcement agencies are exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003; Amend. of 5-19-2015 ) 
Sec. 14-45. - Effective date, jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon its enactment and passage by the board of commissioners. This chapter shall only apply to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Amend. of 3-18-2003) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution of July 17, 2007, repealed ch. 18, which consisted of §§ 18-1—18-75, and enacted new provisions to be designated ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-84, to read as herein set out. Former ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from a resolution of Aug. 20, 1996; and an amendment of Nov. 1, 2002. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; roads and bridges, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Self-inspection exemption. 
The Board of Commissioners, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, exempts the county from the alternative inspection procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Secs. 18-2—18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 18-36. - Adoption of technical codes. 
The following technical building and construction codes, including appendices where noted, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 are adopted by reference as the official codes of the county and may be amended for later editions or amendments as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(a)  International Building Code (International Code Congress); 
(b)  National Electrical Code; 
(c)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(d)  International Mechanical Code; 
(e)  International Plumbing Code; 
(f)  International Residential Code; 
(g)  International Energy Conservation Code; 
(h)  International Fire Code; 
(i)  International Property Maintenance Code; 
(j)  International Existing Buildings Code. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-37. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the planning and development department. Citations for violations may be issued by this department. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in chapter 1, section 1-13. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Secs. 18-38—18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING PERMITS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-71. - Building permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any building to be located, erected, moved, expanded or structurally altered for a cost in excess of $1,000.00 unless a permit is specifically required herein (ex. temporary electrical pole, moving building on or across public thoroughfares, etc.) without obtaining a building permit issued by the planning and development department in conformity with this chapter. All permits issued shall be posted at the construction entrance and displayed on the premises described in the permit during construction or reconstruction. Any building permit shall automatically expire six months from the date of issuance if construction has not begun or has been abandoned. Construction or reconstruction not in compliance with the building permit issued, or without a building permit as required in this section, shall constitute a misdemeanor for which the violator, if found guilty, may be punished as provided by law. Each day upon which a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense under this section. 
(b)  Building permit applications shall be accompanied by a copy of a dimensional sketch or preliminary site plan, signed by the owner or his authorized agent, and include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; 
(2)  Shape, size, height and location of the structures proposed to be erected, demolished, altered or moved, and of any buildings already on the lot; yard dimensions and the use of structures, including the number of dwelling units within each structure; 
(3)  Easements (public and private); 
(4)  Watercourses; 
(5)  Fences; 
(6)  Street names and street right-of-way lines; 
(7)  Other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application; and 
(8)  Identity of owner and location by tax map and parcel number, verified by the tax assessor's office on the permit form. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-72. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application required. Prior to the issuance of any permit required or authorized by the building code, an application therefore shall be submitted in writing to the planning and development department on forms furnished for such purpose by the department. Such application shall be signed in the spaces provided by the qualified applicant, the owner of the property or his authorized agent, and, where required, the architect or engineer. The applicant shall become the permit holder upon issuance of a permit and shall be held responsible for the supervision and conduct of all work covered thereby. The application shall serve as the basis for determination of issuance of a permit and shall be factual evidence upon which any interested party may rely as to the information provided thereon. 
(b)  Changes to application. In the event of a change in any material fact given in the application, which served as a basis for issuing the permit, the permit holder shall immediately file an amended application detailing such changed conditions. If the change in the application is a change in the person responsible for the work, the owner shall immediately stop the work and notify the planning and development department in writing, detailing such changed conditions and any other information as required or, in lieu thereof, a new permit application shall be filed immediately by a new qualified applicant. If such changed conditions are determined to be in compliance with the building code and other applicable regulations, an amended building permit will be issued at a minimum fee if the changed conditions shall not be greater than those permitted in the original permit. 
(c)  Qualifications and responsibilities of applicant. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2), (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section, application for permits shall be accepted from and permits issued only to contractors who are qualified as provided in this article to perform the kind of work included in the particular permit for which application is made. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every contractor, builder, electrician, plumber or mechanical contractor who shall make contracts for the erection or construction or repair of buildings, or any portion thereof for which a permit is required, and every contractor or builder making such contracts and subletting the same, or any part thereof, shall be required to: 
a.  Purchase and maintain an occupational license. The fee is as listed in the schedule of fees. Such license shall be registered with the planning and development department. 
b.  Any contractor not licensed by the state must purchase and maintain a license bond (or an equivalent) in the amount of $25,000.00. Such bond shall be conditioned that all work performed by the contractor or under his supervision shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this building code and other pertinent laws and regulations. He will pay all fees and penalties properly imposed upon him for violations of the building code. The planning and development department shall be so named on the license bond. 
(2)  The owner of commercial property, except that designated for farming and agricultural purposes, may make application for a permit, supervise and do the work in connection with construction, repair, alteration or maintenance where the total value of such work, including labor and materials, does not exceed $1,000.00, and where none of the work to be done is required by law to be performed by a licensed contractor. All work performed in the case of buildings or structures classified as group E-educational, or group I-institutional or group A-assembly occupancy shall be performed only by a licensed contractor. 
(3)  The owner of residential or agricultural property may make application for a permit, supervise and do the work in connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or addition to a dwelling, including farm and agricultural buildings and structures, regardless of the size or cost of such work under the following conditions: 
a.  Such dwelling, farm or agricultural building is intended for the use and or occupancy of the owner making such application and not intended for sale. In this connection, no more than one permit shall be issued to an owner for the construction of a new dwelling (not including permits issued for alterations, additions and repairs to an existing dwelling) during any 12-month period. 
b.  The planning and development department may require proof that the applicant is the owner of the dwelling upon or in which construction is to take place, and nothing in this section is to be construed to invalidate the requirement for applying for and obtaining permits, paying fees, calling for required inspections, and complying with all plans, specifications, codes, laws and regulations applicable. 
(4)  A maintenance craftsman may obtain a permit for work to be done by him on the building or premises owned by his employer where such work is in the same category as the craftsman is qualified and where such work is limited to the maintenance, repair and minor alterations. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-73. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications, except as outlined in section 18-74. 
(b)  All plans for buildings, structures, additions or alterations to group E-educational, group I-institutional, and group A-assembly occupancy, regardless of size, and all buildings or structures three or more stories in height or greater than 5,000 square feet in area (except those classified as one-family and two-family dwellings, expressly exempted by the chief building inspector, and those buildings or structures for farm or agricultural purposes), such designer shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering, and shall affix his official seal to such plans, specifications and accompanying data. 
(c)  Plans shall be original drawings or prints of the structure, mechanically reproduced at the original scale on substantial paper, showing completely all foundations, wall sections, floor plans, roof plans and elevations at a convenient scale; a plot plan showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and location on the lot of the buildings or structures to be erected or altered, the location and number of required off-street parking and loading spaces; such other information as may be required to determine compliance with the building code and this chapter; complete structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical plans; and such other reasonable information as may be required to clearly show the nature, character and location of the proposed work. Computations, stress diagrams, shop drawings, floor plans of existing buildings to which additions are proposed and other data necessary to show compliance with the building code shall be included when required by the planning and development department. Any specifications in which general expressions are used to the effect that "work shall be done in accordance with the building code" or "to the satisfaction of the director of the planning and development department," shall be deemed imperfect and incomplete, and every reference to the building code shall be by section or subsection number applicable to the materials to be used, or to the methods of construction proposed. 
(d)  The director may authorize the issuance of a permit without plans and specifications for minor alterations, repairs and small or unimportant work, but in no instance where the work is of a structural nature. The issuance of a permit without plans and specifications will still require the necessary inspections and compliance with the building code and all other pertinent regulations. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-74. - Examination of plans. 
All plans and applications shall be examined in the order received, except those plans that have been previously examined. If the application or the plans do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, such applications shall be rejected in writing, stating the reasons therefore. Such plans may be returned for correction of the tracings. Penciled notations on such plans may be accepted for only minor corrections. If the application, plans and specifications meet the approval of the building code, the plans shall be stamped "approved," and the permit shall be issued. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-75. - Approval of other authorities. 
In addition to verifying compliance with the building code, the planning and development department shall require that the laws, rules and regulations of any other regulatory authority having jurisdiction, where such laws, rules and regulations are applicable and are known, shall be satisfied before a permit shall be issued. The department shall require such evidence, as is reasonable, to show such other approvals. The department shall not thereby be held responsible for enforcement of such other regulations it is not specifically authorized to enforce. The following are some, but not necessarily all, other agencies having jurisdiction on some or all projects: 
(1)  The county road department, the sheriff's office, the state highway department, and the City of Eatonton's police department for the moving of buildings, structures and heavy equipment over, temporary construction over, storage of material on, construction operations over or temporary blocking of streets or other public spaces; 
(2)  The county road department for the installation of a driveway culvert installed on county property; 
(3)  The county health department for the permitting of wells, septic tanks and water and sewer systems; 
(4)  The land department of Georgia Power for the permitting of docks, ramps and bulkheads that are within their jurisdiction; and 
(5)  The state highway department for permitting driveway approaches on any state road. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-76. - Permit types. 
(a)  Building permits, as issued by the planning and development department shall be required for: 
(1)  The erection or construction of any building or structure and the adding to, enlarging, repair, improving, altering, covering or extending of any building or structure; 
(2)  The moving of any building or structure within, into, through, or out of the county; 
(3)  The demolition of any building or structure; 
(4)  The erection, remodeling, relocating, repair, altering or removal of any sign; or 
(5)  The installation or alteration of a swimming pool. 
(b)  Electrical permits shall be required for the installation, repair, alteration, addition to or changing of any electrical wires, fixtures, apparatus, raceways, conduit or any part thereof, which generates, transmits, transforms or utilizes electrical energy in any form for lights, heat or power. 
(c)  Plumbing permits shall be required for the installation, repair, alteration, addition to or changing of any plumbing system or appurtenances thereto, domestic water supply or distribution systems, plumbing fixtures and traps, sanitary and storm sewers, liquid waste piping, or water and sewer-using equipment. No plumbing permit shall be required for the repair of leaks, unstopping of sewers or waste pipes, repair or replacement of faucets or water closets, repair of valves, repair or cleaning of septic tanks. 
(d)  Mechanical permits shall be required for the installation, alteration or major repair of: 
(1)  Boilers or steam-activated machinery, including the appurtenances and piping thereto; 
(2)  Heat-producing appliances, furnaces or other heating apparatus, including piping or flues, or accessories thereto, except electrical and other appliances that are fully portable and require no physical connection to piping or flues; 
(3)  Air conditioning or refrigeration systems; 
(4)  Mechanical ventilating systems, including air distribution ductwork; 
(5)  Gas systems or piping; 
(6)  Elevators, lifts, escalators, hoists or other transporting devices; 
(7)  Paint-spraying equipment or other process equipment that produces explosive or flammable vapors; 
(8)  Fire sprinklers, standpipes, fire hose cabinets or other fire protection apparatus; and 
(9)  Mechanical equipment of any kind that is regulated by the building code. 
(e)  Renewal of permits. 
(f)  Reinspection fees. 
(g)  Miscellaneous permits include, but are not limited to, tents for assembly, home occupation licenses, occupation registration, temporary camper, carnivals, rodeos, sporting events, public events (specific duration of less than one year), and tent revivals. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-77. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Permits not valid. No building, construction, electrical, mechanical, miscellaneous or other permit issued by the planning and development department shall be valid until fees prescribed by this section shall have been paid. 
(b)  Permit fees for work commenced prior to obtaining permits. In all cases where building, construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or other work for which a permit is required is commenced before such permit is obtained, any permit fee due to the county for a permit for such work shall be twice the amount of the regular permit fee specified in this article which would have been due had such permit been obtained prior to commencing work. In no event shall such fee be less than an amount listed in the schedule of fees in addition to the regular permit fee. Payment of such increased fee shall not be a defense in any prosecution for any such work, for which a permit is required. Any work performed prior to the issuance of a building permit that has not been inspected by the county, and that is not easily inspected, or has been covered up, shall be inspected by an independent engineer that can certify that such work complies with the building code. 
(c)  Reinspection fees. When extra inspection trips are made for a permit holder due to any of the following reasons, an addition fee in an amount listed in the schedule of fees shall be charged for each such additional inspection: 
(1)  Wrong address given on call for inspection; 
(2)  Work not ready for inspection at time specified; 
(3)  Required corrections not made within time specified; 
(4)  Failure to request required inspections; and 
(5)  Additional work done after inspection has been made. 
(d)  Refund of fees. Where no work has been done under a valid permit for which fees have been paid and a written request for refund of fees is made by holder thereof within six months of the date of original issuance, the director of the planning and development department may authorize the refund of 85 percent of such fee upon surrender of the permit and cancellation of the permit, providing no refund shall be made of a plan review fee. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-78. - Schedule of building or construction permit fees. 
For the purpose of determining fees, floor area shall be the gross overall outside floor area of a building at each story, including all portions under a roof. Where a building permit fee is paid for a new building or addition, separate permits and fees shall not be required for fences, walls, awnings, masonry fence walls, site work or other components normal to building construction. Separate fees shall be paid for electrical, plumbing, mechanical, miscellaneous or other permits shown elsewhere in this schedule. Fees can be found in the schedule of fees located at the planning and development department. Permit fees shall be as follows: 
(a)  New buildings and additions. 
(1)  For each square foot of enclosed area or fractional part of residential space, for each story below and above grade. 
(2)  For each square foot of garage, storage building or barn space. 
(3)  For each square foot of open shed space. 
(4)  For commercial space. 
(b)  New construction other than buildings, including towers, pylons, storage tank foundations, structural elements of industrial complexes not within a building, and similar construction. 
(c)  Alterations (including major repair to buildings or other structures). 
(d)  Moving buildings/modular and manufactured homes on or across public thoroughfares, when the move is not in conjunction with a building permit. 
(e)  The manufactured home fee, including 200-amp electrical. 
(f)  Masonry fences and walls: For each 50 linear feet or fractional part thereof. 
(g)  Swimming pools: For all permanent swimming pool installations aboveground or in-ground, including fencing. 
(h)  Demolition of buildings and for demolition of structures other than buildings. 
(i)  Temporary permits. 
(j)  Minimum fee for any building permit, based upon the fee formulas contained in subsections (b) through (l) of this section. 
(k)  Golf course or recreational development area: A base fee plus a per acre fee. 
(l)  Development/subdivision permit: A flat fee. See chapter 28, development regulations. 
(m)  Electrical permit fees. Electrical permit fees for service installations (conductors and equipment for delivering energy from the electrical utility supply system, residential and commercial). Each service or subservice requiring a utility-owned meter shall be considered a service for fee purposes. 
(n)  Plumbing permit fees. Plumbing permit fees for new residential or commercial service shall include a base fee and a per fixture fee. Renovations or additions to a room shall be charged a fee. 
(o)  Mechanical permit fees. Mechanical permit fees for new residential or commercial service HVAC system and charges per ton of air conditioning equipment and 20,000 BTU of heat equipment. Additions or changes of equipment shall require a fee. 
(p)  Renewal of permits. 
(q)  Reinspection fees. Fees for reinspection shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(r)  Miscellaneous permit fees. Tents for assembly, home occupation licenses, occupation registration, temporary camper, carnivals, rodeos, sporting events, public events (specific duration of less than one year) and tent revivals permits. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-79. - Inspections. 
Field inspections will be made to determine that the building, construction or structural alteration or use is being pursued in accordance with the site plan for which a development or building permit has been issued and in compliance with this chapter. These inspections and reports of findings shall be made as soon as practicable after inspection is requested by the developer. When a violation is found to exist, a notice of violation will be posted on the site. See section 18-84 for enforcement and penalties of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-80. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Upon completion of construction but prior to occupancy or use for the purpose constructed, and prior to utility hookup, the property owner or his agent shall notify the planning and development department and request final inspection of the premises. The inspection will be conducted as quickly as is reasonably practicable after such request. A certificate of occupancy will be issued only if such construction comports with all applicable local, state or national rules, regulations, statutes, laws, ordinances, and the terms of this chapter. No electricity, gas or water may be supplied to the premises until such certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-81. - Unsafe buildings. 
An unsafe building is defined as any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a fire hazard and/or other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, demolition, use and occupancy of such building, structures or premises. The International Property Maintenance Code, with the exceptions of Section 111, Means of appeal, will regulate this Code; all appeals will be made according to chapter 66, subsection 66-156(d) and subsection 66-157(c). 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 18-82. - Manufactured housing site requirements. 
(a)  No structure not now located within the county shall be used as a residence and individually sited unless it has been constructed in conformity with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development under 42 USC 5401, currently meet all fire and safety requirements of such standards, and has more than 450 square feet of living area. No pre-HUD (mobile) home may be transported on or across county roads. 
(b)  Any manufactured home shall be completely enclosed (skirted) with materials of brick, block, concrete or siding of like or similar character to the unit, or other nonrigid materials that must be affixed to a solid backing not less than one-half inch thick. 
(c)  All manufactured homes individually sited must have at each door a landing that is a minimum of 36 inches by 36 inches; be attached to a permanent foundation; and have all towing devices, wheels, axles and removable hitches removed. 
(d)  All manufactured homes to be individually sited shall comply with the following: 
(1)  In existing subdivisions that have specific covenants providing for individual siting of such homes, the setbacks provided in the covenants shall control, but shall not be less than the standard residential setback required by chapter 66, zoning. 
(2)  In existing subdivisions that allow the siting of such homes, the standard residential setbacks provided in chapter 66, zoning. 
(e)  All manufactured homes individually sited must be placed upon permanent foundations constructed in accordance with applicable building codes and state law and shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers' instructions and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131 and state fire marshal rules and regulations. 
(f)  The following items must be completed before final power inspection for manufactured homes and site-built homes: 
(1)  Completion of skirting/underpinning as sited in subsection (b) above; 
(2)  Construction of porches/decks at each exit as sited in subsection (c) above; 
(3)  Installation of driveway pipe and gravel at driveway entrances onto county/state/federal roads; 
(4)  Construction of well house, if applicable; 
(5)  Permanent posting of street number; and 
(6)  Connection to water and sewer facilities, if applicable. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-83. - Minimum standards for pre-owned manufactured homes. 
These standards are applicable only to those pre-owned manufactured homes built under the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code) and defined as a manufactured home under O.C.G.A. 8-2-131(3). Construction and safety standards for a pre-owned HUD Code manufactured home should not exceed the HUD Code standard in effect at the time the home was produced. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Pre-owned manufactured home. Any manufactured home as defined in O.C.G.A. 8-2-131(3) that has been previously utilized as a residential dwelling. 
(2)  Retailer. A retailer shall be synonymous with dealer as defined in O.C.G.A. 8-2-131(2). 
(3)  Assignee. Any bank, financial institution or any person purchasing a retail installment contract, that has as security a manufactured home. 
(b)  Facilities required. 
(1)  Sanitary facilities. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in working condition when properly connected to an approved water and septic/sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks, and obstructions. 
(2)  Hot and cold water supply. Every kitchen sink, lavatory and tub or shower in a pre-owned manufactured home must be connected to a supply of both cold and hot water. 
(3)  Water-heating facilities. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall have water-heating facilities in a safe, working condition. 
(4)  Heating facilities. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall have heating facilities in safe, working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each manufactured home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for unvented use and the total input rating of the unvented heaters is less than 30 BTU per cubic foot of room content. Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms. In lieu of inspecting the heating facilities of a pre-owned manufactured home, the retailer, assignee, or county may request a heating inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such a person will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein which pertain to heating systems. The county will not be responsible for any cost incurred by or due to a third party. 
(5)  Smoke detector. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall be provided with a State of Georgia-approved smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. 
(6)  Windows. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. 
(7)  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
(8)  Electrical. 
a.  Distribution panels. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
b.  Electrical system. The electrical system (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed, wired and shall be in working condition. The pre-owned manufactured home shall be subjected to an electrical continuity test(s) to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
c.  Third-party inspection. The retailer, assignee, or county may, in lieu of inspecting the electrical system of a pre-owned manufactured home, request an electrical inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such a person will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein which pertain to electrical systems. The county will not be responsible for any cost incurred by or due to a qualified third party. 
(9)  Exterior walls. The exterior of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls to the occupied spaces of the pre-owned manufactured home. 
(10)  Exterior siding. The exterior siding of the pre-owned manufactured home shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(11)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(12)  Interior floors, walls and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be kept in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain or moisture. 
(c)  Homes purchased for repair. No home may be occupied until standards herein are met. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Sec. 18-84. - Enforcement; penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, covered or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the director of the planning and development department, or any other appropriate authority of the county, may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this chapter requiring the presence of the violator in the magistrate's court; or institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent this unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate this violation or to prevent the occupancy of this building, structure or land. Where a violation of the regulations of this chapter exists with respect to a structure or land, the director may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any firm, person or corporation that shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as they exist, or as they may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation, shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Any violation of this chapter shall be regarded as a misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year's imprisonment and/or a fine of $500.00. Each day that this violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(1)) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; private collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, § 50-36; taxation, ch. 54; telecommunications, ch. 58; O-I office and institutional district, § 66-291 et seq.; C-1 local commercial district, § 66-311 et seq.; C-2 general commercial district, § 66-331 et seq.; SC special commercial district, § 66-351 et seq.; I-L light industrial district, § 66-371 et seq.; I-H heavy industrial district, § 66-391 et seq.; sign regulations for AG, C-1 and C-2 commercial districts, § 66-526; sign regulations for SC commercial district, § 66-527; sign regulations for I-L light industrial district and I-H heavy industrial district, § 66-528; sign regulations for O-I office institutional district, § 66-529; cable television franchise, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-31. - Required for business dealings in the county. 
Each year, every person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation, except for not-for-profit or charitable organizations, in the county, whether with a location in the unincorporated areas of the county, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall register such business, trade, profession or occupation and, except for exemptions and exclusions set out in this article, shall pay an occupation registration fee for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which registration shall be kept in the place of business, if the business, trade, profession or occupation has a permanent business location in the county. If the business, trade, profession or occupation has no permanent business location in the county, such business registration shall be shown to any deputy sheriff or such other person designated for this purpose by the board of commissioners upon request. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-21-2013, § 1(exh. A) ) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
The words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary worksite which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation registration fee means a fee charged to persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for registering an occupation, profession, trade or business. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation registration fee. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 10) 
Sec. 22-34. - Fee; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation registration fee shall be paid by those businesses, trades, professions and occupations and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or by the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
(b)  The occupation registration fee shall be in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and may be updated from time to time by the board of commissioners. The amount of the occupation registration fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. 
(c)  No business, trade, profession or occupation or practitioner of profession or occupation shall be required to pay more than one occupation registration fee for each of its locations. All businesses, professions, trades and/or occupations with a business location in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be required to register their business, profession, trade and/or occupation with the county, even when such businesses, professions, trades and/or occupations are not subject to payment of a registration fee and are not otherwise subject to regulation by the county. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 3) 
Sec. 22-35. - Payment of fee by business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation registration fee is hereby imposed on those businesses, professions, trades and/or occupations with no location or office in the state, if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 4) 
Sec. 22-36. - Dominant line of business to be identified on occupation registration form. 
The occupation registration form of each business operated in the county shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 5) 
Sec. 22-37. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the county. 
Where a person or entity conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the registration fee and/or registration. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 6) 
Sec. 22-38. - Practitioners practicing exclusively for a government. 
No practitioner of profession or occupation or person whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall be required to register or pay an occupation registration fee for that practice. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 7) 
Sec. 22-39. - When registration fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when registration fee delinquent. 
An occupation registration fee shall be due for the calendar year 1998 and each succeeding calendar year thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided in this section. Beginning with the year 1999, such registration and registration fee shall be due and payable January 1 of each year and, if not paid by March 1 of each year, shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. Each business, trade, profession or occupation located in the county subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall pay a registration fee immediately upon beginning business. The registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 8) 
Sec. 22-40. - Exemption from registration and payment of registration fee on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
Any organization with a tax exempt status pursuant to IRC section 501(c)(3) shall not be required to pay a registration fee pursuant to this article, and shall not be required to register as set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 9 ; Ord. of 5-21-2013, § 2(exh. A) ) 
Editor's note— Section 2(exh. A) of an ordinance adopted May 21, 2013, changed the title of § 22-40 from "Exemption from payment of registration fee on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose" to "Exemption from registration and payment of registration fee on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose." 
Sec. 22-41. - Code enforcement officer. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint a person who shall be its duly designated officer and inspector in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. The board of commissioners hereby grants enforcement powers to the county sheriff, in addition to any such appointed person. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 11) 
Sec. 22-42. - Businesses not required by this article to pay registration fee. 
The following businesses, trades, professions and occupations shall not be required to pay a registration fee pursuant to this article, but shall be required to register such business with the county and may be assessed an occupation license fee or other type of fee or tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 46, chapter 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state, governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 12) 
Sec. 22-43. - Registration to be made on forms prescribed by the county. 
Registration of businesses, trades, professions or occupations shall be accomplished by completing a form provided by the county. The individual who completes each form shall certify thereon that the information contained therein is true and complete to the best of that person's knowledge. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 13) 
Sec. 22-44. - Amendment; repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the fees or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and fee rates of any business, trade, profession or occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation registration fee provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment or collection by the jurisdiction of additional fees upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 14) 
Sec. 22-45. - Requirement of public hearing before registration fee increase. 
Subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation registration fee as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 15) 
Sec. 22-46. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation registration fee. 
The board of commissioners may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in the occupation registration fee to one or more types of businesses, trades, professions or occupations as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses, trades, professions or occupations or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons therefor shall be set forth in the minutes of meetings of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998, § 16) 
Secs. 22-47—22-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FORTUNETELLING, PALMISTRY AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit, regulate or tax fortunetelling, astrology and palmistry, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 

Sec. 22-76. - Purpose and authority of article. 
(a)  This article is enacted for the purpose of regulating and taxing the businesses of fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry and other kindred practices, business and professions. 
(b)  This article was adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners pursuant to the authority granted under O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
(Ord. of 5-11-1983, § I(A), (B)) 
Sec. 22-77. - Applicability of article provisions. 
This article shall apply to those persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or other such entities which engage in the practices of fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry and other kindred practices, businesses and professions where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services, and where the practices are carried on outside the corporate limits of a municipality. 
(Ord. of 5-11-1983, § I(C)) 
Sec. 22-78. - Annual fee required. 
In addition to complying with the occupation registration requirements as set forth in article II of this chapter, those persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or other entities engaged in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry and other kindred practices, businesses and professions as described in this section shall obtain a license and pay an annual fee of $1,000.00 to the county. 
(Ord. of 5-11-1983, § I(D)(1)) 
Sec. 22-79. - Display of license. 
Each person, firm, partnership or corporation holding a license pursuant to this article shall display the license prominently at all times on the premises for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. of 5-11-1983, § I(D)(2)) 
Sec. 22-80. - Location requirements. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in the above-named businesses or practices within 500 yards of any church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings, and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. 
(Ord. of 5-11-1983, § I(D)(3)) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— (a) By resolution adopted October 21, 1997, the board of commissioners adopted an emergency and disaster mutual aid agreement in conjunction with the Georgia Emergency Management Agency Area Three Counties. An official copy of the agreement is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(b) In order to implement the statewide emergency telephone number 9-1-1 plan, Morgan County and Putnam County entered into an agreement on October 17, 1989, regarding, among other things, response to an emergency call after it is dispatched even though it may mean crossing jurisdictional boundaries. An official copy of the agreement is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(c) By agreement dated August 6, 1986, the City of Eatonton and Putnam County contracted to provide a combined central fire protection unit to be known as the Eatonton Putnam Fire Department to serve the city and the county. An official copy of the agreement is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.; standards for ambulances, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-34; restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); emergency vehicle equipment, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-90 et seq.; authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - 9-1-1 TELEPHONE SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 9-1-1 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 26-31. - Charge imposed. 
A charge in the amount of $1.50 per exchange access facility provided to the telephone subscriber is imposed for E 9-1-1 telephone service in the county. 
(Res. of 11-18-1997) 
Secs. 26-32—26-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - 9-1-1 PREPAID WIRELESS TRANSACTIONS 

Sec. 26-66. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(Res. of 7-19-2011) 
Sec. 26-67. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Res. of 7-19-2011) 
Sec. 26-68. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this resolution [article] and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this resolution [article]. 
(Res. of 7-19-2011) 
Sec. 26-69. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this resolution [article] shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Res. of 7-19-2011) 
Sec. 26-70. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this resolution [article] are hereby repealed. 
(Res. of 7-19-2011) 
Sec. 26-71. - Effective date. 
The resolution [article] shall become effective January 1, 2012. 
(Res. of 7-19-2011) 
Chapter 28 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; signs, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Incorporation by reference. 
The following is incorporated by reference: The latest publication of the "Georgia Department of Transportation (G.D.O.T.) Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control" and the "Georgia Department of Transportation (G.D.O.T.) Standard Detail Manual". 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-2. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted for the purposes of encouraging economically sound and stable land development and ensuring the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services, the provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, that surface drainage is regulated, the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites through the dedication or reservation of land for streets, recreational, educational and other purposes, that land is developed in conformity with the comprehensive plan for the county, and the processing of all plats and permits through uniform procedures and standards. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-3. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-4. - Jurisdiction. 
The board of commissioners grants the director of the planning and development department the authority to interpret and to enforce the provisions of this chapter subject to the article V of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-5. - Conflict with public and private provisions. 
(a)  Public provisions. The regulations of this chapter are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive, or imposes higher standards, shall control. 
(b)  Private provisions. The regulations of this chapter are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction. However, where conflicts occur the regulations of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-6. - Saving provision. 
This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue or affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-7. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and validity of prior approvals and actions. 
(a)  This chapter is the Putnam County Development Regulations Ordinance of 2007, and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of zoning approval, uses, or building permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this chapter. 
(b)  All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the planning and zoning commission and/or board of commissioners shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by said entities shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against these violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-8. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-9. - Definitions. 
All terms in this chapter shall have the same meaning as set forth in chapters 30 and 66, unless otherwise defined in this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-10. - Appendices. 
Appendix A: Development Regulations Process flow chart. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Secs. 28-11—28-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THE PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCESSES AND SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-20. - Subdivision purposes. 
Subdivisions are for the purpose of creating smaller parcels from larger ones and generally for single-family residential housing. However, other purposes of subdivisions may include multifamily, commercial, agricultural, and industrial uses, if the developer so desires to create parcels on which these uses are to be located and permitted by the zoning ordinance. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-21. - Model homes. 
For the purpose of allowing the early construction of model homes in a residential subdivision, the director may permit the construction of no more than four model homes prior to the recordation of a final plat, provided the following are met: 
(a)  The preliminary plat has been approved. 
(b)  A development permit has been approved for at least that portion of the preliminary plat within which the model homes are proposed to be constructed. 
(c)  There is only one model home per proposed lot in the subdivision. 
(d)  The lots for the model homes must comply with the requirements of the zoning district and be in locations shown on the preliminary plat. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-22. - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or buildings to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter before any building permit is issued or any improvements, clearing and grubbing, grading or alteration of lands or buildings commences. Notwithstanding the foregoing, approval of a comprehensive site land disturbance permit and approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the development permit for such subdivision or site development. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-23. - Resubdivision of land. 
For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat or site plan, including vacation of part or all of any plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on each map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be reviewed, approved, or disapproved by the director of the planning and development department by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision or site plans as provided herein. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-24. - Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. 
In addition to the requirements established in this chapter, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations: 
(a)  The Georgia Plat Act. 
(b)  All applicable statutory provisions. 
(c)  The zoning ordinance, the policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan of Putnam County and the City of Eatonton, and all other appropriate ordinances of Putnam County and laws of other jurisdictions. 
(d)  Any and all rules of the county health department and/or appropriate state agencies. 
(e)  The rules of the Georgia Department of Transportation with respect to roadways within its jurisdiction, if the subdivision, or any multifamily or nonresidential development abuts a state highway. 
(f)  The Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-25. - Flag lot. 
A parcel of land that does not have adequate width for development and has at least a driveway corridor from the required minimum road frontage of the zoning district to a larger portion of the parcel situated behind other parcels in the development that front on the street. Flag lots shall have the following requirements: 
(a)  The minimum size flag lot portion located to the rear of the lots fronting directly on the street shall meet the minimum lot size of the zoning district. 
(b)  The driveway corridor (pole section of a flag lot) that provides access to the larger portion of the property shall be at least 40 feet in width. 
(c)  The building setbacks of the zoning district shall be applied to the "flag" portion of the lot as though it were a standard lot fronting directly on the street. 
(d)  No abovegrade structures may be located in the pole portion of the flag lot. 
(e)  Whenever deemed necessary, the driveway portion in the right-of-way shall be a shared driveway. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 28-26. - Plats straddling political boundaries. 
Whenever access to a subdivision is proposed by the applicant across land in another governmental jurisdiction, the director of the planning and development department may request assurance from the county attorney that access is legally established, and from the political jurisdiction in which the access road is located that it is adequately improved. The director shall determine that the construction standards of the road closely approximate the standards set forth in this chapter. If the road does not approximate the standards of this chapter, the director may require that an alternate means of access be provided that does comply. Lot lines shall not cross the jurisdictional boundary lines. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-27. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, inadequate drainage or erosion that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use, nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger of health, safety and property destruction. The developer shall be required to accommodate a solution to the drainage or erosion condition in the development permit, unless, in the opinion of the director, the hazard is not within the bounds of, or affected by the proposed development. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-28. - Rejection of land dedication. 
Whenever an application proposes the dedication of land to public use that the director of the planning and development department finds not suitable for such public use, the director shall refuse to approve the plat. The developer may incorporate the land into the design of the development, resubmitting the application for review. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-29. - Subdivision and street names. 
The proposed name of the subdivision or site development shall not be duplicated, or closely approximate phonetically or visually to the name of any other subdivision or site development in the county. The director of the planning and development department shall have final authority to approve the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at preliminary plat approval. The same authority shall apply to street names whether the streets are public or private. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-30. - Development fronting a county arterial. 
A major subdivision or site development (residential or commercial) along a county arterial shall screen the development at the road with the use of landscaped buffers and/or berms. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Secs. 28-31—28-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PREAPPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE 

Sec. 28-40. - Development consultation and concept plan. 
(a)  Minor subdivision. 
(1)  The developer who chooses to divide a parcel into four or fewer lots must consult with the director before proceeding with the drawings showing the proposed division of the parcel. 
(2)  The lots in the minor subdivision must front on an existing public or private road classified as other than an arterial or collector whether of the state or county roadway system as defined by this chapter. 
(b)  Major subdivision and site development. 
(1)  A concept plan, drawn to scale, is required reflecting the conditions of the zoning approval, if any were so applied by the board of commissioners, and shall be submitted to and approved by the director prior to the submittal of any other drawings and documents. The director shall have five days to determine compliance with the applicable conditions of zoning approval and shall inform the applicant of the director's remarks or approval before submission to the technical review committee (TRC). 
(2)  If no conditions of approval apply to the land on which the subdivision is proposed, the developer may choose to either meet with the director informally to discuss the concept of the subdivision or to submit an application for preliminary plat approval. 
(3)  The lots in the major subdivision must front on interior public or private road, which are to be designed according to article III, design standards, division 1, infrastructure requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Site development. 
(1)  The term "site development" means any multifamily or a commercial or industrial project intended to be developed as an entity. Each site development is described, in part, by a site plan, which shows the development in detail. 
(2)  For all multifamily, commercial, or industrial projects, the developer shall submit a concept plan to the director for processing to the TRC that shall comply in all respects to chapter 66, zoning, subsection 66-161(c)(12). 
(3)  Subsequent to the review of the application by the TRC and approval of the concept plan by the director, the applicant shall prepare a detailed site plan to accompany the application for a development permit. (See section 28-52.) 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Secs. 28-41—28-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES 

Sec. 28-50. - Preliminary plat or site development application procedure. 
The application shall include all of the following: 
(a)  A letter stating the general purpose and intent of the plat and a summary of the developer's intentions with respect to whether the streets will be public or private, the amount of open space proposed, the contemplated minimum lot sizes and floor areas of the structures, the amount and percent of lot coverage and any other aspect of the development the applicant chooses to express; 
(b)  The applicant shall state on the plat that it includes all of the applicant's ownership in that location, including any contiguous parcels owned by the applicant. 
(c)  Include the payment of a fee listed in the schedule of fees. 
(d)  Include four copies of the preliminary plat (see section 28-52). 
(e)  Include four copies of a traffic study. 
(f)  Upon receipt, the director shall have five working days to determine if the application is complete and to so advise the applicant the reason(s) why the plat has not been accepted for processing. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
Sec. 28-51. Preliminary plat—General. 
The preliminary plat and site development shall be prepared and sealed by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, at a convenient scale of not more than one inch equals 200 feet, shall be prepared in ink, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence and referenced to an index sheet if more than one is used. Such sheets as the preliminary plat is drawn upon shall be consistent with current engineering practices. Subdivision plat details shall conform to the requirements of the state board of professional registration and the Plat Act. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-52. - Features. 
The preliminary plat or site development shall show the following: 
(a)  Name of the development. The applicant shall submit a proposed name for the subdivision or site. 
(b)  A notarized affidavit which includes the name, address and telephone number of the current legal owner or authorized agent of the property, and a citation of the last instrument conveying the title of each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision. This may not be applicable to a site development. 
(c)  Citation of any existing right-of-way or easements whether legal or in use by someone other than the property owner affecting the property. 
(d)  Provide existing covenants on the property, if any, and submit proposed covenants if so intended. 
(e)  Name and address, including the telephone number of the professional persons or firms responsible for the design, for design of public improvements and for surveys. 
(f)  Location of property by map and parcel numbers. 
(g)  Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds, historical sites, natural areas of aesthetic beauty or interest, railroad right-of-way, watercourses, wetlands, and floodplains. 
(h)  Location, width, type and name of all existing or platted streets or other public or private ways within or adjacent to the tract. 
(i)  Approximate location of future roads and their classification as may be shown on the Joint Putnam County/City of Eatonton Joint Comprehensive Plan. 
(j)  Name and locations of adjoining developments and current property owners. 
(k)  Locations and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, bridges or above and underground structures and aerial utilities within the tract and adjacent thereto. 
(l)  Approximate locations and sizes of existing permanent buildings and utility stations on the tract. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-53. - Proposed improvements for subdivisions and site developments. 
The following proposed improvements shall be indicated on preliminary plats and site plans: (Site developments need not comply with the items denoted by an asterisk (*) unless the Director deems it appropriate to require them.) 
(a)  * Location and pavement width of all proposed streets, easements, and other public and private ways, including rights-of-way. 
(b)  Require minimum building setback lines. Site developments shall show setbacks for all property lines. 
(c)  Locations, dimensions and areas in square feet of all proposed and existing lots. Site development plans shall be drawn to an engineering scale of one inch equals 200 feet (or as otherwise may be approved by the director) and showing all proposed improvements to the property, including but not limited to: buildings, parking, landscaping, lighting, stormwater detention, vehicular ingress and egress, total floor area and/or number of dwelling units, total land area, building coverage, and building height (in feet and floors). Development in the village zoning district may be required by the director to show more details related to the utilization of exterior spaces proposed adjacent to and among the proposed improvements. 
(d)  Total area of the subdivision/site development expressed in acres and decimals of an acre. If less than one acre, the area shall be described in square feet. 
(e)  Location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public dedication or private reservation, or landscaping with designation of purpose thereof. This is generally not required of a site development, however, it is required of developments within the village zoning district. 
(f)  Indications of all uses proposed by the applicant. If the site development is in the village zoning district, the floor area relationship between commercial and residential uses must be indicated. 
(g)  * Proposed names of all streets. The developer shall submit a list of alternate street names. 
(h)  * Blocks shall be consecutively numbered and lettered. The blocks in numbered additions to existing subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered and lettered consecutively throughout the various additions. 
(i)  * All lots in each block shall be numbered consecutively. 
(j)  If the subdivision or site development is to be developed in phases coincidental with ensuing development permits, the phases shall be shown and numbered consecutively. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-54. - Phasing of development. 
(a)  The applicant may choose to develop the land contained within the preliminary plat or site development in phases (segments of the whole) with a single development permit for each phase. The phasing plan must be shown on preliminary plat or the site development. 
(b)  The director may impose such conditions upon the distribution and/or size of the phases as he or she may deem necessary to ensure the orderly development and to minimize unnecessary construction traffic among the new homes and uses in the development. The boundaries of each development permit shall coincide with the phases shown. 
(c)  Any change in the size or distribution of the phases shown on the approved preliminary plat or site development will require the submission of a new phasing plan for the entire application, and if the new phasing plan arrangement is found to be significant by the director, he or she may require an entirely new application and a new review per the requirements of this chapter applicable at the time of the new application. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-55. - Preliminary plat and site development certifications. 
The following certifications shall be included on the preliminary plat and site development and shall be endorsed prior to the submission of the preliminary plat or site development for approval: 
(a)  Engineer's certification. An engineer and surveyor's certification seal with overriding signature. 
(b)  Owner's certification. 
The owner of this land, as shown on this plat, or his agent, certifies that he/she is the owner of the property contained within this plat or site development and that the plat or site development was made from an actual survey, and accurately portrays the existing land and its features and the proposed developments and improvements thereto. 

 
(c)  Sanitarian certification. 
I hereby certify that all the proposed lots of this subdivision meet the requirements of the Putnam County Health Department for septic tanks. 

 
(d)  Certification of preliminary plat/site development approval. 
NOT FOR RECORDING 
I hereby certify that this (preliminary plat) (site development) was found to comply with the requirements of all Putnam County ordinances and regulations and conditions of zoning approval (if any) applicable at the time of this approval by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. 

 
(e)  Infrastructure certifications. 
(1)  Public works. 
I hereby certify that the construction plans for all proposed roads meet the requirements of the Putnam County Development Regulations. 

 
(2)  Eatonton Putnam Water and Sewer Authority (EPWSA). 
I hereby certify that the construction plans for the proposed water system meet the installation requirements of this department. 

 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
Sec. 28-56. - Preliminary plat and site development review considerations. 
The following criteria may be used to evaluate the proposal: 
(a)  Conditions of zoning approval by the board of commissioners, if any. 
(b)  The current zoning and existing use. 
(c)  The intended use of the property. 
(d)  Consideration of adaptation of the design to the topography, watershed and vegetation and the effect of surface drainage from the development on downstream properties, watercourses, and impoundments. 
(e)  Parking, buffer zones, open spaces, utility services and external accessibility. 
(f)  Existing and projected traffic. 
(g)  Noise and lights. 
(h)  Pollution effects, if any. 
(i)  Conformity with current land use regarding lot sizes and street circulation. 
(j)  Effect on governmental services. 
(k)  Development patterns as specified by the Putnam County and City of Eatonton Comprehensive Plan. 
(l)  Public health and safety. The consideration of any other factors relevant to the protection or promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare as to the unrestricted use of property. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-57. - Preliminary plat and site development processing. 
(a)  The director of the planning and development department shall review the application and formulate the changes necessary to cause it to comply with the conditions of zoning approval (if any) and the applicable ordinances, regulations, and statutes the director is charged to enforce. 
(b)  The technical review committee (TRC) shall review all preliminary and final plats, concept and site developments for compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the various jurisdictions and agencies of government represented. 
(c)  The director shall distribute copies of the application to the representatives on the TRC no later than one week prior to the review meeting. The director shall prepare a list of the applications, stating the location, applicant's name or corporate name, number of lots, proposed use, zoning district, date of the TRC meeting and any other information the director deems appropriate, transmitting it to each member of the board of commissioners for their information and shall post the list in locations obvious to the public. 
(d)  The technical review committee shall hold a meeting to discuss and review the preliminary plat or site development application within 45 days of the date of application. The applicant or authorized representative is required to attend the scheduled meeting of the TRC. If attendance is not achieved, application shall not be discussed and shall be rescheduled for the next meeting of the TRC when the applicant can attend. 
(e)  The applicant shall make any changes required to the application, delivering such to the director. 
(f)  Once all the comments of the members of the TRC have been satisfied and so noted in writing on the copy of the revised application, the director may approve the application and thus certify on the application where indicated that it meets all the requirements of the applicable regulations. 
(g)  The director shall retain a copy of the approved application in the official departmental files. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-58. - Construction plans for subdivisions and site developments. 
Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals 100 feet and details at a scale sufficient for the purpose. Plans sheets shall be the same as used for the plat or site development. Construction plans shall include: 
(a)  Cover sheet. The cover sheet shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the development. 
(2)  The owner's name, address and phone number. 
(3)  All endorsements required under section 28-55. 
(4)  A site location sketch to aid in location of the subdivision. 
(5)  A revision block that shows the date and description of all revisions and the initials of the person making the revision. The format for the revision block is: revision date, description of revision, and name of person who checked and approved the revision. 
(b)  Plan sheets. Plan sheets showing all street alignment, station number, curve data, angles of intersections, curb and gutter locations, sidewalks and improvement location. 
(c)  Profile sheets. Profile sheets showing all proposed and existing elevations and vertical curve data along the centerline of all streets. 
(d)  Utility plans sheets. Plan sheets showing the location, size and specification of all water, sewer and natural gas and other utilities to be installed by the subdivider, or others showing connections to existing systems. 
(e)  Grading and contour plan sheets. Plan sheets showing the proposed grading of existing and finished contours. The contour interval shall be two feet. 
(f)  Construction detail sheets. Construction detail sheets showing the details of all construction to include, but not be limited to: road paving, cross sections, sewers details, fire hydrants, thrust blocks, dams, retention ponds, retaining walls, junction boxes, pavement patches, culverts, sidewalks, French drains, ditches, slope protection, energy dissipation pads and other details needed to clarify the requirements of the design. The designer shall use state DOT standards available to simplify the construction. 
(g)  Road construction and/or road closure permit. A permit to modify or alter a county road and/or to temporarily close a county road must be obtained from the planning and development department. Any such modification or alteration must conform to section 28-67 of the chapter and the county must be indemnified against any loss, liability or expense in connection with the road construction or temporary road closure. 
(h)  Seal of engineer. Each construction plan profile, detail and cover sheet shall bear the seal and signature of the registered engineer under whose supervision the design was done. 
(i)  Fee. Required processing fee as found in the schedule of fees. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-59. - Land disturbance application. 
See chapter 30, environment, section 30-34. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-60. - Issuance of development permit. 
Following approval of preliminary plat or site development applications, construction plan, and land disturbance application, the director shall issue a development permit. If construction does not commence within six months from the date of the issuance of the development permit, such development permit shall be null and void and the developer shall be required to submit new applications for a development permit. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Secs. 28-61—28-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 28-65. - Design guidelines for major subdivisions and site developments. 
(a)  Continuation of existing streets. Where feasible, existing streets shall be extended for access into the subdivision. Such extensions shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall be less than the required width. However, street extensions shall connect developments of similar uses only as defined by the zoning ordinance. In no case shall a street in an industrial development be connected to a street in a residential zoning district. Traffic loading on the existing street system must be considered. If the additional traffic volume is determined by the director to exceed the design specifications of the existing street and/or the nearest street intersection, the director may deny access or require the developer to improve the existing street and/or intersection approaches to accommodate the additional volume. 
(b)  Linear street vertical grades. Maximum and minimum linear street grades shall be as follows: 
(1)  County arterial street: not more than six percent. 
(2)  County collector street: not more than ten percent. 
(3)  Local streets: not more than 12 percent. 
(4)  Alleys: not more than 12 percent. 
(c)  Horizontal curvature . The minimum radii of centerline road curvature shall be as follows: 
(1)  County arterial street: 300 feet. 
(2)  County collector and local street: 200 feet. 
(3)  Local streets: 100 feet. 
(d)  Tangents. Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length not less than 50 feet on local streets and 100 feet on county collectors and 200 feet on county arterials. 
(e)  Vertical alignment. There shall be a horizontal sight distance at all intersections, when measured from a height of three feet, according to the requirements of Chapter Three of the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
(f)  Intersection design. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 78 degrees. Street intersections must be separated from each other in accordance with Table 3-1 in Chapter Three of the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
(g)  Cross slope. Street and road cross slopes shall be at least two percent (one-fourth inch per foot) measured tangent to the center run of the road. Appropriate cross slope design considerations shall be made for transitions into and through super elevations at curves. 
(h)  Driveway turnouts/curb cuts. Where deemed necessary by the director, the driveway or entrance (residential or industrial) shall have a paved turnout, meeting Georgia DOT specifications. Commercial driveways or entrances shall have a paved turnout, meeting Georgia DOT specifications, extending from the edge of the existing pavement of at least 20 feet into the property. 
(1)  Turnouts/curb cuts shall be designed and constructed so as not to release runoff waters onto the roadway but rather into curb inlets or roadside ditches before reaching the existing street/road. Runoff waters from a 25-year or less storm event are not allowed to drain off a driveway onto a street/road. In high traffic/volume areas (typically county arterials and collectors) designs accommodating larger storm events will be required. 
(2)  No curb cut shall be located closer to the nearest radius return of the intersection of two streets than 100 feet. Curb cut spacing shall adhere to Table 3-1 "Driveway Spacing Criteria" in Chapter Three of the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control unless the width of the parcel requesting the curb cut is insufficient to achieve this standard because of the existence of curb cuts on adjacent parcels. In which case the director shall determine which location protects the rights of the property owner and the protection of safety of the public. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 15, 2016 changed the title of § 28-65 from "design" guidelines for subdivisions and site developments to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 28-66. - Required improvements. 
The requirements of this section shall apply to every major subdivision and site development and shall be planned for and provided by the developer by installation and/or payment prior to the approval of the final plat. Where indicated by an asterisk (*), the requirement is not necessarily applicable to a site development as shall be determined by the director in consultation with the developer. 
(a)  * Street names. All streets shall be named and marked with MUTCD signs. Street names shall have the approval of the director and shall not duplicate, nor closely approximate phonetically or visually, the name of any other street in the county. A street that is in alignment with an existing street shall continue the name of the existing street. 
(b)  Streets. All streets, whether public, private or curb cuts, shall be designed, constructed and paved in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  No street or drainage structure shall be accepted by the county until it shall have been in public use for two years (two-year warranty period) and all repairs required by the county have been completed to the satisfaction of the county. 
(2)  To initiate the two-year warranty period the county must conduct an inspection of all drainage structures, the road, grading, grassing, and the use of best management practices for soil and erosion control. The developer/owner must post a surety or cash bond per section 28-82 of this chapter. 
(3)  It is the responsibility of the developer to maintain all streets until they are accepted by the county, and issue a surety bond to the county, to provide for such maintenance and repair, should the developer not be able to conduct the required repairs, as provided by this chapter. 
(4)  The developer shall install all necessary traffic control signs, signals, and street name signs as required by the county or GDOT at its sole cost. In addition, the subdivider shall provide suitable ground cover, such as grass, on all unpaved areas of street right-of-way or other public areas. All grassing shall be done to DOT specifications. 
(5)  If at the end of the two-year warranty period the road or drainage structures are not in good maintenance, the county will require the developer/owner to make such repairs to bring the road or drainage structures into good maintenance. If after 60 days notice from the county the developer/owner has not made the required repairs, the county may seek to call the bond or other surety. 
(c)  Utilities. 
(1)  Generally. All water, sewer, natural gas lines and hydrants shall be along street rights-of-way. The water, sewer and natural gas lines shall be underground and located on back slopes of rights-of-way across drainage ditches away from pavements in order to prevent damage to the pavement during utility construction or maintenance. Only gravity-fed sewer lines may be placed under the pavement. Where required, because of topography, location of existing utilities or other factors, the director may allow the installation of utilities in other areas; however, the alternate location must be shown on the construction drawings and the as-built survey. Water and sewer lines must be on opposite sides of the street. Underground power lines must be located above and four feet to the side of either a water or sewer line. 
(2)  Water. If a public or private water system is proposed to service the area of the subdivision within two years of the approval of the subdivision, water mains shall be installed by the subdivider within the subdivision with connections to each lot in each phase extended to the lot lines. If a public water system is available within 1,000 feet of either a residential or commercial development, a hookup to such is required. If a public or private water system is not available, the subdivider shall provide a water supply through a community water system or individual wells in conformity with the regulations of the county health department and this chapter. 
(3)  Sewer. If a public sanitary sewer system is proposed to service the area of the subdivision within two years of the approval of the subdivision, sewer mains shall be installed by the subdivider within the subdivision with connections to each lot in each phase extended to the lot line. If a public sewer system is not available, the subdivider shall provide a community sewage collection and treatment system or individual septic tank systems in conformity with the regulations of the county health department and the state department of natural resources. 
(4)  Fire hydrants (see chapter 32-19 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances). 
(d)  Storm drainage. 
(1)  Design. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and lot drainage patterns for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots and any drainage feature must be capable of handling a 25-year storm event. Sensitive or high-risk areas will require handling larger storm events, which will be the responsibility of the designing engineer. Multifamily, commercial and industrial developments must take particular care in the design of the parking facilities and buildings with respect to the amount and direction of the runoff. 
(2)  Design certification. A professional engineer must certify that the proposed storm drainage improvements and other proposed construction is adequate, complies with the requirements of this chapter, and complies with accepted engineering practice. 
(3)  Connection to existing systems. If a storm system is located reasonably near the proposed development or subdivision, then the development or subdivision must contain an underground storm drainage system, which will be connected to the existing system. Should a storm drainage system not exist then adequate surface drainage facilities shall be installed. The professional engineer must ensure that the existing system is capable of accepting the additional stormwater without surcharging or damaging the existing system. 
(4)  Stormwater management. Stormwater detention facilities or other forms of suitable storage features will be required where more than a five-percent increase in runoff occurs between the calculated pre-developed flows and the calculated post-developed flows. In addition, detention/retention facilities shall be required if the downstream facilities are not adequate to allow increased runoff. If the facility is deemed to be inadequate, the developer can request permission to modify (at his expense) the downstream facilities to allow a reduction in detention facilities as long as no downstream facilities or lands of others are harmed by the change. The maximum predevelopment rational method runoff coefficient ("C" factor) to be utilized while calculating flows shall be 0.25 for flat and rolling terrain and 0.30 for hilly (seven percent plus) terrain. Post development "C" factors to be utilized shall be related to the density of the development and amount of impervious area included in the development. All "C" factors shall be in accordance with accepted Rational Method Runoff Tables published. Calculations utilizing the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) method of determining the runoff shall utilize the SCS soil group tables and covering to determine the SCS CN number to be used in the calculations. Calculations shall be shown for the two-, five-, ten-, and 25-year storm events. Emergency spillways shall be sized to handle a 100-year storm event. For pre-developed flows, the time of concentration (TOC) shall not be less than five minutes. 
(5)  Roadside ditches. Front and back slopes for roadside ditches shall be 3:1 or flatter. Ditches shall be designed to handle at least a 25-year storm event and velocities within the ditch are recommended to be held below two feet per second. Velocities above two feet per second will require additional stabilization practices. Erosion matting meeting DOT specifications is recommended and may be required within any ditch. Check dams or other suitable structures shall be placed in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition. 
(6)  Drainage structures. Where drainage pipes, curb inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, and other structures are utilized, these shall conform to the Georgia DOT Standard Detail Manual, latest edition. 
(7)  Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter meeting Georgia DOT Standard Detail Manual specifications is recommended for any new development. In residential areas, curb and gutter may either be 18 to 24-inch standup ("L" backing) or rollback type. In commercial and industrial areas, 30-inch standup is required. Associated junction boxes, piping, transitions, and other appurtenances shall meet Georgia DOT specifications. 
(e)  Development along arterial or collector streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial or collector street or railroad right-of-way the following are required: 
(1)  In a village, commercial or industrial-manufacturing zoning district of ten acres or more, the following shall apply: a two-lane access road parallel to the arterial or collector, separated from the arterial or collector by a ten-foot wide landscaped strip through which access shall be provided at intervals of no less than 500 feet or whenever coincident with a median break should one exist in the arterial or collector street shall be required. 
(2)  In residential zoning districts (including multifamily), a 20-foot wide nonaccess buffer along the entire length of the back of the lots abutting an arterial or collector street is required. 
(3)  Setbacks from arterial roads: 50 feet. 
(f)  Lot sizes. All lots shall conform to the Putnam County Zoning Ordinance. The arrangement of the subdivision lots and design of the development and the required improvements, however, are controlled by this chapter. 
(g)  * Lot lines. All subdivision side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless otherwise approved by the director in furtherance of creative design models. 
(h)  * Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be required to provide separation of development from an arterial street or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(i)  Easements . The director of the planning and development department may require easements having an adequate width and located along rear and/or side lot lines for utility lines, drainage and underground cables, with provision for access from a public way. The director may also require access easements to existing parcels not otherwise fronting on a public road. 
(j)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips that control access to street and public grounds shall be permitted only when the reserve strip is deeded to the county. 
(k)  Deceleration lanes and center turn lanes. 
(1)  Deceleration lanes or a center turn lane are required if sight distances required by this chapter cannot be achieved or the number of dwelling units in a development exceeds 50, at each entrance to a multifamily or nonresidential development project intersecting a county collector or a county arterial road, or if the director deems either a deceleration or turn lane or both are necessary to protect the safety of the public. 
(2)  Deceleration and turn lane construction standards. 
a.  Deceleration lanes shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. The lane shall be 12 feet in width exclusive of the curb and gutter width. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and a ten-foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the county. 
b.  Left turn lanes may be required if the average daily traffic (ADT) exceeds 2,000 vehicles per day or if the director has knowledge of other information that would warrant a detailed traffic impact study as established by the Georgia Department of Transportation to determine if a left turn is needed. The study shall be prepared in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
c.  Other project access improvements as deemed necessary by the director of the planning and development department in addition to a required deceleration lane in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience, and safety to the motoring public may be required. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 28-67. - Design standards for streets. 
In order to provide for roads suitable in location, width and improvement, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads are hereby required and shall be planned for and provided by the developer, prior to the approval of the development permit. Road classifications may be indicated in the comprehensive plan; otherwise, they shall be determined by the director. The developer shall dedicate and/or deed the required right-of-way to the county at no cost to the county. 
(a)  Rights-of-way. 
(1)  Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
a.  County arterial street: 80 feet. 
b.  County collector street: 60 feet. 
c.  Local street: 60 feet. 
d.  Alleys: 24 feet. 
(b)  Pavement widths. Street pavement widths shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  County arterial street (two lanes not divided): 26 feet without curb and gutter or 24 feet with curb and gutter, 27—28 feet back-to-back. 
(2)  County collector street: 26 feet without curb and gutter or 24 feet with curb and gutter, 27—28 feet back-to-back. 
(3)  Local street: 22 feet with or without curb and gutter and 25—26 feet back-to-back. 
(4)  Alleys: 18 feet (residential); 20 feet (commercial and industrial). 
(c)  Ingress/egress: A minimum of two vehicular ingress/egress points shall be required if the development proposes more than 100 dwelling units. 
(d)  Paving requirements: subgrade. These generally are requirements of subdivisions; however, whenever an existing street is required by this chapter to be widened or decel and turn lanes provided, regardless of the type of development, these standards shall apply. Accel/decel lanes shall meet these requirements or match existing whichever is thickest. 
(1)  Clearing and grubbing right-of-way. This work shall consist of removing and disposing of all vegetation and debris within the right-of-way to a depth of at least three feet below the existing grade for any fill sections and three feet below finished subgrade for any cut sections. Topsoil shall be stripped and stockpiled for later use. All stump holes shall be backfilled and compacted to 95 percent of the Standard Proctor density with a suitable material, Class I or II Soil. 
(2)  Subgrade. This work shall consist of placing, mixing, compacting and shaping the top 24 inches of soil. This work also includes subgrade stabilization. 
(3)  Compaction. The entire surface shall be plowed, harrowed and mixed to a depth of at least six inches. After the material has been thoroughly mixed, the subgrade shall be compacted at 98 percent of the Standard Proctor density. The appropriate roller for the soil to be compacted shall be used. Compaction tests shall be made by a certified engineer or from a certified laboratory. Tests are to be made along the roadbed at 500-foot intervals and at every two feet of fill. Any areas that do not meet with the specified compaction shall be excavated and replaced with suitable material. Test results shall be submitted to the director. The developer shall incur all costs for compaction tests. In addition, proof-rolling of the area shall be required consisting of a ten-ton payload on a standard tandem axle dump truck or other mutually agreed upon piece of loaded machinery, which shall be done in the presence of the public works department representative. 
(4)  Subgrade material. All streets shall consist of Class I or II soil. If such material is not available on-site, it shall be furnished by the developer. 
(e)  Paving requirements: base. 
(1)  Local streets shall have an eight-inch compacted graded aggregate base (GAB) at 98 percent of the Standard Proctor density. 
(2)  County arterial and collectors shall have an eight-inch crusher run stone base or a four-inch compacted graded aggregate base (GAB) compacted to 100 percent of the Standard Proctor density. 
(3)  Compaction testing intervals shall be required as prescribed in subsection 28-67(d)(3). Proof-rolling may also be required per the same paragraph. 
(f)  Paving requirements: prime. All roadways shall be primed in accordance with the requirements of the Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges, Section 412, Bituminous Prime. 
(g)  Paving: wearing surface. 
(1)  Local streets (includes residential/subdivision streets). A two-inch plant mix asphalt type E or F top-wearing surface is to be applied over the eight-inch base. 
(2)  Arterial and collector roads. The minimum paving design for these roads shall be compacted subbase at 98 percent of the Standard Proctor density, an eight-inch graded aggregate base, two inches of type B binder, and one and one-half inches of type E or F top-wearing course. 
(3)  Driveway turnouts/curb cuts. These shall be paved in accordance with the applicable receiving street/road and shall have a minimum radius of 15 feet. Suitable concrete paving is also acceptable for turnouts or curb cuts. Turnout/curb cuts serving single driveways shall have a minimum width after radius of 12 feet with commercial/industrial turnouts/curb cuts meeting requirements of subsection 28-65(h). 
(4)  Commercial/Industrial entrance and lots. Due to the Americans with Disabilities Act, any and all ingress, egress, and parking lots/area including internal roads to and from, shall be paved by suitable conventional asphalt paving or concrete paving. 
(h)  Shoulder requirements. The street right-of-way shall be graded to provide at least a five-foot gently sloping strip (sloped at approximately two percent away from the road) measured from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement on both sides of the street to provide utilities, to prevent the encroachment of driveways into the street surface, and to provide, however, that eight feet shall be provided for walkways off the paved vehicular surface; provided, however, that the director of the planning and development department may waive this requirement in cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that the topography of the land being subdivided is such that compliance with this section would be impractical. Topsoil, striped and stockpiled before paving, shall be spread at a minimum depth of four inches in preparation of the seedbed. The soil shall be thoroughly broken, well pulverized, smoothed and firm before planting. The shoulder shall be seeded with tall fescue and Bermuda applied at a rate of 40 pounds per acre. Mulch shall be used on all seeded areas. The mulch material may consist of rye, oat or wheat straw of good quality, free of seeds of competing species. 
(i)  Culverts. Pipe size shall be determined by standard engineering practices but in no case be sized to handle less than a 25-year post-developed storm event nor shall the time of concentration be less than five minutes for any predeveloped flow calculations. All cross drainpipes for multifamily driveways shall be fully bituminous-coated corrugated metal pipe with the appropriate bedding, inlet/outlet protection, and headwalls/flared-end sections. Installations shall be in accordance with state DOT standards. A hydrology study with pre- and post-development flows and routing computations shall be submitted with the design. Pipe gauge (thickness) shall be as determined by the height of the fill. Minimum cover pipes shall be 12 inches. HDPE (hydro polyethylene) pipe with smooth inside lining may be substituted for the CMP (corrugated metal pipe) if adequate cover can be achieved in accordance with manufacturer specifications. Reinforced concrete (RC) pipe is required under county arterials and county collectors and local streets. Multibarrel culverts are permitted if single barrel pipe installations cannot adequately provide the flow capacity and achieve cover over the pipe. 
(j)  Design standards for cul-de-sacs. Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, as determined by the director, cul-de-sacs (dead-end streets) should not be greater than 1,200 feet in length measured from the nearest (existing or proposed) intersection. It is recommended that they be not greater than 500 feet in length in multifamily areas. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 60 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 40 feet for residential developments and a 70-foot property line radius with an outside pavement radius of 50 feet for commercial and industrial developments. Temporary paved turnarounds are required at the end of any roadway of each phase until the next phase of the development is initiated. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Secs. 28-68—28-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING AND LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 28-75. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Plans required. A parking plan for all but detached single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the director with the building plans. The director shall review the proposed parking plan to ensure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The director shall not allow occupancy or use of a building until it is ascertained that its related parking facilities are completed in accordance with the approved plan. The director shall determine if a provision of the required spaces on a temporary basis on a hard-surfaced subbase (subgrade plus an asphalt first layer or bound crushed stone aggregate) shall satisfy this requirement. 
(b)  Design standards. All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Shall have access to a public street unless otherwise provided in this section. 
(2)  Shall be graded and paved, including access drives, and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control. The director can waive the paving requirement at his/her discretion; however, the handicapped parking spaces must be paved per the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(3)  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curbstones or other similar designations. 
(4)  Each space shall have not less than 153 square feet, and shall be not less than eight and one-half feet wide and 18 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. The size of the parking spaces may be reduced to a minimum area of not less than 120 square feet and shall be not less than eight feet wide and 15 feet deep, exclusive of passageways on not more than 40 percent of the number of spaces required for any one use. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street. Handicap spaces shall be provided in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(5)  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting property or public streets. 
(6)  Shall be separated from sidewalk and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and by a strip of land at least ten feet wide reserved as open space and landscaped. 
(7)  Design of the parking area, including space and driveway arrangement, shall conform to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers. 
(8)  Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. This lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. 
(9)  No parking or loading area shall be established within the required front yard of any multifamily district. 
(10)  The parking area shall be permanently maintained by the owners or the occupants so long as the uses exist. 
(c)  Location. All parking facilities shall be located on the same plot with the use it serves, unless otherwise provided in this section. 
(d)  Joint use of parking facilities. The required parking spaces for a number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night and on Sundays. 
(e)  Use of area. No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment unless permitted by the district in which the area is located. 
(f)  Surface of parking areas. The parking of any vehicle on any lot in any district on other than a surface treated and hardened to accommodate this vehicle is prohibited except as provided in this section. 
(g)  Required spaces. The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lodging: One space per guestroom plus additional spaces for employees. 
(2)  Public assembly: One space per four fixed seats; without seats: One per 35 square feet of largest assembly room. 
a.  Libraries, museums: One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Schools, including kindergarten, play schools and day care centers: One space for each employee, including teachers and administrators, whichever is greater, plus five spaces per classroom for high school and colleges. 
(3)  Health facilities: 
a.  Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, homes for the aged and similar institutional uses (unless otherwise provided in this section.): One space for each four beds, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each four employees, including nurses. 
b.  Mortuaries and funeral parlors: Five spaces per parlor or chapel unit, or one space per four fixed seats. 
(4)  Businesses: 
a.  Automobile repair establishments: One space for each regular employee, plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
b.  Food stores: One space for each 100 square feet of floor area designated for retail sales only. 
c.  Restaurants, including bars, grills, diners, cafes, taverns, nightclubs, lunch counters and similar dining and/or drinking establishments: One space for each four seats provided for patron use, plus one space for each 74 square feet of floor area provided for patron use but not containing seats. 
d.  Office and government buildings: One space for each 300 square feet of ground floor area, plus one space for each 500 square feet of upper floor area. 
e.  Shopping centers: Five and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area designated for retail sales only for centers up to 15 acres in size and eight spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area designated for retail sales only for centers of 15 or more acres in size. 
(5)  Industries: 
a.  Commercial, manufacturing and industrial establishment (not retail): One space for each three employees on the maximum working shift, plus one for each company vehicle on the premises. 
b.  Wholesale establishment: One space for every 50 square feet of customer service area, plus two spaces for each three employees on the maximum working shift, plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
(h)  Off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading shall be established in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
(1)  Design standards. Where required, one or more off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building. A loading berth shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 35 feet by 14 feet overhead clearance. A loading space need not be a full berth but shall be sufficient to allow normal loading of a magnitude appropriate to the property served. The building inspector shall determine the sufficiency of loading space, but in no case shall this space or its use hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
(2)  Required spaces. The number of spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 
a.  Hospital, retail operations, including restaurant and dining facilities within hotel and office buildings, with a total usable floor area of 20,000 square feet or more: One loading berth for every 40,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; one loading space for every 20,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
b.  All other hospitals and retail operations with a gross floor area less than 20,000 square feet, all wholesale and light industrial operations with gross floor area less than 10,000 square feet: one loading space. 
c.  Office buildings: One loading berth per 40,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
d.  Industrial and wholesale operations, gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or over: 
10,000—40,000 square feet ..... 1 
40,000—100,000 square feet ..... 2 
100,000—160,000 square feet ..... 3 
160,000—240,000 square feet ..... 4 
240,000—320,000 square feet ..... 5 
320,000—400,000 square feet ..... 6 
Each 90,000 square feet above 400,000 ..... 1 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-76. - Landscaping requirements. 
The following requirements shall apply to parking lots on commercial, manufacturing, industrial and multifamily properties. This section does not apply to single-family residences and subdivisions. 
(a)  Tree shading . Trees shall be planted and maintained throughout the surface parking lot to ensure that, within 15 years after planting, at least 50 percent of the parking area will be shaded. 
(b)  Shading calculation. 
(1)  Shading shall be calculated by using the projected diameter of the tree crown at 15 years. 
(2)  The TRC shall establish a list of species appropriate for providing shade in parking lots, and shall review site plans of each parking lot to determine whether or not the lot complies with this section. 
(3)  Areas where tree canopies overlap shall not be counted twice. 
(4)  Trees planted in order to comply with the regulations of this section may be selected from the following list: 
a.  Crepe myrtle: Small 
b.  Chinese loropetalum: Small to medium 
c.  Chinese pistache: Medium 
d.  Japanese zelcova: Medium 
e.  Athena elm: Medium 
f.  Shumard oak: Medium to large 
g.  Red/scarlet oak: Medium to large 
h.  Rotundo loba (fruitless sweet gum): Large 
(c)  Surface parking lot subject to shade calculation. 
(1)  Except as provided below, all surfaces on which a vehicle can drive are subject to shade calculation, including all parking stalls; all drives within the property, regardless of length, and including drive-through lanes; and all maneuvering areas, regardless of depth. 
(2)  The following surface areas are exempt from this shade requirement: 
a.  Truck loading area in front of overhead doors. 
b.  Truck maneuvering and parking areas unconnected to and exclusive of any vehicle parking. 
c.  Automobile dealerships display/sales/service/vehicle storage areas (however, required parking for auto dealerships is still subject to shading). 
(d)  Planting requirements . 
(1)  All planted trees shall be species that are large mature shade trees, with an exception allowing small mature shade trees where overhead utility lines would interfere with normal growth (as determined by the director). No trees shall be planted under overhead utility lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. 
(2)  No tree shall be planted close to a building foundation, water line, sewer line, electrical line or natural gas line as follows: 
a.  Five feet for a mature small tree. 
b.  Fifteen feet for a mature large tree. 
(3)  Minimum footprint for planting beds. There shall be a minimum landscaping area of: 
a.  One hundred thirty square feet per tree with irrigation. 
b.  One hundred fifty square feet without irrigation. 
(4)  All landscaping (trees, shrubs, and turf) in the planting areas shall be properly maintained. 
(5)  Concrete curbing is required around the landscaping area so as to protect the tree from moving vehicles. 
(e)  Land disturbance permit procedures (for proposed parking lots). 
(1)  A tree shade plan shall be submitted with other permit drawings as part of the land disturbance permit process. This plan may either be a separate drawing or part of the landscape plan, and shall include the following information: 
a.  Definition of spatial limits. Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, etc. 
b.  Specimen trees or existing stands of trees. 
c.  Tree shade calculations. 
d.  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of tree protection measures. 
e.  It is encouraged (not required) for bioretention areas to be installed in the landscaping areas where shade trees are located. 
(2)  Such plans shall be reviewed by the planning and development department for conformance with applicable zoning conditions and with the parking lot tree ordinance. 
(3)  Issuance of the land disturbance permit is contingent upon approval of the tree shade plan. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Secs. 28-77—28-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINAL PLAT AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION 

Sec. 28-80. - Application procedure and requirements for requests for inspection. 
Following the completion of construction authorized by the development permit of a subdivision or site development, the developer shall submit to the director a written request for a final inspection of the subdivision or site development. As-built surveys of all improvements, structures, buildings, rights-of-way and utilities shall accompany the application in addition to any required bonds or surety and deeds for rights-of-way, and applicable fees. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-81. - Inspection process. 
The director, using the construction drawings of the development permit, shall conduct a field inspection of the subdivision or development seeking compliance with the development permit as issued. If there are deviations from the approved drawings deemed by the director to be significant, the director shall require the developer to submit revised drawings and/or engineering studies (as appropriate), reflecting the changes. The changes shall be further reviewed for compliance with the original approval and comments of the TRC. Once the director is satisfied that compliance with the development permit has been achieved, the developer shall be notified that a final plat may be submitted. A satisfactory inspection of a site development shall cause the director to issue a certificate of completion letter to the developer, stating the development has met all applicable requirements. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-82. - Bonding and surety. 
Written proof that bonds, letters of credit, or escrow accounts for performance and maintenance in the amount of $5,000 per 100 feet of linear roadway (or $6,000 with curb and gutter) payable to Putnam County to pave, repave and/or repair all roads and drainage in said subdivision if deemed necessary at a future date by the planning and development department. The bond, letter of credit, or escrow account will be released by the director upon completion of final inspection of all improvements and verification of completion of all required repairs, provided that: 
(a)  Houses are completed on 75 percent of the lots in a residential subdivision; or 
(b)  Seventy-five percent of the commercial buildings are completed in a commercial subdivision; or 
(c)  Twenty-four months after final inspection, whichever is greater. 
No bonds, letters of credit, or escrow accounts for performance and maintenance shall be accepted by Putnam County until all phases (pursuant to section 28-54) are completed. 
Such bonds or letters of credit shall be issued by a bonding company or commercial bank (or trust company), respectively, authorized to do business in the State of Georgia and having an office or registered representative in the State of Georgia. Such escrow accounts shall be in the name of Putnam County in a commercial bank or trust company located in Putnam County. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
Sec. 28-83. - Final plat certifications. 
In addition to the information required for preliminary plats in section 28-52, the following shall be included on a final plat: 
(a)  Location and dimension of any buffer, landscape strip, no-access easement as required by this chapter and any additional information requested by the TRC. 
(b)  Building setback lines along streets with dimensions. 
(c)  Lots numbered in numerical order. 
(d)  The following certifications: 
(1)  Final surveyor's certificate: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct as to the property lines and all improvements shown thereon, and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist, and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown. The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in _______ feet and an angular error of _______ per angle point, and was adjusted using _______ rule. This plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in _______ feet, and contains a total of _______ acres. The equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements herein was ________. 

 
(2)  Owner's acknowledgement and declaration: 
STATE OF GEORGIA, PUTNAM COUNTY 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates by this Acknowledgement and Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, sewer collectors, lift stations, drains, easements, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown. 

 
(3)  Final plat approval: 
The Director of the Planning and Development Department or designee certifies that this plat complies with the Putnam County Development Regulations. 
DATED THIS _______ DAY OF ________, 20___. 
_____
DIRECTOR, PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
(4)  Health department certification (for subdivisions served by septic tanks): 
The lots shown hereon have been reviewed by the Putnam County Health Department and with the exception of lots _______ are approved for development. Each lot is to be reviewed by the Putnam County Health Department and approved for septic tank installation prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
DATED THIS _______DAY OF ________, 20 ___. 
BY: _____ 
TITLE: _____ PUTNAM COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT 
(5)  Infrastructure certifications: 
a.  Public works. 
I hereby certify that the road(s) meet the requirements of the Putnam County Development Regulations. 

 
b.  Eatonton Putnam Water and Sewer Authority (EPWSA). 
I hereby certify that the water system meets the installation requirements of this department. 

 
(6)  Board of commissioners: 
a.  The Putnam County Board of Commissioners hereby accepts this final plat. 
DATED THIS _______DAY OF ________, 20 ___. 
___________ 
Chairman, Board of Commissioners 
AND 
___________ 
County Clerk 
b.  Board of commissioners' acknowledgement of surety bonds of performance and maintenance for dedication and deed of rights-of-way. 
The Putnam County Board of Commissioners does hereby acknowledge receipt of surety bond for performance and maintenance of the right-of-way with improvements and to acknowledge receipt by dedication and deed the right-of-way subject to final inspection. 
DATED THIS _______DAY OF ________, 20 ___. 
___________ 
Chairman, Board of Commissioners 
AND 
___________ 
County Clerk 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Amend. of 3-18-08) 
Sec. 28-84. - Final plat submission and approval. 
The following shall constitute an application for final plat approval: 
(a)  Certification of the name, current mailing address and telephone number of the current owner(s) of the property contained within the boundaries of the final plat, provided by the clerk of the court. 
(b)  Dedication deeds for all easements, streets, and rights-of-way. 
(c)  The required processing fee, including the cost to record the plat with the clerk of the court. 
(d)  Two copies of the as-built survey of all improvements with embossed seals and original signature of a registered land surveyor. 
(e)  A time-stable reproducible original of the final plat with the required certifications (see section 28-83 for certifications). 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-85. - Approval of and recordation of the final plat. 
(a)  The review of the final plat shall conform to the same requirements of the preliminary plat found in section 28-52 and section 28-53 of this article. 
(b)  Once the members of the TRC are satisfied their individual requirements have been met and the director has conducted an on-site inspection of all the improvements authorized by the applicable development permit and shown on the as-built survey and is satisfied all requirements have been met, the director shall notify the developer the final plat is ready for signature and recordation. 
(c)  The director and county sanitarian shall sign the appropriate certificates stating all applicable requirements have been met. 
(d)  The director shall transmit the final plat and bond to the clerk of board of commissioners who shall place the final plat on the board of commissioners agenda for acceptance of the bond, dedication deeds, and the final plat for acceptance by the board of commissioners and signature of the chairperson of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The director shall then record the final plat with the clerk of the superior court and provide the developer with two copies. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-86. - Vested rights. 
No vested rights shall accrue any plat by reason of preliminary or final approval until the actual signing of the final plat by the chairman of the board of commissioners and recordation of the signed final plat with the clerk of the superior court. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-87. - Acceptance of previously constructed private roads. 
In accordance with this chapter, the board of commissioners may accept for maintenance any previously constructed private roads within the boundaries of the county. Upon dedication by the property owners of the private roads, the board of commissioners shall have the sole discretion to accept the same for maintenance on condition that: 
(1)  The roads were constructed in accordance with the established standards of the county, meet all applicable regulations concerning roads contained in this chapter and were completed prior to January 1, 2005; 
(2)  The roads have been surveyed by a licensed land surveyor who has prepared an as-built survey as described in section 28-80, which was either previously submitted to and approved by the director or planning department in accordance with the preliminary and final plat approval requirements codified at the time of construction or which has been recently prepared and submitted to the director in accordance with the preliminary and final plat application process currently established; and 
(3)  All independent and county inspections requirements have been satisfied, including completion of core sample tests by an approved and accredited engineering firm that is a member of the American Society for Testing and Materials on areas of the road designated by the county and performed no greater than 90 days prior to the request for acceptance, which indicate the roads are equal to the current constructed road standards as established by the county or within an acceptable deviation as recommended by the director and the county inspector. 
Further, upon satisfaction of these conditions, the board of commissioners may waive the bonding requirements described in section 28-82. 
( Amend. of 8-22-2013 ) 
Secs. 28-88—28-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 28-100. - Modification. 
The owner or developer of land may request the board of commissioners to grant a modification of the development regulations to permit what is currently not authorized. Such request shall be referred to the TRC, which shall render a recommendation to the board of commissioners. All modifications shall be heard at a noticed public hearing and processed as a text amendment of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-101. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the director of the planning and development department and TRC shall have the right of appeal to the planning and zoning commission, if such appeal is filed with the director of the planning and development department within ten days of the rendering of the decision by the director of the planning and development department. 
(b)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the planning and zoning commission regarding any matter shall have the right of appeal to the board of commissioners, if such appeal is filed with the director of the planning and development department within ten days of the rendering of the decision by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of commissioners regarding any subdivision matter shall have the right of appeal to a court of law if such appeal is filed with the clerk of court within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 28-102. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of the planning and development department to enforce this chapter, and to bring to the attention of the board of commissioners any violation or lack of compliance herewith. 
(b)  No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision or development or an existing subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the director of the planning and development department in accordance with provisions of this chapter and filed with the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(c)  The subdivision of any lot or parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease, shall not be permitted except as provided for by the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot site subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with or violates any of the regulations of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-103. - Civil enforcement. 
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of this chapter; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation; to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in section 28-105. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-104. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, covered or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the director of the planning and development department, or any other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this chapter and require the presence of the violator in the magistrate's court; or institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent this unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate this violation or to prevent the occupancy of this building, structure or land. Where a violation of this chapter exists with respect to a structure or land, the director of the planning and development department may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 28-105. - Penalties. 
Any firm, person or corporation that shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as they exist or as they may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Any violation hereof shall be regarded as a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year's imprisonment and/or a fine of $500.00. Each day that this violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(2)) 

Chapter 29 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

Sec. 29-1. - Disorderly conduct—Defined. 
Any of the following behaviors or activities shall constitute the offense of disorderly conduct: 
(a)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; 
(b)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(c)  Any person who shall, without provocation, use to or of another, in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which, as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances, will, when used to or of another person in his or her presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words;" 
(d)  Any person who, without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone, email, text message, internet or any other digital or electronic communication to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; 
(e)  Any person who shall, by acts of violence or threats thereof, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(f)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or shall assemble or congregate with another or others for such prohibited purpose; 
(g)  Any person who assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(h)  Any person who is in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages; 
(i)  Any person who aids or abets or encourages a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace; 
(j)  Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; 
(k)  Any person who appears in public in an intoxicated state or condition, whether said intoxication is manifested by consumption of an alcoholic beverage and/or drugs; 
(l)  Any person who exposes any part of his or her body in an indecent or rude manner; 
(m)  Any person who by and in any manner, creates loud noises which disrupt, disturb or otherwise interfere with the peace and tranquility of the public; 
(n)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed, and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens; 
(o)  Any person who loiters along public sidewalks, streets or public ways of the county; 
(p)  Any person who fails or refuses to remove himself or herself from the private property of another when requested to do so by the owner, an authorized representative of the owner, or the occupant(s) thereof; 
(q)  Any person who congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and fails to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer or other lawful authority; 
(r)  Any person who commits the offense of disorderly conduct at a youth sports event on publicly owned property shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  As provided in section 1-13; and 
(2)  A mandatory minimum period of probation of 60 days, less any days served in jail. The judge shall ban the defendant from all youth sports events on publicly owned property as a term and condition of probation; 
(s)  For the purposes of this section, "youth sports event" means any sports competition or sports practice involving one or more teams of persons under the age of 19 years. 
(Amend. of 10-18-2011(2)) 
Sec. 29-2. - Penalties for violations. 
Every person convicted of disorderly conduct, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both by such fine and imprisonment, provided that no provision of this chapter shall be construed so as to deprive the court imposing the sentence of the power given by law to stay or suspend the execution of such sentence or to place the defendant on probation. 
(Amend. of 10-18-2011(2)) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; roads and bridges, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted May 18, 2010, has been treated as superseding former art. II, §§ 30-31.1—30-37, and enacting a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Oct. 7, 1997; an amendment adopted Sept. 7, 2001; an ordinance adopted Feb. 17, 2004; and an amendment adopted April 7, 2006. 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 30-31.1. - Purposes, repealer, severability. 
The governing authority of Putnam County, Georgia, to encourage the effective use of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the county's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to minimize the possible adverse effect of soil erosion and sedimentation on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of legal measures affecting soil erosion and sedimentation controls, does hereby adopt this Putnam County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance and hereby repeal all ordinances or portions thereof which are in conflict with this article. Every provision of this article shall be severable from all other provisions. A finding by any court of the illegality or unenforceability of any provision or provisions hereof shall not operate to void this article, but, instead, all provisions not specifically and explicitly held to be illegal or unenforceable shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 30-31.2. - Applicability and effect. 
This article shall be effective in each jurisdiction shown in section 30-31.1, on its date of adoption by the governing authority of said jurisdiction without regard to whether or not any other jurisdiction has adopted this article. After said effective date, no construction project or land-disturbing activity shall be undertaken in the unincorporated area of Putnam County unless it is in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this article. The effect of this article, as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
(a)  To establish a permit system to allow various land-disturbing activities, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this article; 
(b)  To comply with various state and federal requirements which govern land-disturbing activities; 
(c)  To prohibit all land-disturbing activities not expressly permitted by this article; and 
(d)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 30-31.3. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth in this section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Agricultural operations means raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, ratites, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products. 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Board of Commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County. 
Buffer means an area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
CPSEC means a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to an excavated surface; also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert. 
Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
District means the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow of water and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. (See also: Sediment.) 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the State General permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 30-33(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 30-32(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice of hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law codified as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin by wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. (See also: Erosion.) 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and Code Section [O.C.G.A. §] 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying wholly within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout waters means all streams or portions of streams within a watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provision of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.edp.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are those supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but which are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding and covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010; Ord. of 9-18-2018(1) ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land within the unincorporated area of Putnam County. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as it is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first-order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in definitions and also O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for the use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticulture, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsection 30-33(c)(15) [and] (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such exempt forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road-construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permitted for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 30-33. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans for such activities. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 30-33(b) [and] (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity not exempt from the provisions of this article and the NPDES General Permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 30-33(b) [and] (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with this paragraph 2 of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit for issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 Nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm-water fisheries or by more than ten Nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which the failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 30-33(c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the current Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts, except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsections 30-33(b)(2) of this article. 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure is to be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkhead and seawalls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the down stream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970," and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-7-.01(r), at www.edp.georgia.gov, provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 30-33(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010; Ord. of 9-18-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 30-34. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article and other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Putnam County without first obtaining a permit to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 30-34(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  Local permitting fees shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area based on the chart below. 

 
Examples: 
1.  For 14 acres of disturbed land the fee is calculated as such: 
5 × ($100.00) + 5 × ($60.00) + 4 × ($20.00) = $880.00 
2.  For seven acres of disturbed land the fee is calculated as such: 
5 × ($100.00) + 2 × ($60.00) = $620.00 
In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8, half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 30-33(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 30-34(b)(6), has been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond, said bond may be in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond, or any part thereof, to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 30-33(b) [and] (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stake holder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable, but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district, and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 30-33(c)(15) [and] (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 30-34(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in [the] title is in violation of this article. The holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010; Ord. of 9-18-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 30-35. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The local issuing authority will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state a time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspection of the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to code section [O.C.G.A. §] 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010; Ord. of 9-18-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 30-36. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and end each subsequent violation, the director of the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply with the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provision of subsection 30-34(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, Magistrate Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 30-37. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permit, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 30-38. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within ten days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal, provided that a notice of appeal is filed with the planning and development department. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee of $50.00. The board of commissioners shall take action on the appeal after a public hearing to be conducted pursuant to the rules for a public hearing found in the zoning ordinance then in effect. The board of commissioners shall hear all such appeals within 30 days of filing the notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Putnam County. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 30-39. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the first day of July, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, not the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Amend. of 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 30-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER RESOURCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-41. - Purposes, repealer, severability. 
The governing authority of Putnam County, Georgia, to maintain and enhance the county's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to preserve environmentally sensitive water resources, to preserve water quality, and to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment within the county, does hereby adopt this Water Resource District Ordinance and hereby repeals all ordinances or portions thereof which are in conflict with this article. Provisions of the zoning ordinance which are not identical with a provision of this article shall not be considered to be conflicting. This article and the zoning ordinance shall be considered in pari materia and the more stringent provisions shall apply. The maps and overlays referred to in this article are incorporated herein and made a part hereof by said reference and shall be supplements to the maps which are a part of the zoning ordinance. Every provision of this article shall be severable from all other provisions. A finding by any court of the illegality or unenforceability of any provision or provisions hereof shall not operate to void this article but, instead, all provisions not specifically and explicitly held to be illegal or unenforceable shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 30-42. - Applicability and effect. 
No person shall begin any building or land development activity or process within the unincorporated area of Putnam County unless it is in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this article. The effect of this article, as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
(a)  To establish and delineate groundwater recharge districts, wetlands districts, and water supply watershed districts, (collectively referred to as water resource districts) which supplement all districts designated in the zoning ordinance; 
(b)  To establish criteria to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution form spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections, and other development pressures; 
(c)  To establish criteria to promote the wise use of wetlands and to protect them from alterations which would significantly affect or reduce their primary characteristics and functions which affect water quality, flood plain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; 
(d)  To establish criteria to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future public water supply for residents, minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to said water supply, and to maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds; 
(e)  To prohibit building and land development activities not expressly permitted by this article; and 
(f)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 30-43. - Interpretations and definitions. 
In this article, words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth in this section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Aquifer. Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Buffer. A natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Corridor. All land within the buffer areas and other setback areas required by section 30-46 of this article. 
DRASTIC. The standard system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) document EPA-600/2-87-035. The DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility. 
DNR. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Generalized wetlands map. A map which shows the general location of all wetlands within the boundaries of Putnam County. 
Hazardous waste. Any waste which, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. The EPA has developed a list of hazardous wastes based on corrosiveness, reactivity, and toxicity, the current edition of which is hereby incorporated herein. 
High pollution susceptibility area. An area with a DRASTIC rating of more than 181 and so designated by DNR's Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 20, as supplemented by the Putnam County Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map. 
Impervious surface. A man-made structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Jurisdictional wetlands. An area which meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination. A delineation of jurisdictional wetlands boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by § 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC § 1344, as amended. 
Perennial stream. A stream which flows throughout the whole year. 
Pollution susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility maps. Maps showing relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR), using the DRASTIC methodology, and characterizing land areas as having high, medium, and low potential susceptibility for pollution of groundwater. 
Recharge area. Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Regulated activity. Any activity which will, or may be reasonably expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States, except those activities exempted in § 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
Reservoir boundary. The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
River/stream bank. The rising ground bordering a river or stream which confines the water to its natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Significant recharge area. Those areas designated as such by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in the map titled "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrologic Atlas 18" (current edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type, thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant recharge areas are generally as follows in the Piedmont area of Georgia, which includes Putnam County: 
Rocks have little primary porosity, with most groundwater being stored in the overlying soils. The significant recharge areas are those with thicker soils. Thick soils in the Piedmont area are generally characterized by two or more geologic contacts per four square miles and slopes of less than eight percent. 
Utility. Public or private water or sewer piping systems or pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, access facilities to bodies of water, storm water drainage systems, railroads, and similar installations and activities. 
Water resource district. An area in which this article imposes a set of requirements governing the use of land in said district in addition to those requirements imposed by the zoning ordinance. 
Water supply reservoir. A government-owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more government-owned public drinking water systems, but excluding the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed. The area of land upstream of a government-owned public drinking water intake. A small water supply watershed is a water supply watershed less than 100 square miles in size. A large water supply watershed is a water supply watershed more than 100 square miles in size. 
Wetlands. Areas inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration which support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions involving source of water which causes soil saturation. 
Zoning ordinance. Any ordinance properly adopted by the governing authority of Putnam County which delineates various zoning districts in the unincorporated areas of Putnam County and which restricts land use within said zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2000, § 3; Ord. of 9-17-2002; Ord. of 9-18-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 30-44. - Groundwater recharge area districts. 
Groundwater recharge areas are vulnerable to residential and commercial development activities and agricultural activities. Development usually causes an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in groundwater recharge areas can alter or impair the recharge characteristics, thereby decreasing the supply of groundwater. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste, and septic tank effluents contribute to a deterioration in groundwater quality and can threaten the health of people who rely on water drawn from wells. 
(1)  District delineation. The groundwater recharge area districts in Putnam County are shown on and identified as such on DNR's Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 18 (current edition), as supplemented by the Putnam County Groundwater Recharge Areas Map. At the time of adoption of this article, all of Putnam County has been designated as an area with low pollution susceptibility on DNR's Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20. 
(2)  Limitations on land use. In addition to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, limitations on land use within groundwater recharge areas shall be as follows: 
a.  There shall be no landfills. 
b.  There shall be no new permits for the land disposal of hazardous waste. 
c.  Facilities permitted or to be permitted to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste shall perform such operations on an impermeable pad having a spill and leak collection system. 
d.  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a volume of 660 gallons or more shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
e.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
1.  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet in capacity; or 
3.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet in capacity. 
Any liner required by this subsection shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of at least one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. The average size of existing agricultural waste impoundments in Putnam County is about 15 acre-feet. The recommended vertical hydraulic conductivity in clay can be compacted by the use of sheep's-foot rollers or pans with heavy rubber tires. 
f.  New homes served by septic tank/drain field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DHR Table MT-1). These minimum lot sizes may be increased based on consideration of other factors as set out in §§ A—F of the DHR manual. 
1.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
3.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
g.  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitation as identified on Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DHR Table MT-2). These minimum lot sizes may be increased based on consideration of other factors as set out in §§ A—F of the DHR manual. 
1.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
3.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
h.  If the applicable zoning ordinance requires a larger lot size than that required by subsections f. and g., the larger lot size shall be used. 
i.  Any lot of record on the date of the adoption of this article shall be exempt from the lot size standards required by subsections f. and g. 
j.  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR Manual and the lot size standards required by subsections f. and g. 
k.  Facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in § 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces and in accordance with any applicable federal or state spill prevention requirements and state and local fire code requirements. 
l.  The design of any new facility for the spray irrigation of wastewater sludge in any high pollution susceptibility area shall comply with DNR's Criteria For Slow Rate Land Treatment (current edition), as amended, and other technical publications, as well as site-specific information submitted by a registered professional engineer for each such project. 
m.  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in any high pollution susceptibility area. 
n.  Exclusive of mining settling basins, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in any high pollution susceptibility area. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2000, § 4; Ord. of 9-18-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 30-45. - Wetlands districts. 
(a)  [Defined, identified.] The wetlands within Putnam County are indispensable and fragile natural resources and in which development activities are significantly restrained because of flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide fish, wildlife, and vegetation habitats, water quality maintenance, water pollution control, flood control, natural resource education, opportunity for scientific study, and recreation. 
The following categories of freshwater wetlands and aquatic habitats have been defined, identified, and mapped by DNR: 
(1)  Open water. Areas of open water, primarily reservoirs, ponds, lakes, rivers, and estuaries. 
(2)  Nonforested emergent wetlands. Freshwater marshes dominated by a variety of grasses, sedges, rushes, and broad-leaved aquatics associated with streams, pond areas, and tidally-influenced nonsaline waters. 
(3)  Scrub/shrub wetlands. Nonforested areas dominated by woody shrubs, seedlings, and saplings averaging less than 20 feet in height; these wetlands may intergrade with forested wetlands, nonforested emergent wetlands, and open water. 
(4)  Forested wetlands. Natural or planted forested areas having a dominant tree crown closure of hardwoods, pines, gums, cypress, or any combination of these types. These areas are usually in stream or river floodplains, isolated depressions, and drainways, and contain standing or flowing water for a portion of the year. Subcategories are: 
a.  Hardwood floodplain forests; 
b.  Coniferous floodplain forests; 
c.  Mixed floodplain forests; 
d.  Nonalluvial forested wetlands. 
(5)  Altered wetlands. Areas with hydric soils that have been denuded of natural vegetation and put to other uses, such as pasture, row crops, etc., but that otherwise retain certain wetlands functions and values. 
(b)  District delineation. The wetlands area districts in Putnam County are shown on and identified as such on the Little River Watershed and Wetland Delineation Map. Said overlay map is a generalized wetlands map and shows the general location of wetlands according to the 1987 National Wetlands Inventory and should be consulted by persons considering development activities in or near wetlands. However, this map does not necessarily represent the exact boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Putnam County and shall not serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by § 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(c)  Permit coordination process. In order to assure that all applicable federal and state requirements in regard to wetlands are met, the local issuing authority of Putnam County shall compare all requests for subdivision, rezoning, development, construction, demolition, or land disturbance to the generalized wetlands map. This review is simply a coordination process and is not an additional wetlands permitting process. No action by the Putnam County or its employees shall relieve a landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. This review shall result in one of two actions by the local issuing authority: 
(1)  He shall issue a local permit pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County of 1997 or the Putnam County Land Disturbance Ordinance without requiring a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the Corps of Engineers if either of the following two conditions exists: 
a.  The request does not involve an activity which would cause alteration of wetlands; or 
b.  The request involves a location which is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the generalized wetlands map. 
(2)  He shall not issue a local permit but shall defer issuing any local permit pending a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the Corps of Engineers and shall issue such a permit only after either a letter of permission or a § 404 permit is issued by the Corps of Engineers whenever his review determines that the request appears to involve land which contains wetlands or is located near wetlands so as to have a potential to alter them. 
(d)  Limitations on land use. In addition to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, limitations on land use within wetlands districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  No landfills shall be allowed. 
(2)  No receiving areas or transfer points for toxic waste, hazardous waste, or other potential contaminants shall be allowed. 
(3)  No permit for construction or development within the wetlands districts shall issue without action by the local issuing authority, the planning and zoning commission and the governing authority of Putnam County, which shall consider the following factors and issue written findings in regard thereto before issuing such a permit: 
a.  Whether impacts to an area would adversely affect the public health safety, welfare, or the property of others. 
b.  Whether the area is unique or significant in the conservation of flora and fauna including threatened, rare, or endangered species. 
c.  Whether alteration or impacts to wetlands will adversely affect the function including the flow or quality of water, cause erosion or shoaling, or impact navigation. 
d.  Whether impacts or modification by a project would adversely affect fishing or recreational use of wetlands. 
e.  Whether an alteration or impact would be temporary in nature. 
f.  Whether the project contains significant state historical and archaeological resources, defined as "Properties On or Eligible for the National Register of Historic Places". 
g.  Whether alteration of wetlands would have measurable adverse impacts on adjacent sensitive natural areas. 
h.  Where wetlands have been created for mitigation purposes under § 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, such wetlands shall be considered for protection. 
(e)  Permitted uses. Unless otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance, the following uses shall be permitted by right within the wetlands districts: 
(1)  Forestry activities which comply with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission, to include road construction best management practices which comply with § 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Passive outdoor recreational activities, to include fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(4)  Normal agricultural activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock, subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2000, § 5; Ord. of 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-46. - Water supply watershed districts. 
In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate, safe drinking water is essential. The ability of natural systems to filter storm water runoff is threatened by both residential and commercial development. Land disturbing activities can increase erosion and sedimentation which can, in turn, threaten the storage capacity of reservoirs. Storm water runoff from impervious surfaces can introduce toxins, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more difficult and expensive and making the resulting sewage more dangerous to humans and wildlife. To control and alleviate these problems and to protect public water supplies, water supply watershed districts shall be created as prescribed herein. 
(1)  District delineation. The water supply watershed districts in Putnam County are shown on and identified as such on the Little River Watershed and Wetland Delineation Map. These districts are defined as that area surrounded by the ridge lines of the respective watersheds upstream of a reservoir or government-owned water system intake and are divided for regulatory purposes by the arc formed by a radius seven miles upstream of each respective public water supply intake. 
(2)  Limitations on land use. In addition to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, limitations on land use within water supply watershed districts shall be as follows: 
a.  No landfills shall be allowed. 
b.  The corridors of all perennial streams in a large water supply watershed tributary to a water supply reservoir within a seven mile radius of the reservoir boundary shall be protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields shall be prohibited in the setback area of subsection 2., above. 
c.  A tributary to the water supply intake in a large water supply watershed shall have no specified minimum criteria for protection, except that new facilities located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir and which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in § 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
d.  The perennial stream corridors of a small water supply watershed within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmental-owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir shall be protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
e.  The perennial stream corridors within a small water supply watershed and outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
f.  The following criteria apply at all locations in a small water supply watershed: 
1.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities shall be prohibited. 
2.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent of the total area. 
3.  Facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall perform their operations on an impermeable surface having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources. 
g.  The owner of any water supply reservoir shall develop a reservoir management plan for approval of the governing authority of Putnam County and the Department of Natural Resources. Said reservoir management plan shall address the recreational use of the reservoir and the maintenance of a buffer around the reservoir. Prohibitions or restrictions on all or some of the following recreational uses shall be addressed in the reservoir management plan to protect the water quality of the reservoir for drinking purposes while optimizing its recreational benefits: swimming, fishing, boating, docks, and public access. Furthermore, said plan shall mandate that a buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary. The allowable buffer vegetation and disturbance shall be specified in the reservoir management plan. Reservoir owners, upon consideration of ground slopes and soil types, may adopt buffers of differing sizes only upon approval of the governing authority of Putnam County and the Department of Natural Resources. 
(3)  Partial exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided that the conditions described herein have been met: 
a.  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this article. 
b.  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
c.  Utilities shall be exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of this article if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas and if the following conditions are met: 
1.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
2.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
3.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
d.  Forestry and agricultural activities shall be exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of this article provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
2.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2000, § 6; Ord. of 9-18-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 30-47. - Enforcement. 
The local issuing authority and his designees shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this article by withholding building and development permits for any activity prohibited by this article, by initiating court action to enjoin proposed violations or to abate activities in violation, and by issuing citations for violations hereof. Violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor and may be punished by 60 days confinement, a fine of $500.00, or both. Each day's violation comprises a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2000, § 7; Ord. of 2-17-2004) 
Secs. 30-48—30-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AREAS 

Sec. 30-60. - Prohibition of certain watercraft within Putnam County on Lake Sinclair. 
The operation of any of the following vessels on Lake Sinclair shall be prohibited: 
(1)  The operation of any vessel, specifically including a houseboat, with a marine toilet, galley, or sleeping quarters; 
(2)  Any motorized vessel greater than 30 feet six inches in length; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to: 
a.  Law enforcement, scientific research, or dam operation and maintenance craft; or 
b.  A vessel not greater than 40 feet in length used for conducting group tours on behalf of the owner or operator of a REAP certified by the department of community affairs under O.C.G.A. § 52-8-192 if the same vessel was lawfully operated on the lake by such REAP owner or operator under former provisions of this paragraph as such existed immediately prior to May 29, 2007; in addition, such vessel may be replaced by the same REAP owner or operator but only by one vessel at a time and only if each such predecessor vessel has been retired from lawfully operating on the lake and the replacement vessel does not exceed 40 feet in length; or 
(3)  Any vessel equipped with any type of bypass mechanism that reduces or eliminates the effectiveness of the muffler or baffler system required by O.C.G.A. § 52-7-10. 
(4)  Any vessel in violation of this section which was located in Putnam County in Lake Sinclair prior to July 1, 2008 shall not be in violation of this section unless the same is removed from Lake Sinclair for a period exceeding six months. After being removed from Lake Sinclair for a period exceeding six months this section shall apply to any such vessel. 
(Ord. of 7-22-2008) 
Chapter 31 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 31-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for and carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitations, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services, rescue; engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, consequence management functions to include victim services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility spaces, search and rescue, and any other function relative to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for the carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-2. - Declaration of local emergency or disaster. 
(a)  In the event of actual or impending emergency or disaster of natural or human origin, or pandemic influenza emergency, or impending or actual enemy attack, or a public health emergency, within or affecting this county or against the United States, the board of commissioners or a designee may declare that a state of local emergency or disaster exists. The state of local emergency or disaster shall continue until the board of commissioners finds that the threat or danger has passed or the emergency or disaster has been dealt with, to the extent that emergency or disaster conditions no longer exist, and terminates the state of local emergency or disaster. No state of local emergency or disaster may continue for longer than 30 days unless renewed by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  A declaration of a state of local emergency or disaster shall activate the emergency and disaster response and recovery aspects of the local emergency or disaster plans applicable to the county and shall be authority for the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, and materials and facilities assembled, stockpiled, or arranged to be made available. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "state of local emergency or disaster" means the condition declared by the board of commissioners when, in its judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the county is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the county to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Secs. 31-3—31-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 31-36—31-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES 

Sec. 31-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this division if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county, expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-73. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-74. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the board of commissioners and having paid fees as provided by this division. Any registration requirement under this chapter will be considered fulfilled if the building contractor has previously registered pursuant to section 22-31 of this Code of Ordinances. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-75. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the board of commissioners or such other person designated by the board of commissioners at the county administration building or such other place designated by the county, annually. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the board of commissioners with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. Any contractor doing business under this division who is currently registered pursuant to section 22-31 of this Code of Ordinances is exempt from registration under this Code section. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-76. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at the current fee schedule adopted by the county for business registration under section 22-31 of this Code of Ordinances. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-77. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-78. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-79. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The board of commissioners hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Secs. 31-80—31-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING 

Sec. 31-102. - Prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-103. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-104. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation found in violation of any portion of this article shall be punished according to the general penalty as described in this section. Violation of the provisions of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Secs. 31-105—31-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF THE CODE 

Sec. 31-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations of a particular zoning district. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-123. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting this state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county building and zoning department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Secs. 31-124—31-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPOSITION OF CURFEW 

Sec. 31-145. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals , unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, includes those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to division 2 of this article, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-146. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-147. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 31-148. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the unincorporated county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
( Amend. of 3-7-2014 ) 
Chapter 32 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 32-11. - Fire codes adopted. 
(a)  In addition to the International Fire Code adopted in chapter 18, section 18-36 of the Code of Ordinances, there is hereby adopted the following Georgia fire safety rules which are incorporated herein by reference as if fully written out in this section: 
(1)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended, there is hereby adopted the state fire safety rules now and as may hereafter be promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner as set forth in chapter 120-3-3 of Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. 
(2)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, the provisions of the International Fire Code including appendix (B—F) are modified and amended in paragraphs (b) through (f) and sections 32-12 through 32-18 below. 
(3)  O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(4)  Copies of the codes adopted in paragraph (a) shall remain on file at the office of the Putnam County Fire Rescue Chief, located at 117 Putnam Drive, Eatonton, Georgia, and at the Putnam County Department of Planning and Development, 117 Putnam Drive, Eatonton, Georgia. 
(5)  All adopted fire codes shall be known as "fire codes." In the event the fire chief or his/her designee determines that the provisions of the state fire safety rules and the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted hereinabove conflict, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire chief or his/her designee shall govern. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU 

Sec. 32-12. - Establishment of the fire prevention bureau. 
Under the authority of the chief of Putnam County Fire Rescue is established the fire prevention bureau. This bureau shall be responsible for application and enforcement of all matters involving fire codes, as well as public fire safety education and initial investigation of fire incidents. The fire chief shall appoint the head of the fire prevention bureau in a manner consistent with personnel policy. The bureau head shall be known as the "fire marshal" and the "authority having jurisdiction", in matters related to fire codes. As needed, properly trained fire service personnel may be temporarily assigned to the fire prevention bureau by the fire chief to assist with operations. The fire marshal is hereby designated by the Putnam County Manager as a code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-13. - Fire prevention bureau. 
(a)  The fire codes adopted in section 32-11 shall be enforced by the fire prevention bureau, which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief of Putnam County Fire Rescue, and the building official, where applicable. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall be the head of the fire prevention bureau and any other personnel assigned to the fire prevention bureau shall be designated as assistant fire marshals for such duty by the fire chief of Putnam County Fire Rescue. 
(c)  A report of the fire prevention bureau shall be made annually and transmitted to the Putnam County Fire Rescue Chief; it shall contain all proceedings under this chapter and the codes referred to herein, with such statistics as the fire chief may wish to include therein. The fire chief shall also recommend any amendments to such codes, which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 32-14. - Authority and scope. 
Putnam County is responsible for the application and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Fire Codes for buildings in Putnam County, Georgia, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12. The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to both public and private property, and to all commercial structures and their occupants, except as otherwise specified herein or by other applicable law. Designated employees of Putnam County Fire Rescue are authorized to enforce all applicable state laws, regulations, and all applicable provisions of this Code in Putnam County, Georgia, and in all municipalities with whom Putnam County has a valid intergovernmental agreement for the provision of fire inspection services. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-15. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
Any appeal or request for variance in the event the fire marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire codes do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the fire code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may submit in writing to the fire chief, or his designee, with the explanation and reason why the variance should be granted within ten days of the fire marshal's decision. The fire chief, or his designee, shall respond within ten days with a statement as to the purpose of the requirement with a response which approves or denies the request. Should the affected party wish to appeal the decision of the fire chief, the appeal shall be made in writing to the Putnam County Board of Commissioners for review. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this Code. The decision of the board is final. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
ARTICLE V. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 32-16. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize a building, occupancy, premises or system regulated by this Code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or the codes identified in section 32-11. 
(b)  Notice of violation. When the fire marshal finds a building, premises, vehicle, storage facility or outdoor area that is in violation of this Code, the fire marshal is authorized, but not required, to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, when compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for reinspection. 
(c)  Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this Code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail, or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested or a certificate of mailing, to the last known address of the owner, occupant or both. 
(d)  Compliance with orders and notices. A notice of violation issued or served as provided by this Code shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the notice of violation pertains. 
(e)  Prosecution of violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the fire marshal is authorized to request the County Attorney to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
(f)  Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the fire marshal shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed without authorization from the fire marshal. 
(g)  Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire marshal, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in chapter 18, section 18-84 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(h)  Abatement of violation. In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, the fire marshal is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. 
(i)  Stop work order. 
(1)  Order. Whenever the fire marshal finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the fire marshal is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(2)  Issuance. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. A copy of the order shall also be given to the director of the planning and development department. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume. 
(3)  Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the fire marshal shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(4)  Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to imposition of a fine. 
(j)  False alarm . 
(1)  Fee established . To discourage excessive false alarms at any residential, commercial, institutional or educational location, enhance the safety of firefighters of Putnam County Fire Rescue, protect the lives and property of the citizens and residents of Putnam County, reduce unnecessary use of public safety and fire rescue resources, and to defray the costs of public safety and fire rescue responses to false alarms, a false alarm service fee is hereby established. 
(2)  Definitions . 
a.  Alarm systems means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention by Putnam County Fire Rescue. 
b.  False alarm means a bell, mechanical, electrical, or telephone apparatus, or combination thereof which is activated for the purpose of summoning Putnam County Fire Rescue to respond to a fire, destruction of property, or other event requiring fire rescue response when in fact the service called for is not needed. 
c.  Rate and base . 
1.  The owner or lessee of any residential, commercial, institutional or educational property with an alarm system shall pay to Putnam County a false alarm service fee, based upon the total number of false alarms occurring at such location during the preceding 12 months. The false alarm service fee shall be charged as shown in the following schedule: 

 
2.  All false alarm service fees assessed by this section shall be due and payable within 30 days following notice thereof. If not paid within 30 days of notice shall constitute a violation of a county ordinance. 
3.  Notification of false alarm. 
i.  Following a false alarm at any residential, commercial, institutional or educational property, Putnam County Fire Rescue shall notify the responsible owner or lessee of such false alarm and the false alarm service fee due under this section. Such notice may be given by mailing a copy of the notice of false alarm prescribed by Putnam County Fire Rescue to the alarmed premises, or by leaving a copy of such notice of false alarm at the alarmed premises. 
4.  Exceptions. Each of the following circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no fee shall be assessed: 
i.  Alarm conditions activated by a person working on the alarm system with prior notification to Putnam County Fire Rescue; or 
ii.  Alarms that can be substantiated as being activated by documented electrical interruptions, floods, or other natural disasters. 
d.  Maintenance and operation. The owner or lessee of any residential, commercial, institutional or educational property with an alarm system shall: 
1.  Maintain the premises and alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms; and 
2.  Respond or cause their representative to appear at the alarm location within a reasonable period of time when notified by Putnam County Fire Rescue or monitoring company to provide access to the premises, deactivate the alarm system, or provide security at the alarm location. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 32-17. - Unsafe buildings. 
(a)  General. If during the inspection of a commercial premises, a building or structure or any building system, in whole or in part, constitutes a clear and imminent threat to human life, safety or health, the Fire Marshal shall issue such notice or orders to remove or remedy the conditions as shall be deemed necessary in accordance with this section and shall notify the Building Official of the notice or order for any repairs, alterations, remodeling, removing or demolition required. 
(b)  Unsafe conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe or deficient because of inadequate means of egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. A vacant structure which is not secured against unauthorized entry as required by section 311 of the I.F.C. [International Fire Code] shall be deemed unsafe. 
(c)  Structural hazards. When an apparent structural hazard is caused by the faulty installation, operation or malfunction of any of the items or devices governed by this Code, the Fire Marshal shall immediately notify the Building Official in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Evacuation. The Fire Marshal or the fire department official in charge of an incident shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation of any occupied building deemed unsafe when such building has hazardous conditions that present imminent danger to building occupants. Persons so notified shall immediately leave the structure or premises and shall not enter or re-enter until authorized to do so by the Fire Marshal or the fire department official in charge of the incident. 
(e)  Summary abatement. Where conditions exist that are deemed hazardous to life and property, the Fire Marshal or fire department official in charge of the incident is authorized to abate summarily such hazardous conditions that are in violation of this Code. 
(f)  Abatement. The owner, operator, or occupant of a building or premises deemed unsafe by the Fire Marshal shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008) 
Sec. 32-18. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal is authorized to render interpretations of fire codes and to make and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to carry out the application and intent of its provisions. 
(b)  Enforcement assistance. Police and other enforcement agencies shall have the authority to render necessary assistance in the enforcement of fire codes when requested to do so by the Fire Marshal. 
(c)  Interference with enforcement. Persons shall not interfere or cause conditions that would interfere with the fire marshal carrying out any duties or functions prescribed in the fire codes. 
(d)  Fire watch. The fire marshal shall have the authority to require standby fire personnel or an approved fire watch when potentially hazardous conditions or a reduction in a life safety feature exists due to the type of performance, display, exhibit, occupancy, contest or activity, impairment to a fire protection feature, or the number of persons present. 
(e)  Fire watch employment. The owner, agent, or lessee shall employ one or more qualified persons, as required and approved, to be on duty. Such standby personnel or fire watch personnel shall be subject to the fire marshal's orders at all times and shall be identifiable and remain on duty during times such places are open to the public, when such activity is being conducted, or as required by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008) 
ARTICLE VII. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 32-19. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Ownership . All fire hydrants installed within the unincorporated area of Putnam County shall be owned by and under the direct supervision of the respective owners. Owners shall be required to provide the Putnam County Fire Chief with a complete listing of the number and location of all fire hydrants under their supervision. 
(b)  Fire hydrants required . All public well or water supply systems, as defined in this Code, shall provide fire hydrants as a primary means of fire suppression. This requirement shall apply to newly constructed systems and any expansion of existing systems where such expansion would add service for 15 or more connections or add service for 25 or more persons on a daily basis whether such expansion is completed at one time or in several phases. Owners or operators of existing public well or water supply systems are hereby prohibited from removing fire hydrants currently installed in said systems except as provided below. Existing public well or water supply systems which do not include fire hydrants shall not be required to install fire hydrants unless the system is expanded as provided above. 
(c)  Fire hydrant standards . All fire hydrants incorporated into a public well or water supply system shall be installed and maintained by the respective owners in accordance with the most recent version of the International Fire Code including any appendices as adopted by Putnam County. Said standards include, but are not limited to, minimal distance between fire hydrants, location with respect to public right-of-way, design and construction specifications, and pressure/flow capacity. 
(d)  Fire chief granted authority . The Putnam County Fire Chief, or his/her designee, is hereby granted the authority to inspect, test and approve all fire hydrants situated within the unincorporated area of Putnam County. The Putnam County Fire Chief shall keep all records of the location and test results of all fire hydrants under this authority. The fire chief, or his/her designee, shall indicate the result of testing by color-coding the fire hydrant according to the International Fire Code standards. Newly installed fire hydrants shall be tested within 180 days of installation. Existing fire hydrants shall be tested at intervals of no less than two years. No owner of a fire hydrant included under this authority shall interfere with or restrict the ability of the Putnam County Fire Chief to exercise this authority. 
(e)  Fire hydrant out-of-service . The owner of any fire hydrant under their supervision which is known to be inoperative or out of service for any reason shall promptly report the same to the Putnam County Fire Chief. Any fire hydrant found, on testing, to fail to meet the standards set forth above shall be designated as out-of-service. The Putnam County Fire Chief shall notify the owner, in writing, of any fire hydrant designated as being out-of-service within ten days of such designation. The notification may be by personal service or U.S. Postal Service, registered letter. 
(f)  Owner duty to repair . Upon notification of a fire hydrant being out-of-service, it shall be the duty of the owner to repair or replace the defective fire hydrant so as to place it back in service within 90 days of receiving notification. Alternatively, at the option of the owner, the defective fire hydrant may be physically removed from the system, providing however that the distance between the remaining, approved fire hydrants be no less than 1,000 feet. 
(g)  Violations . Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, any violation of this code section shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $50.00. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-19.1 - Fire hydrant tax. 
(a)  Special district created . A special tax district within Putnam County is hereby created, consisting of all real property situated within the unincorporated area of Putnam County. Said special district shall be known as the Putnam County Fire Suppression District. 
(b)  Special tax to be levied . To pay, wholly or partially, the costs of installing, maintaining, inspecting, and testing of fire hydrants within the special district, a special tax shall be levied against all taxable real property situated within the special district. The amount of said tax shall be set, from time to time, by the Putnam County Board of Commissioners, providing however that the tax shall not exceed $25.00 per annum. 
(c)  Distribution of tax proceeds . As a fee for collection services, the tax commissioner of Putnam County shall be paid ten percent of the fire hydrant tax fees collected. The remaining special tax proceeds shall be paid into a restricted fund of Putnam County, said restricted fund to be established by resolution of the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. The restricted fund shall be used exclusively to compensate the Putnam County Fire-Rescue Department and owners of fire hydrants located in the unincorporated area of Putnam County for duties imposed by this code section. Compensation to owners of fire hydrants shall be made by written agreements between the owner and Putnam County. 
(Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
State Constitution reference— Ref. GA Constitution, Art. IX, Sect. II, Para. VI (c) 
Sec. 32-20. - Parking in fire lanes; authority to prevent blocking of private ways and alleys. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in, or otherwise obstruct, any fire lane as described in this section. 
(b)  Penalty. The fine for any offense under this section shall be $50.00. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this paragraph, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire lane means an area designated by the fire official which provides access to fire department connections and fire hydrants and provides access for fire department vehicles to buildings. This includes all alleys, including private alleys, private ways or driveways, where parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with ingress or egress of fire department vehicles and equipment. 
Fire marshal means a fire officer or other designated authority or the fire officer's or authority's duly authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted in this chapter. 
Master plat means an original plat drawn in accordance with this section. 
Plat means a map created by the property owner which depicts the location and boundaries of land and all existing fire lanes in accordance with this section. Maps shall be drawn to scale. 
Property owner means each person possessing any estate or leasehold right in the property being designated as a fire lane. 
(d)  Authority . The fire chief, or a duly authorized fire official, may properly designate fire lanes and prevent the blocking of any private alley, private way or driveway in Putnam County by the parking of automobiles or otherwise. 
(e)  Posting of signs. The commercial property owner is required to post signs meeting the following criteria in areas designated as fire lanes: 
(1)  Signs shall read: "No Parking—Fire Lane." 
(2)  Signs must meet design specifications as required by chapter 48 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  One sign shall be posted at the beginning of the fire lane and one at the end of the fire lane and at intervals not more than 50 feet apart. 
(4)  Signs posted shall not be more than four feet from the edge of the curb and shall be visible from both directions of the driving surface. 
(f)  Painting of curbs . The fire chief or a duly authorized fire official may order curbs adjacent to a fire lane to be painted red or another distinctive color. 
(g)  Parking in a fire lane. No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle or place any other property in a fire lane; however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(h)  Obstructing posted private alley or driveway. Any person who shall park any vehicle of any character or place any other property in any private alley, private way or driveway which has been posted in accordance with this section. Any person owning or occupying property abutting the private alley, private way or driveway who shall cause or permit the placing of anything therein which would impede or block the passage of fire trucks and equipment, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(i)  Site plans. Property which falls within Putnam County upon which fire lanes have been designated shall have all fire lane delineations visually depicted on a site plan. These plans shall be designed by the property owner and submitted to the Building Official. Each plan shall identify all building exterior walls, traffic and parking lanes and sidewalks. The areas to be designated as fire lanes shall be delineated in red ink. The plan shall state a scale of measurement, and specify the name of the property, the location of the property, a brief legal description of the property and the length and width of the fire lanes. 
(j)  Enforcement officials. Fire marshals, police officers, code enforcement officers or other duly authorized law enforcement officials shall have the authority for enforcement of fire lanes. Fire marshals, police officers, code enforcement officers, or other duly authorized officials may cause to be removed to the nearest authorized place of impound or other place of safety any unattended vehicle or other property left standing in violation of this section. If a vehicle is towed by Putnam County subject to this section, Putnam County shall be authorized to use a call list of designated towing agencies to arrange for towing. The vehicle owner shall be responsible for charges for the towing and any daily impoundment storage fee. 
(k)  Notice of ordinance violation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, violations of this chapter may be enforced by a notice of ordinance violation issued by any authorized law enforcement officer, fire marshal, or code enforcement officer as provided below: 
(1)  Ordinance violations charged by means of a notice shall not be punishable by imprisonment but shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00. 
(2)  A notice of ordinance violation may be served by delivery into the hands of the suspected violator or by leaving the notice of ordinance violation at the suspected violator's residence with a person of suitable age and discretion residing therein, or by leaving the notice of ordinance violation at the suspected violator's place of business if the violation occurs at the business location, with a person of suitable age and discretion employed therein. 
(3)  Alternative to the provisions of subsection (2) above, a notice of ordinance violation may be served by substituted service as follows: 
a.  The notice of ordinance violation may be placed on the front windshield of the illegally-parked vehicle in a fashion reasonably calculated to secure the notice of ordinance violation in place. Notices served according to this subsection shall be conspicuously marked and placed in a waterproof packet. 
b.  The notice of ordinance violation may be served by securely attaching the notice of ordinance violation to the front door of the primary residential or business structure on the property served by the fire lane or to other door to said structure reasonably appearing to provide the primary point of egress to said residence or business. A notice of ordinance violation served according to this subsection shall be posted on the upper part of the door, shall be conspicuously marked and shall be placed in a waterproof packet. 
(4)  Violators may respond to a notice of ordinance violation either by signing the notice and returning the notice along with payment of the fine indicated thereon to the Magistrate Court of Putnam County by the date indicated on the notice or by appearing in the Magistrate Court to plead not guilty to the charged violation at the date and time provided on the notice. No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be initiated for failure to appear on the return date on the notice. 
(5)  Violators who fail to respond to a notice of ordinance violation as provided for in subsection (4) above may thereafter be served personally with an ordinance violation citation or accusation, and criminally prosecuted pursuant to chapter 18, section 18-84. 
(l)  Section not exclusive. The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of Putnam County. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-21. - Construction plans approval. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or alter any commercial building without construction document approval by the fire marshal for fire department accessibility, fire hydrant requirements, Life Safety Code requirements, and flammable and combustible liquid tank installations. Construction documents shall be in accordance with the requirements below: 
(1)  Submittals. Commercial construction documents shall be submitted in one or more sets and in such form and detail as required by the building official. The building official will determine if such commercial plans must be reviewed by the fire marshal and will forward copies to him/her for approval. If the fire marshal does not approve the plans, he must submit a list of corrections to be made, in writing, to the building official. No building permits requiring fire marshal review shall be issued without the fire marshal's signature on the building permit. 
(2)  Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are allowed to be submitted when approved by the fire marshal. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as determined by the fire marshal. 
(3)  Applicant responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the construction documents include all of the fire protection requirements and that the shop drawings are complete and in compliance with the applicable codes and standards. 
(4)  Technical assistance. The fire marshal shall be permitted to require a review by an independent third party with expertise in the matter to be reviewed at the submitter's expense. The independent reviewer shall provide an evaluation and recommend necessary changes of the proposed design, operation, process, or new technology to the fire marshal. 
(5)  Engineering. The fire marshal shall be authorized to require design submittals or plans to bear the stamp of a professional engineer. 
(b)  Plan compliance. The fire marshal shall make the final determination as to whether the provisions of the fire codes have been met. 
(c)  Approved documents. Construction documents approved by the fire marshal are approved with the intent that such construction documents comply in all respects with the fire codes. Review and approval by the fire marshal shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of compliance with the fire codes. 
(d)  Corrected documents. Where field conditions necessitate any substantial change from the approved construction documents, the fire marshal shall have the authority to require the corrected construction documents to be submitted for approval. 
(e)  Inspections. Any application for or acceptance of any permit or certificate, requested or issued pursuant to fire codes shall constitute agreement and consent by the person making the application or accepting the permit or certificate to allow the fire marshal to enter the premises at any reasonable time to conduct inspections. Before a certificate or permit is approved, the fire marshal is authorized to inspect the receptacles, vehicles, buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces or areas to be used to determine compliance with the fire codes or any operational constraints required. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PERMITS 

Sec. 32-22. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  Service fee . Fees shall be charged for services and permits based on a schedule developed by Putnam County Fire Rescue and approved by the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-23. - Permits. 
(a)  General. Permits shall be in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Permits required. Permits required by this chapter shall be obtained from the fire marshal. Permit fees, provided for in section 32-22 (fee schedule), if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Operational permits. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by this chapter for either: 
(1)  A prescribed period; or 
(2)  Until renewed or revoked. 
(d)  Permits for the same location. When more than one permit is required for the same location, the fire marshal is authorized to consolidate such permits into a single permit provided that each provision is listed in the permit. 
(e)  Application. Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made to the fire marshal in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire marshal. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire marshal. 
(f)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit describes a use that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the fire marshal shall not issue a permit, but shall return the application to the applicant with the refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal. 
(g)  Inspection authorized. Before a new operational permit is approved, the fire marshal is authorized to inspect the receptacles, vehicles, buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces or areas to be used to determine compliance with this Code or any operational constraints required. 
(h)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued, except that the fire marshal is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there is reasonable cause. 
(i)  Action on application. The fire marshal, in conjunction with the building official, shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the fire marshal shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the fire marshal is satisfied that the proposed work or operation conforms to the requirements of this chapter and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the fire marshal shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(j)  Conditions of a permit. A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials; or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property; or to install equipment utilized in connection with such activities; or to install or modify any fire protection system or equipment or any other construction, equipment installation or modification in accordance with the provisions of this Code where a permit is required by this chapter. Such permission shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable regulations or laws of the jurisdiction. 
(k)  Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed, or revoked or for such a period of time as specified in the permit. Construction permits shall automatically become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Before such work recommences, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee to recommence work, if any, shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued. 
(l)  Extensions. A permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within which the permittee will commence work under that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The fire marshal is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of the time period of a permit for periods of not more than 90 days each. Such extensions shall be requested by the permit holder in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(m)  Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire marshal issuing a permit that indicates that applicable provisions of this chapter have been met. 
(n)  Conditional permits. Where permits are required and upon the request of a permit applicant, the fire marshal is authorized to issue a conditional permit to occupy the premises or portion thereof before the entire work or operations on the premises is completed, provided that such portion or portions will be occupied safely prior to full completion or installation of equipment and operations without endangering life or public welfare. The fire marshal shall notify the permit applicant in writing of any limitations or restrictions necessary to keep the permit area safe. The holder of a conditional permit shall proceed only to the point for which approval has been given, at the permit holder's own risk and without assurance that approval for the occupancy or the utilization of the entire premises, equipment or operations will be granted. 
(o)  Posting the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire marshal. 
(p)  Compliance with chapter. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the fire marshal from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. Any addition to or alteration of approved construction documents shall be approved in advance by the fire marshal, as evidenced by the issuance of a new or amended permit. 
(q)  Information on the permit. The fire marshal shall issue all permits required by this chapter on an approved form furnished for that purpose. The permit shall contain a general description of the operation or occupancy and its location and any other information required by the fire marshal. Issued permits shall bear the signature of the fire marshal or other designated fire official. 
(r)  Revocation. The fire marshal is authorized to revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter when it is found by inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or construction documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
(1)  The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued. 
(2)  The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit. 
(3)  Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated. 
(4)  There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit. 
(5)  The permit is used by a different person or firm from the name for which it was issued. 
(6)  The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this Code within the time provided therein. 
(7)  The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance, regulation or this Code. 
(s)  Required operational permits. The fire marshal is authorized to issue operational permits for the following operations: 
(1)  Explosives. An operational permit is required for the manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of explosive, explosive material, fireworks, or pyrotechnic special effects. 
(2)  Tents, temporary membrane structures, and canopies. An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent having an area in excess of 200 square feet (19 m2), or a canopy in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2). 
(t)  Permissible open burning . All permissible open burning shall be conducted in compliance with the Georgia Environmental Protection Division's Rules for Air Quality Control 391-3-1.02-5 "Provisions, Open Burning" and upon obtaining a burn permit from The Georgia Forestry Commission. The Putnam County fire marshal's Office is responsible for enforcing the regulations found therein. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
ARTICLE IX. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

Sec. 32-24. - Hazardous materials response cost recovery. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this section is to establish uniform criteria for recovering costs associated with the emergency response of Putnam County Fire Rescue to hazardous materials incidents. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings below: 
Hazardous materials incident means a release or spill of any material considered to be dangerous to the general public or the environment (as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and the Georgia State Fire Prevention Code). 
Routine hazardous materials incident means a hazardous materials response that requires no more apparatus, personnel, equipment and/or supplies than were dispatched upon the initial response, and which extends for a period of less than three hours in duration. 
Extra hazardous materials incident means a hazardous materials response that requires more apparatus, personnel, equipment, and/or supplies than were dispatched upon the initial response, and which extends for a period of less than three hours in duration. 
Major hazardous materials incident means a hazardous materials response that requires more apparatus, personnel, equipment, and/or supplies than were dispatched upon the initial response, and which extends for a period of three hours or more in duration. 
(c)  Policy. 
(1)  Putnam County recognizes the need for emergency hazardous materials response within the jurisdictional limits of Putnam County. Therefore, no person or agency requiring an emergency hazardous materials response shall be denied those services due to a lack of insurance coverage or the inability to pay for those services. 
(2)  Putnam County Fire Rescue provides emergency hazardous materials response only, and does not act as a cleanup contractor, and does not provide cleanup or disposal services. 
(3)  Any applicable services rendered to a person, entity or agency shall be billed to that person, entity or agency. 
(4)  The fire chief, in his sole discretion, may waive reimbursement in instances where only minimal response services were required. 
(5)  Other emergency response agencies assisting Putnam County Fire Rescue may submit their list of expenses to the fire department for inclusion in the bill submitted to the responsible person, entity or agency. Neither Putnam County, nor its fire department, shall accept any liability for payment of such costs incurred by other emergency response agencies. 
(d)  Procedure for billing services. 
(1)  A detailed listing of hazardous materials response services provided to persons, entities and/or agencies will be compiled by Putnam County Fire Rescue. This information shall be forwarded to the Putnam County Finance Department, which shall be responsible for the billing. This information shall include: 
a.  Name and address of the owner, lessee, occupant and/or responsible party; 
b.  Date, time and location of incident; 
c.  Putnam County Fire Rescue fire incident report number; 
d.  Description of services rendered; 
e.  Itemized list of costs. 
(2)  The applicable charges for services shall be determined by reference to the following: 
a.  Response to a routine hazardous materials incident. A routine hazardous materials response shall have standardized recovery costs. Recovery cost charges shall begin upon arrival of the first responding fire department unit(s), and shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Loss, consumption, repair, and decontamination of equipment, vehicles, instruments, clothing, supplies and other items, at actual cost; 
2.  Miscellaneous expenses, at actual cost. 
3.  A charge for billing and processing of two percent of total costs. 
b.  Response to an extra hazardous materials incident. An extra hazardous materials response shall have standardized recovery costs. Recovery cost charges shall begin upon arrival of the first responding fire department unit(s), and shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Hazardous materials responders, at actual hourly rate per hour, per person for on-duty response and actual overtime rates per hour for off-duty response; 
2.  Cost for loss, consumption, repair, and decontamination of equipment, vehicles, instruments, clothing, supplies and other items, at actual cost; 
3.  Subsistence supplies, at actual cost; 
4.  Miscellaneous expenses, at actual cost; 
5.  A charge for billing and processing of two percent of total costs. 
c.  Response to a major hazardous materials incident. A major hazardous materials response shall have standardized recovery costs. Recovery cost charges for items 1. through 6., shall begin upon arrival of the first responding fire department unit, and shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Hazardous materials responders, at actual hourly rate per hour, per person for on-duty response and actual overtime rates per hour for off-duty response; 
2.  Hazardous materials command staff, at actual hourly rate per hour, per person for on-duty response and actual overtime rates per hour for off-duty response; 
3.  Cost for loss, consumption, repair and decontamination of equipment, vehicles, instruments, clothing, supplies and other items, at actual replacement cost; 
4.  Subsistence supplies, at actual cost; 
5.  Miscellaneous expenses, at actual cost; 
6.  A charge for billing and processing of two percent of total costs. 
d.  Additional recovery cost charges shall begin after the third hour of on-scene operation (continuous operation is not required), and shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Each fire engine, ladder truck, rescue unit, hazardous materials unit and other equipment and apparatus needed in the response shall be charged based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Schedule of Equipment Rates for like or similar equipment. 
(3)  All funds received from persons, entities or agencies that have been billed for services will be placed in an account designated for personnel costs, decontamination, repair, replacement and purchase of items of both durable and consumable categories for the hazardous materials program of the department. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2007; Ord. of 3-18-2008; Ord. of 1-19-2016 ) 
Secs. 32-25—32-30. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted September 9, 2008, was not specifically amendatory of the Code. The editor has treated these new provisions as superseding chapter 34, which pertained to similar provisions and derived from an ordinance adopted November 1, 1994. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County, Georgia (hereinafter "board"), does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Putnam County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Putnam County, Georgia. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Putnam County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: County Clerk of Putnam County, 108 S. Madison Ave., Suite 300, Eatonton, GA 31024 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of floodprotection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Putnam County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Putnam County from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the director's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in subsection 34-2(b). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before September 26, 2008. [The effective date of the initial FIRM for that community.] 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 1, 1994. [The effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.] 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing floodprofiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing, means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 26, 2008 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced after November 1, 1994 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after November 1, 1994 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-4. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Secs. 34-5—34-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 34-15. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The Putnam County Planning and Development Director (hereinafter "director") is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-16. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the director on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 34-30(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-17. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 34-2(b), then the director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 34-16(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 34-16(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 34-16(1)c. and 34-30(2) or 34-32(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the director and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Secs. 34-18—34-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-29. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-30. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-29(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 34-17(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 34-29(6) above.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 34-17(3)a. and c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 34-2(b), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. 
Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 34-30(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of [this chapter]. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-31. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 34-2(b), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 34-2(b), then the director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of [this chapter]. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-29(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-32. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 34-2(b), may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have been flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-29(a), "elevated buildings". 
The director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 34-16(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-33. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 34-34. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Secs. 34-35—34-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 34-46. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Putnam County as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2008) 
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Putnam County became a member of the multijurisdictional anti-drug task force maintained and called the Ocmulgee Drug Task Force pursuant to an intergovernmental and interagency agreement dated May 9, 1997. The task force is charged with the responsibility of and provided the resources to facilitate the investigation, arrest, prosecution and conviction of those residents and nonresidents of the named jurisdictions involved in the manufacture, use, distribution and sale of illicit drugs. An official copy of the agreement is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day and police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a); random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Sheriff's concurrent jurisdiction. 
The county sheriff shall be authorized to enforce this Code and all ordinances of the county, concurrently with any other person who is already, or who shall be in the future, authorized by the board of commissioners to enforce this Code and ordinances of the county. 
(Res. of 3-6-1998) 
State Law reference— Sheriffs, O.C.G.A. § 15-16-1 set seq. 
Sec. 38-2. - Solicitor-general's concurrent jurisdiction. 
The solicitor-general shall be authorized to prosecute all violations of this Code and all ordinances of the county, concurrently with any other person who is already, or who shall be in the future, authorized by the board of commissioners to prosecute all violations of this Code and ordinances of the county. 
(Amend. of 8-16-2011) 
Secs. 38-3—38-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 38-10. - Code enforcement officers. 
The Putnam County Board of Commissioners shall from time to time, when necessary, hire and appoint code enforcement officer(s), whether part or full time to enforce the provisions of this Code. Said officers shall have the authority to issue and serve citations and to give testimony in any court having jurisdiction of the offense cited. 
(Amend. of 4-19-2005) 
Chapter 40 - OUTDOOR WATERING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Authority and purpose. 
The county, under its powers pursuant to state law, has adopted this chapter to protect the public health and welfare. This chapter implements the county's authority to impose water use restrictions, conditioned upon a restricted water use period declared by the county. This is pursuant to the terms of this chapter or a declared drought response level implementation declared by the state pursuant to chapter 391-3-30 of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, entitled Outdoor Water Use (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-30-.01 et seq.) 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The Putnam County Code Enforcement Department shall be the enforcement authority for this ordinance. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-3. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-4. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of Putnam County. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-5. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall go into effect on December 3, 2010. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address mean the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. 
Declared drought response level (DDRL) means one of four levels of drought that may be declared by the state department of natural resources based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe, as provided in Ga. Comp. Rules and Rags. 391-3-30-.01 et seq., pertaining to outdoor water use. 
Even-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. 
Odd-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Outdoor watering means any watering of decorative lawns, trees or shrubbery by water users. 
Water users means all persons or municipalities using water from any public water source irrespective of that person's responsibility for billing purposes for use of the water. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Secs. 40-7—40-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY WATER RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 40-11. - Restriction on outdoor water[ing] of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-12. - Declaration of period of restricted water use. 
The board of commissioners or county manager shall declare a period of restricted water use in either of two circumstances: 
(1)  State DDRL announcement. In the event of imposition by the state department of natural resources of a DDRL encompassing the geographical area of the county or any part thereof, the board of commissioners or county manager shall declare a water emergency and the level thereof. Upon the declaration, the restrictions of this chapter shall apply to all water use within the county until the board of commissioners or county manager lifts the restrictions; provided, however, that the restrictions shall remain in full force and effect until any state outdoor watering ban has been lifted. 
(2)  Local declaration. In the event of prolonged drought, failure of equipment, or any other factor that substantially affects or may affect the supply of water to the county and the county's water users, the board of commissioners or county manager may declare an emergency and the level thereof. Upon the declaration, the restrictions of this chapter shall apply to all water use within the county until the restrictions are lifted. The county personnel, state agency, federal agency, or the state governor should where appropriate, condition the declaration on the identification of an emergency or water shortage. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-13. - Notice of declaration. 
Upon declaration of a period of restricted water use, the board of commissioners or county manager shall notify all users through news releases to the local media, through notices mailed to all users, or through such other means as the board of commissioners or county manager shall deem expedient and appropriate. Notice shall be given right away after the declaration of a period of restricted water use is made. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-14. - Watering methods. 
During a period of restricted water use of any level, outdoor watering is restricted to bucket, can or handheld hose watering with automatic shutoff nozzle. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited, except watering of newly installed landscaping as permitted herein and except testing of a newly installed or newly repaired sprinkler system by a commercial enterprise engaged in the installation or repair of lawn irrigation systems. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-15. - Level one restrictions. 
In the event of a declaration of a level one period of restricted water use, the following restrictions shall apply within the county: 
(1)  Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(3)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(4)  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-16. - Level two restrictions. 
In the event of a declaration of a level two period of restricted water use, the following restrictions shall apply within the county: 
(1)  Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(3)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(4)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-17. - Level three restrictions. 
In the event of a declaration of a level three period of restricted water use, the following restrictions shall apply within the county: 
(1)  Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
(3)  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
(4)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
c.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
d.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
e.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
f.  Noncommercial fundraisers, such as carwashes. 
g.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-18. - Level four restrictions. 
In the event of a declaration of a level four period of restricted water use, no outdoor water use is permitted, unless the use is exempted under the provisions of this chapter or specifically by the board of commissioners or county manager. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-19. - Enforcement. 
Persons violating water use restrictions as provided herein shall be given one warning in writing prior to the issuance of a citation, unless: 
(1)  The period of restricted water use is declared in response to a DDRL imposed by the state and applicable in the geographical limits of the county; or 
(2)  The declaration of a period of restricted water use specifically provides that no warnings will be given. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Sec. 40-20. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the county in the amount of up to $100.00 for the first violation and up to $1,000.00 for the second violation. Third and subsequent violations shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 and imprisonment for a period of up to 90 days. In addition, third and subsequent violations may, at the discretion of the county, result in immediate shut off of water service for such period as is deemed expedient and necessary under the circumstances, with approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-3-10, Exh. A) 
Chapter 42 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— By resolution adopted February 16, 1993, the board of commissioners authorized its chairman to sign all documents necessary to transfer the county to the Middle Georgia Regional Development Center. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; roads and bridges, ch. 46; zoning, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67a-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

Sec. 42-31. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq., the Eatonton/Putnam County Comprehensive Plan 1992-2012 is adopted. The master copy of such plan is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 8-18-1992) 
Editor's note— By resolution adopted November 18, 1997, the county adopted a five-year work program update in compliance with the Georgia Planning Act of 1989. An official copy of the work program update is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
By a resolution adopted March 2, 2001, the county amended its five-year short term work program. 
By resolution adopted August 21, 2007, the county adopted the community agenda portion of the 20-year Comprehensive Plan update. An official copy is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Chapter 46 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-4(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; cable television franchise, App. A. 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Fishing from county bridges; penalty for violation of section. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from the rights-of-way, causeways or bridges of the county road system. It shall also be unlawful to stand upon or obstruct in any way the rights-of-way, causeways or bridges of the county road system. A person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1979) 
Sec. 46-2. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The county's road construction ordinance as adopted June 6, 1974, and amended by a resolution adopted April 15, 1997, and the county's rights-of-way ordinance as adopted on July 21, 1987, and amended by ordinances adopted October 10, 1987, and February 21, 1989, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Secs. 46-3—46-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROAD USE AND LOGGING CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-81. - Supervision. 
All work for which a permit is granted under this article shall be under direction and supervision of the county road superintendent or his designee who shall have the authority to order the applicant to immediately cease all logging operations when the weather conditions compromise public safety or public property. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 46-82. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person, corporation, business, partnership or consortium who performs activity in violation of this article shall be liable to fine and/or injunction, mandamus and/or other procedure by any governmental body, or by an entity aggrieved by such activities. The building inspector, the code enforcement officer or the county sheriff or any of his deputies may issue a citation for a violation of this article. The citation shall be returnable to the county magistrate court. A person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 9) 
Secs. 46-83—46-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 46-106. - Required; permit. 
No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any driveway, curb or curb cut on the public roads, including state roads, within the unincorporated areas of the county for conducting any logging, pulpwood or timber operations within the unincorporated areas of the county, without first obtaining a permit from the Putnam County Planning and Development Department in the manner specified in this division. In addition, the appropriate form for ad valorem taxation must be obtained. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 1; Amend. of 4-19-2005; Amend. of 4-7-2006) 
Editor's note— Persons constructing, reconstructing or improving any commercial driveway, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-6-130, are required to obtain a permit from the state department of transportation prior to undertaking such work. See O.C.G.A. § 32-6-131. 
Sec. 46-107. - General standards for issuance. 
The director of the planning and development department or his/her designee shall issue a permit when he/she finds that: 
(1)  The plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the county road superintendent or his designee to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the building inspector within ten days after receipt thereof. 
(2)  The work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the board of commissioners for public work of like character. Signs shall be posted and gravel put down at each exit. 
(3)  The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties. 
(4)  The safety of the public will not be impaired. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 3; Amend. of 4-19-2005; Amend. of 4-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-108. - Application. 
Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article relating to the subject matter of this article, shall submit an application for such permit to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department. The application shall state the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Name and address of the property owner; 
(3)  Location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person who is to do such work; and 
(4)  Estimated date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other data or plans as may reasonably be required by the county building inspector and the county road superintendent. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 5; Amend. of 4-19-2005; Amend. of 4-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-109. - Plan required. 
Prior to approval by the road superintendent or his designee for any logging operations permit, the applicant shall submit a plan of all driveways used for such operations which are adjacent to any public road, to the superintendent who shall have the authority to require installation of a pipe under such driveways. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 6) 
Sec. 46-110. - Bond. 
An applicant for a permit under this article shall file a bond or a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association in the amount of $5,000.00 with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the board of commissioners from all claims for cleaning or repairing any county road. A separate bond shall be required for each separate operation and each exit. Any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it was delivered. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 2; Amend. of 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 46-111. - Display. 
It shall be the duty of any permittee under this article to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 7) 
Sec. 46-112. - Limitation on issuance. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done and carried out by such applicant. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 8) 
Chapter 48 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Development regulations, ch. 28; environment, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 66. 

Sec. 48-1. - Purposes, repealer, severability. 
The governing authority of Putnam County, Georgia, to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the county, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the county's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of provisions affecting signs, does hereby adopt this "Putnam County Sign Ordinance" and hereby repeals all ordinances or portions thereof which are in conflict with this chapter. Every provision of this chapter shall be severable from all other provisions. A finding by any court of the illegality or unenforceability of any provision or provisions hereof shall not operate to void this article but, instead, all provisions not specifically and explicitly held to be illegal or unenforceable shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-2. - Applicability and effect. 
This chapter shall be effective on July 17, 2007. After said date, no sign shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained in the unincorporated area of Putnam County unless it is in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter, including appendices A through G. The effect of this chapter, as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
(a)  To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones and a limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter; 
(b)  To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without a requirement for permits; 
(c)  To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter; and 
(d)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-3. - Interpretation and definitions. 
Words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth in this section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in subsection 48-4(c). No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted or construed as limiting or directing the contents of any sign in Putnam County. No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to permit commercial signage in a situation or location in which noncommercial signage is prohibited. 
Animated sign: Any sign that uses movement or change or lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. 
Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is not permanently mounted to a pole or a building. 
Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source, also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Building marker: Any sign indicating only the name of a building and/or date and/or incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other similar permanent material. 
Building sign: Any sign that is part of or is attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. 
Canopy sign: Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for the purposes of this chapter. A sign or portion thereof on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time and/or temperature, which shall not be considered a changeable copy sign under this chapter. 
Commercial message: Any wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Director: The director of the planning and development department of Putnam County or his/her designee. 
Flag: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive color, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
Freestanding sign: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and which are independent from any building or other structures. 
Identification sign: A sign that contains only information that identifies only the owner and/or the address of the premises on which sign is erected. 
Incidental sign: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," or other similar directive. 
Institutional sign: A sign that identifies a school, church, or hospital. 
Lot: Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of the subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record. 
Marquee: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Marquee sign: Any sign attached to in any manner or made a part of a marquee. 
Mobile sign: Signs designed to be transported by means of wheels and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. Mobile signs are prohibited in the unincorporated areas of Putnam County. 
Nonconforming sign: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, and designed to move in the wind. 
Person: Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a permanent structure, including but not limited to, signs converted to A- or T-frames, balloons used as signs, and umbrellas used for advertising. 
Projecting sign: Any sign affixed to a building or a wall in such a manner that any part of it extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
Residential sign: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses and which contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Roof sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof of a building, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Roof sign, integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Sign: An inscribed board, plate, space, surface, or the like which provides information, identification, or advertisement and which is not part of a vehicle capable of movement. 
Temporary sign: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted to a structure or affixed to the ground. 
Wall sign: Any sign attached generally parallel to a wall and within 12 inches of said wall or which is painted on the wall surface of a building or which is erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building of structure and which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. 
Window sign: Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service and which is placed inside a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
Yard, front: The yard extending across the total width of a lot between side lot lines and that area between the street right-of-way line and that line established by the front wall of the principal structure projected to intersect the side lot lines. 
Zone lot: A parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations or a nonconforming lot as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-4. - Computations. 
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(a)  Computations of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, or triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblems, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
(b)  Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for the sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two sign faces are placed back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(c)  Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the normal grade at the base of the sign to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of the existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases where the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower. 
(d)  Computation of maximum total permitted sign area for a zone lot. The permitted area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be computed by applying the standards contained in the appendices which are at the end of this article and which pertain to the various zoning districts in Putnam County. The maximum area for freestanding signs shall be dependent in part on the road frontage of the zone lot in which such sign is located. Lots fronting on two or more arterial streets shall be allowed to allocate the permitted sign area to each street frontage, without increasing the total sign area allowed. When multiple freestanding signs are erected on a single zone lot under this provision, each shall be placed at the midpoint of the applicable road frontage. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-5. - Signs allowed on private property. 
Signs shall be allowed on private property in the county only in accordance with appendices A through G, which are located at the end of this chapter and which pertain to the various zoning districts in Putnam County. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall erect a sign of any type on any zone lot unless there is located on said lot a building with an area of more than 1,000 square feet unless said sign is exempt from the requirement of obtaining a permit pursuant to subsection 48-14(d). 
(b)  The Georgia Department of Transportation (G.D.O.T.) shall regulate new signage along the Scenic Byway (State Route 16). 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-6. - Sign permit required. 
If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot shall obtain a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of section 48-13. Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain, at all times, a sign permit for such sign in accordance with sections 48-14, 48-15, or 48-16. No sign shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in accordance with section 48-9. No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for a proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this chapter (including those protecting existing signs) in every respect and with the master signage plan in effect for the property. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-7. - Design, construction, and maintenance. 
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of "the state minimum standard codes" as defined in O.C.G.A. 8-2-20. 
(b)  Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, all signs shall be constructed of permanent material and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. 
(c)  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this Code, at all times. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-8. - Master signage plan. 
No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless and until a master signage plan for the zone lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the inspector and approved by the inspector as conforming to this section. 
(a)  Master signage plan . For any zone lot on which the owner proposes to erect one or more signs requiring a permit, the owner shall submit to the inspector a master signage plan containing the following: 
(1)  An accurate plot plan of the zone lot, at such scale as the director may reasonably require. 
(2)  Location of building, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such zone lot. 
(3)  Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of signs and the number of freestanding signs allowed on the zone lot(s) included in the plan under this chapter. 
(4)  A notarized letter from private property owners on which zone lot the signs will be placed, if applicable. 
(5)  An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that incidental signs need not be shown. 
(b)  Limit on number of freestanding signs under master signage plan. The master signage plan for all zone lots with multiple uses or multiple users shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each street on which the zone lots have frontage and shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs. 
(c)  Consent. The master signage plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the inspector shall require. 
(d)  Procedures. A master signage plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other official plan required by the county for the proposed development and shall be processed simultaneously with such other plan. 
(e)  Amendment. A master signage plan may be amended by filing a new master signage plan that conforms with all requirements of the ordinance then in effect. 
(f)  Binding effect. After approval of a master signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any other provision of this chapter. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any provision of this chapter, this chapter shall control. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-9. - Signs in the public right-of-way. 
No sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way, except for the following: 
(a)  Permanent signs. Permanent signs, including: 
(1)  Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, or direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(2)  Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company; and 
(3)  Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities. 
(b)  Emergency signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing work within the public right-of-way which has been authorized or permitted by a governmental agency. 
(c)  Other signs forfeited . Any sign installed or placed on public property except in conformance with the requirements of this section shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the county shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-10. - Signs exempt from regulations under this chapter. 
(a)  Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, ordinance, or court order; 
(b)  Historical or memorial plaques, tables, or markers; 
(c)  Signs which are an integral part of or are painted on or attached to vending machines, gas pumps, ice machines, or similar devices and which indicate the contents of the machine, name or logo of the supplier, price, or operating instructions; 
(d)  Window signs painted on or attached to a window or glass door; 
(e)  Traffic control signs on private property, such as "Stop," "Yield," and similar signs, the face of which meet department of transportation standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort; 
(f)  Any sign erected, re-erected, or modified in order to replace or repair a sign that has been moved, destroyed, altered, removed or otherwise affected by any entity lawfully acting with the powers of eminent domain provided: 
(1)  The exercise of the power of eminent domain is the proximate cause of said sign being affected; and 
(2)  The owner of said sign is limited to replacing said sign with one in compliance with this chapter, the same sign or a replacement with the same exact dimensions, colors and type (freestanding, marquee, etc.) so that the nonconformity of said sign is in no way enlarged. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-11. - General permit procedures. 
The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of all sign permits under this article and the submission and review of master signage plans: 
(a)  Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind, for variances, and for approval of a master signage plan shall be submitted to the director on an application form or in accordance with application specifications published by the director. 
(b)  Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a master signage plan shall be accompanied by the application fees as established by the Putnam County Schedule of Fees. 
(c)  Completeness. Within five working days of receiving an application for a sign permit, a variance, or for a master signage plan, the director shall review it for completeness. If the director finds that it is complete, the application shall then be processed. If the director finds that it is incomplete, the director shall, within such five-day period, send the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this chapter. 
(d)  Action on a sign permit application or application for variance. Within ten working days of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit or variance, the director shall either: 
(1)  Issue the sign permit or variance, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this article and of the applicable master plan; or 
(2)  Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform to the requirements of this chapter and of the applicable master signage plan. In case of a rejection, the director shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the chapter or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is inconsistent. 
(e)  Action on master signage plan. On any application for approval of a master signage plan the director shall take action on the application on one of the following dates: 
(1)  Fourteen days after the submission of a complete application if the application is for signs for an existing building; or 
(2)  On the date of final action on any related application for building permit, site plan, or development plan for signs involving new construction. 
(3)  On or before such applicable date, the director shall either: 
a.  Approve the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan and the plan itself conforms in every respect with requirements of this chapter; or 
b.  Reject the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan or the plan itself fails in any way to conform to the requirements of this chapter. In case of a rejection, the director shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the chapter with which the plan is inconsistent. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-12. - Permits to construct or modify signs. 
(a)  Application. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawing to show the dimension, design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a master signage plan in effect for the zone lot. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same zone lot. 
(b)  Inspection. The director shall cause an inspection of the zone lot for which each permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign has been issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such permit or at such earlier date as the owner may request. If the construction is not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is complete and in full compliance with this chapter and with the building and electrical codes, the director shall affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying the sign(s) and the applicable permit by number or other reference. If the construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance with this chapter and applicable codes, the director shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the construction is then complete, the director shall affix to the premises the permanent symbol described above. 
(c)  Lapse. In the event that a permitted sign has not been substantially completed within six months of the date of the issue of the permit, said permit shall lapse and be void and of no effect. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-13. - Sign permit—Continuing. 
The owner of a zone lot which contains signs requiring a permit under this chapter shall at all times maintain a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for individual zone lots, notwithstanding the fact that a particular zone lot may be included with other zone lots in a master signage plan. 
(a)  Initial sign permit. An initial sign permit shall be automatically issued by the director upon final inspection of the completed sign installation, construction, or modification. 
(b)  Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor owner of the property, subject only to filing such application as the director may require and paying any applicable fee. The assignment shall be accomplished by this filing and shall not require approval by the director. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-14. - Temporary sign permits (private property). 
Temporary signs on private property shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Term. A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary sign for a specified period not to exceed a 60-day period. 
(b)  Number. No more than two temporary sign permits shall be issued to the same registered business on the same zone lot in any calendar year. 
(c)  Other conditions. A temporary sign shall be allowed under conditions of and subject to all requirements for temporary signs as noted herein. 
(d)  Exceptions to the requirement of obtaining a permit for certain temporary signs. Any person or entity which has a recurring requirement to place temporary signs shall not be required to obtain a permit for each individual sign, provided that applicant adheres to the following requirements: 
(1)  The maximum square footage of any sign in a residential zone shall not exceed six square feet. The maximum total square footage for all such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(2)  The maximum square footage of any sign in any nonresidential zone shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(3)  An additional sign may be placed in the rear yard, as defined in the current Putnam County Zoning Ordinance, of any zone lot, which abuts Lakes Oconee or Sinclair, or tributaries thereto. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
Sec. 48-15. - Nonconforming signs and signs without permits. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any zone lot or other premises on which exists a sign that does not conform with the requirements of this chapter or for which there is no current and valid sign permit shall be obligated to remove such sign or, in the case of a nonconforming sign, to bring it into conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(a)  Nonconforming existing signs, permits, and terms. A sign that would be permitted under this chapter only with a sign permit, and which was in existence on the effective date hereof (July 17, 2007) and which was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which for any reason is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or of the zoning ordinance shall not be obligated to remove such sign. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any sign located within a county right-of-way must be removed. 
However, any nonconforming sign shall either be eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this section when any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than 50 percent of the lesser of the original value or replacement value of the sign. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-16. - Variances. 
When, in specific cases, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unusual hardship because of extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the size, shape, or topography of a zone lot, the director may, after application, grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter in regard to the placement or height of a sign. 
(a)  Variances, conditions required. The director may grant a variance only after making findings that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography and which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by owners of similar properties; 
(3)  Granting the variance would not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges, which are denied to similar properties; 
(4)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(5)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
(6)  The variance requested is the minimum variance which will make possible the logical use of the land, building or structure; and 
(7)  The variance is not a request to permit a type of sign which otherwise is not permitted in the zoning district involved. 
(b)  Actions of director on receipt of an application for variance. In addition to those actions required of the director in subsection 48-11(d), the director shall enter written findings that address each condition referred to in subsection (a), above. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-17. - Appeals. 
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the director in regard to any provision of this chapter may appeal said decision to the planning and zoning commission, provided that a notice of appeal is filed with the director within ten days of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee required by the schedule of fees. Such appeals shall be heard by the planning and zoning commission within 30 days of filing the notice of appeal. The decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the board of commissioners, provided that a notice of appeal is filed with the director within ten days of the decision of the planning and zoning commission. The decision of the board of commissioners may be further appealed to the superior court taken within ten days of the decision being appealed. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 48-18. - Violations. 
Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this chapter, by the Code of Ordinances, chapter 1, section 1-13, and by state law. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter and each day's violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this chapter. 
(a)  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the sign is located. 
(b)  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit. 
(c)  To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portion of this article. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Sec. 48-19. - Enforcement and remedies. 
Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or six months' imprisonment or both. Each day's violation shall be considered to be a separate offense. 
All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3)) 
Secs. 48-20—48-50. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE AG-1 
PERMIT REQUIRED 

 
NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign which would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  See section 48-14 for restrictions and exceptions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
APPENDIX B. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONES AG-2 AND R 
PERMIT REQUIRED 

 
PERMIT NOT REQUIRED 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign, which would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  See section 48-14 for restrictions and exceptions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
APPENDIX C. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE R-M 
PERMIT REQUIRED 

 
PERMIT NOT REQUIRED 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign, which would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  See section 48-14 for restrictions and exceptions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
APPENDIX D. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE MHP 
PERMIT REQUIRED 

 
PERMIT NOT REQUIRED 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign, which would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  See section 48-14 for restrictions and exceptions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
APPENDIX E. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE VILLAGE 
PERMIT REQUIRED 

 
PERMIT NOT REQUIRED 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign, which would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  For commercial also see chapter 66, zoning, subsection 66-101(l). 
(4)  See section 48-14 for restrictions and exceptions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
APPENDIX F. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONES C-1, C-2, AND C-3 
PERMIT REQUIRED 

 
PERMIT NOT REQUIRED 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign, which would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Signage is allowed in addition to other computation of freestanding signage. May be lit only with external lighting. 
(5)  See section 48-14 for restrictions and exceptions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
APPENDIX G. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGN TYPE, NUMBER, AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT, AND COMPUTATION IN ZONE I-M 
PERMIT REQUIRED 

 
PERMIT NOT REQUIRED 

 
Notes: 
(1)  "Minimum" area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of size of the sign, which would be allowed by computation. 
(2)  Signs must be located outside public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Square footage is cumulative for all flags on lot. 
(4)  Signage is allowed in addition to other computation of freestanding signage. May be lit only with external lighting. 
(5)  See section 48-14 for restrictions and exceptions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(3); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE AND SCRAP TIRES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 8-20-2002 amended chapter 50 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former chapter 50 derived from Ord. of 8-8-1990 and Ord. of 6-26-1991, §§ III—XIV. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - [Purpose.] 
A chapter defining litter, waste public or private property, scrap tire generators, carriers and sorters; retail tire dealers, municipal, commercial and industrial solid waste, and recovered materials. Regulations for disposal, burning, burial and transportation of all solid waste, litter, waste and scrap tires, the use of solid waste or litter containers or receptacles, prescribing penalties for the violation of said chapter, and other purposes related thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-2. - Enactment clause. 
It is declared to be the policy of Putnam County Georgia, in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment, to revise and update existing laws, and to institute and maintain a comprehensive county-wide program for all solid waste management which will assure that the storage, transportation, collection, and disposal of solid waste does not adversely affect the health, safety, and well being of the public and does not degrade the quality of the environment by their reason of location, design, method of operation or other means and which, to the extent feasible and practical, make maximum utilization of the resources contained in solid waste referred to in this chapter as recovered material. 
It is further declared to be the policy of Putnam County, Georgia, to educate and encourage generators and handlers of all solid waste to reduce and minimize to the greatest extent possible the amount of solid waste which requires collection, treatment, or disposal through source reduction, reuse, composting, recycling, and other methods to promote markets for and engage in the purpose of goods made from recovered materials and goods which are recyclable. 
Therefore, by power vested to the county through the Constitution of the State of Georgia, article IX, section II, paragraph I, the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County does hereby ordain and enact into law the following: 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Secs. 50-3—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Administrative officer means the person authorized by the board of commissioners to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter, or his duly qualified representative. 
Board means the legally designated and qualified governing authority of the county, the board of commissioners. 
Collector means a person who, under agreement, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting and/or disposing of solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or disposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70.] 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal and includes administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and other elements necessary or useful in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn or dispose of a substance. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51.] 
Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes, highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludge; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes; electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and byproducts; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22.] 
Inert waste means solid waste that will not, or is not likely to, cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste materials, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this section. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42.] 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22.] 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. [As defined in § 391-3-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management.] 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22.] 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42.] 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22.] 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22.] 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. [As defined in § 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management.] 
Scavenge means the uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51.] 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and the city, county, and state governments. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51.] 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51.] 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51.] 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse, putrescible and nonputrescible, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; hazardous wastes, and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources [subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. § 1342]; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22.] 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste, a hazardous substance, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of nonhazardous, low-impact animal byproducts classified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, "waste" includes without limitation, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51.] 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative agricultural, and silvicultural operations. [As defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22.] 
(b)  Other words, not specifically defined within this section shall have their standard or dictionary meaning. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-32. - Waste disposal—General. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all litter, waste, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, waste, scrap tires, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in Putnam County including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in Putnam County unless such litter or waste originates in Putnam County or other areas authorized by the Putnam County Board of Commissioners, and: 
(1)  The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for the disposal of litter, waste, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires or recovered materials and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)  The litter, waste, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables or scrap tires is placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4, et seq., and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, et seq., and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq., applicable to solid waste, except where requirements of this chapter are more stringent. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Violation. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13, subsection 50-35(a), or this section. 
(1)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may also be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway and/or other public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence [As provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.2).]; and/or 
(2)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and/or 
(3)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article; and/or 
(4)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation; and/or 
(5)  In case of an open dump or improper solid waste, litter or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this chapter. Putnam County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(6)  The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this chapter. 
(7)  In addition to actions filed by Putnam County for violations of this chapter, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seed conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Putnam County Board of Commissioners, the director of the planning and development department, and/or the environmental compliance officer or his/her designee. 
(2)  Any person(s) authorized to enforce this chapter shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this chapter, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this chapter must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(3)  Appeals for the violation of this chapter may be made to the Magistrate Court of Putnam County, or higher court if the person so chooses. The person always has the right to consult his/her attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(c)  Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(1)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this chapter, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(2)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in section 1-13 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the court and/or the board of commissioners may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this chapter for which said violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(4)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after court order as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including but not limited to, any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this chapter, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the chapter on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(5)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on their personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(6)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator too perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(d)  Evidence of violations. 
(1)  Whenever litter, or any type of waste(s), as defined in this chapter, is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped by any person(s) or from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that said person(s) or the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(2)  Whenever any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this chapter, which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the chapter is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002; Amend. of 4-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-34. - Administration. 
(a)  The administrative officer is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall have control of solid waste facilities, equipment and personnel and shall organize and operate a publicly owned solid waste collection, transportation and disposal system. He shall inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors, private transportation and disposal systems to the end that such operations shall be in compliance with this chapter. All regulatory actions of the administrative officer shall be subject to the review of the board. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a requirement of or fee charged by the administrative officer shall have the right to appeal to the board which may, upon hearing, confirm, modify or revoke such requirements or fees. 
(c)  Furthermore, in addition to the administrative officer, any duly sworn law officer of the county is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 50-35. - Precollection. 
(a)  Accumulations. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building in the county unless it is in proper containers or otherwise prepared as set forth in this section or shall bury or burn litter or waste without the express prior approval of the administrative officer or other appropriately authorized agency such as the forestry commission for burning permits. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited. The administrative officer by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premise with such solid waste accumulation to remove such accumulation. Failure to remove such accumulation within ten days of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall constitute a separate violation of this section for each day the garbage, litter or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. For the first violation of this chapter, there shall be an automatic fine of $200.00 and a minimum fine of $750.00 nor greater than $1,200.00 for the second violation. This subsection shall apply whether the owner or occupant of such premises disposes of his own solid waste on the premises or not. 
(b)  Containers. All solid wastes that are likely to attract flies, rodents, dogs, cats or other animals, or to blow and litter the landscape, or to create odors or vapors, creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or, in any way to create a nuisance are required to be placed in approved containers. Approved containers may be cans constructed of metal or plastic, essentially leakproof, rodentproof and flyproof and with tightfitting lids, or may be disposable paper or plastic bags intended for garbage and are essentially flyproof and rodentproof. Bags may not be allowed to accumulate until they decompose or become a nuisance. 
(c)  Owner disposal. If the owner or occupant of a premises elects to dispose of his own solid waste on the premises, he is encouraged to bury the solid waste in an approved manner. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-36. - Green boxes. 
(a)  The county has provided metal solid waste storage containers located at strategic sites throughout the county. These containers are designed and intended for use for household solid waste only. 
(b)  No person shall place any construction refuse, land clearing or tree trimming refuse, large appliances, bed springs, scrap iron, rocks, concrete, furniture or similar bulky noncompatible materials within these containers with the following exceptions: Small amounts of tree trimmings, provided they do not exceed four inches in diameter or four feet in length; furniture, provided it is broken down and demolished and does not exceed four feet in maximum dimension; metal toys or bicycles, or small dead animals. No dead animals over 30 pounds in weight, or any smoldering ashes or incineration residue may be placed in these containers; nor may any substance classed as hazardous waste be placed therein. Scavenging in or around the containers is prohibited. 
(c)  Collection from these storage containers by county collection vehicles should be performed at least two times per week and more often in high solid waste generation areas. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-37. - Private collection, transportation and disposal. 
(a)  Vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such a manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. In addition, vehicles used by collectors shall be readily identifiable by letters not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, vehicle number if more than one, state permit number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. 
(b)  Collectors. No person may act as a collector of solid waste within the confines of the county unless he has first applied for and received a valid occupation registration from the Putnam County Planning and Development Department. Applications for the license must be received by the Putnam County Planning and Development Department at least 15 days prior to January 1 of each year. The application must supply, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Number and date of applicant's state permit for solid waste collection and/or disposal site. 
(2)  Number of vehicles, capacity, type and vehicle identification number, and number of employees for each vehicle. 
(3)  The names of industrial and commercial establishments and the number of residences to be served. 
(4)  If applicant does not operate a disposal site, he must give the name and state permit number of any disposal site to which he transports solid waste. 
The administrative officer shall consider such applications within two weeks of receipt. He/she shall evaluate the accuracy of data submitted and the applicant's capacity to perform his proposed solid waste operation within the requirements of this chapter in a satisfactory manner. The administrative officer shall take such action upon the application as he/she deems reasonable and shall thereupon notify the applicant of action taken and, in case of denial, the reasons therefor. 
(c)  Occupation registration fee. The occupation registration fee for approved applications shall be an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per calendar year, payable at the time the initial license is issued and on or before January 1 thereafter, except that such payment may be prorated per month or fraction of month for the remainder in which the registration is first approved. Registrations shall not be transferable or refundable, but shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of this chapter, provided that prior to suspension or revocation the board shall afford the alleged violator an opportunity to be heard as to reasons, if any, why such order for suspension or revocation should not be issued; and following such hearing, the board shall take such action as they deem to be fit and proper. 
(d)  Regulation of all solid waste or litter containers and receptacles. 
(1)  All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles and their surrounding area shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(2)  Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the appropriate container or receptacle. 
(3)  No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the Putnam County Board of Commissioners or their designee. 
(4)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle, or set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(5)  No person shall deposit large, noncompatible articles in containers or receptacles such as but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, automobile parts, boat parts, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(6)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(7)  No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. 
(8)  No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. 
(9)  No person shall indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of any containers or receptacles. 
(10)  No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection, convenience and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in a manner that it can be handled by the attendant and shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation unless express written permission is given by the Putnam County Board of Commissioners or designee. 
(11)  No person shall deposit solid waste, litter or liquid of any kind at any county solid waste collection and recycling center in to county owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for said material. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002; Amend. of 4-7-2006) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 50-38. - Asbestos; scrap tire management. 
(a)  Asbestos to be received in the landfill is subject to special handling and service charges as established by the county. Asbestos to be accepted must be contained in plastic bags and stored in a fiberglass barrel (or better), all in accordance with state regulations. The county reserves the right to reject any and all asbestos materials based upon the site availability. 
(b)  Old tires require special handling and will be subject to special handling and service charges as established by the county. The county in its discretion may require that tires be split before acceptance. 
(c)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 1,000 scrap tires. 
(d)  Tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-39. - Disposal sites. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites licensed by the board of commissioners and operated in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources and at no other place. However, to further land reclamation and conservation, private property owners are urged to obtain shortterm state and county permits to operate approved disposal sites for nonputrescible and nonlittering wastes such as construction wastes, land clearing wastes, leaves and tree trimmings. In specific instances, when they deem advisable, the board may waive the licensing requirement for incorporation of wood refuse such as wood chips, shavings, saw dust or leaves into land, provided that no nuisance is created and with the approval of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-40. - User charges. 
All or some solid wastes deposited at a convenience center may be subject to the user charges as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges determined by the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. User charges for vehicles shall be based on actual truck weights less the tare weight for the vehicle as determined on the landfill scales at the time of deposit or by volume. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-41. - Payment of user charges. 
(a)  Each user delivering waste to a county facility shall pay the user charges, if any, as provided in the schedule of fees and charges at the time of deposit at the county facility, unless a charge account has been approved in advance by the county commissioners or their designated representative. 
(b)  Applications for charge accounts shall be made at the board of commissioners' office. 
(c)  On or before the tenth day of each month, the county clerk shall bill each approved user for the previous months landfill user fees. The bill shall be due and payable not later than the 25th day of the month of billing. Bills not paid by the 25th of that month shall be subject to a ten percent penalty, plus interest. Accounts with bills past due more than 30 days may be excluded from use of the landfill and licenses, if any, may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the board. Uncollected user fees more than 90 days in arrears shall be turned over to the appropriate agency for collection. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-42. - Dead animals. 
(a)  Disposition of dead animals is the exclusive responsibility of the owner of such animals. In specific instances, if the owner is not known, the county will dispose of dead animals, but as soon as the owner of such animal is determined, he shall be liable to the county for the full costs of disposing of such animals. 
(b)  No person shall allow dead animals to remain on or in front of his premises more than 24 hours without proper burial or other approved disposition. Each 24-hour period excepting the first shall be deemed a separate violation, subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle, except containers or receptacles designed for such purpose and so designated by the Putnam County Board of Commissioners. 
(d)  Small dead animals may be processed at the Putnam County Animal Control Department. Arrangements are to be made with the Animal Control Department prior to delivery. Confirmation must include type, size, and any pertinent facts including how said animal died and any known or suspected diseases or conditions. Some diseased animals are strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, ch. 14. 
Sec. 50-43. - Financing. 
To ensure adequate financing of a comprehensive solid waste management program, the administrative officer shall annually submit to the board a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The board shall take such action as it deems appropriate as to the budget and shall give due consideration to the budget in its final form, in the establishment of the millage rate for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Secs. 50-44—50-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDFILLS, REFUSE, AND REGULATED HAZARDOUS WASTE 

Sec. 50-76. - Regulation of municipal solid waste landfills, inert landfills, construction and demolition landfills, and solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)  No landfill shall be operated in Putnam County, Georgia, other than a landfill designated by the Putnam County Board of Commissioners as being a part of the comprehensive solid waste management plan, and no private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in Putnam County, Georgia, without a solid waste handling permit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(b)  No person shall deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection, convenience, and/or recycling facility. 
(c)  No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection, convenience, and/or recycling facility. 
(d)  No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste collection, convenience, and/or recycling facility. 
(e)  Any price on solid waste brought to said facility will be set to defray total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)  Hours of operation of said facilities will be set to maximize convenience to residents of that area. 
(g)  All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge provided it is [they are] separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)  All collection centers will be manned during hours of operation to ensure compliance with this chapter and all applicable state and/or federal laws. 
(i)  Attendant on duty will have full authority of said center consistent with this chapter. 
(j)  All rules listed above shall apply to all public and/or private property in said county, all waters and/or waterways of said county, and all Putnam County Solid Waste Collection, Convenience and Recycling Centers. 
(k)  Recovered materials and recovered materials processing facilities are subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-77. - Issuance or revocation of landfill permits. 
The board of commissioners acting on behalf of the citizens of the county, as the county's governing authority, can issue or revoke permits as they pertain to a landfill site, maintenance and operation. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-78. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-79. - Regulated hazardous waste not accepted in landfills. 
No hazardous waste shall be accepted in any landfill in the county. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-80. - Yard trimmings. 
(a)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion with the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(b)  No yard trimmings may be stored for more than 30 days without the express written consent of Putnam County. Requests for such are to be made at the Putnam County Planning and Development Department. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002; Amend. of 4-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-81. - Recycling. 
The Putnam County Board of Commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of citizens of Putnam County, in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of; therefore, it is the policy of the Putnam County Board of Commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-82. - Severability. 
Should any sentence, section, subsection or provision of Ordinance of 8-20-2002 or application of a provision of said ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court or other competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 50-83. - Repeal of conflicting resolutions or articles. 
(a)  Therefore, be it ordained that all conflicting resolutions, ordinances or parts or sections of resolutions or ordinances in conflict with Ordinance of 8-20-2002 are hereby repealed. 
(b)  Be it further ordained that said chapter shall take effect on the first day of the month after passage by the Putnam County Board of Commissioners, and shall be enforced from and after such date, the public health and welfare demanding it. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2002) 
Chapter 54 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-211 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22. 
Related laws references— Homestead exemption, art. III; homestead exemption for persons 65 or older, art. IV. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County hotel/motel occupancy tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 54-31. - Levied; rate. 
The board of commissioners of the county hereby levies an excise tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b) upon the furnishing for value to the public of any rooms, lodging or accommodation furnished by any person or legal entity for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for value in the amount of eight percent of the charge to the public for such rooms and furnishings. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995; Amend. of 7-21-2015 ; Ord. of 3-15-2016(2) ) 
Sec. 54-32. - Expenditure for promotion of tourism, conventions and trade shows. 
(a)  The board of commissioners pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b)(5)(A), 48-13-51(b)(6) shall expend in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected an amount equal to four and one-half percent of the collected tax for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows. Any amounts expended as provided in this section shall be expended through a contract with a private sector nonprofit organization. A private sector nonprofit organization shall meet the criteria under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(3). 
(b)  In each fiscal year during which a tax is collected pursuant to this code section, an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceeds the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5)(B), for tourism product development. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995; Amend. of 7-21-2015 ; Ord. of 3-15-2016(2) ) 
Sec. 54-33. - Budget plan to be adopted; audit; beginning date for collection. 
(a)  The county shall prior to each fiscal year in which the tax is imposed adopt a budget plan specifying how the expenditure requirements will be met as required in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1)(A). The authorized entity with which the county contracts shall furnish its budget for expenditures it shall make prior to adoption of the county budget. 
(b)  The county audit each year shall reflect whether the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 have been met. 
(c)  The first month of collection under this revised article shall be effective June 1, 2015. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995; Amend. of 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 54-34. - Collection procedures. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every operator of a qualifying facility within the unincorporated areas to collect the tax imposed in this article. 
(b)  All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the county clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each month in which such taxes are collected. The county clerk shall furnish the required forms for reporting the tax. 
(c)  Payment in full shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding calendar month period showing the gross rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected and such other information as may be required by the county clerk. 
(d)  A collection fee will be allowed to reporting operators collecting the tax levied. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales tax under O.C.G.A. title 48, chapter 8. Each operator collecting a tax under this article shall keep all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charge for each occupancy and such other information as the county clerk may require. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995) 
Sec. 54-35. - Enforcement of collection; powers of clerk/treasurer. 
The clerk/treasurer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed in this article, and in doing shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To examine, or authorize the examination of, the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to persons subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  To require the filing of reports by any persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax levied in this article; and 
(3)  To allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax levied in this article, but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995) 
Sec. 54-36. - Court action. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the county attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995) 
Sec. 54-37. - Liability of hotel operator. 
If any hotel operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this article and subsequent thereto sells out his business or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. If the purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefor to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995) 
Sec. 54-38. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk-treasurer, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995) 
Secs. 54-39—54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 54-71. - Enumeration of exempt tangible personal property. 
There shall be exempt from county ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes, 100 percent of the following described personal property: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in this state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. For purposes of this subsection, remanufacture of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components shall constitute manufacturing operations in this state. Remanufacture of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components means the substantial overhauling or rebuilding of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components; 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within this state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. Such period shall be determined based on application of a first-in, first-out method of accounting for the inventory. The official books and records of the warehouse, dock or wharf where such property is being stored shall contain a full, true and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such property for which a freeport exemption has been claimed shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and the county. 
(Res. of 8-30-1985) 
Secs. 54-72—54-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOME DECALS 

Sec. 54-80. - Issuance of mobile home location permits; decals. 
O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492 is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety along with any future amendments or revisions made by the General Assembly as section 54-80 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. 
(Amend. of 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 54-81. - Mobile home decal; penalty for failure to display. 
O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493 is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety along with any future amendments or revisions made by the General Assembly as section 54-81 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. 
(Amend. of 4-19-2005) 
Secs. 54-82—54-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX ON DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 54-91. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to exercise the powers granted to the board of commissioners of the county to levy a business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as similar language contained in such statute. 
The Putnam County Board of Commissioners ordains as follows: 
( Ord. of 6-18-2013 ) 
Sec. 54-92. - Levy of tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 2014, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county to include: each state and national banking association, federal savings and loan association, state building and loan association, and other depository banking institutions doing business from one or more locations within Putnam County. 
( Ord. of 6-18-2013 ) 
Sec. 54-93. - Rate of tax. 
The business tax rate on any depository financial institution subject to this tax shall be 0.25 percent of gross receipts of said institution during the calendar year immediately preceding the year for which the tax shall be due; provided, however, that the minimum amount of the business tax levied upon each depository financial institution for any year shall be $1,000.00. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
( Ord. of 6-18-2013 ) 
Sec. 54-94. - Returns. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return, form PT 440, of its gross receipts with the Putnam County Tax Commissioner on March 1 of each year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall in the manner and in the form prescribed by the Commission of the Department of Revenue based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 which includes filing a copy of Georgia Form 900. The tax hereby levied shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return; provided, however, that if otherwise authorized by law, nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the county or the tax commissioner from taking reasonable steps to confirm the information set out in the returns, and to make such adjustments in the tax reported to be due as the circumstances warrant. 
( Ord. of 6-18-2013 ) 
Sec. 54-95. - Tax due date. 
The tax levied hereby shall be due payable on or before 30 days after the filing of the return to the Putnam County Tax Commissioner. Taxes which are not paid in a timely manner shall be in default, and shall bear interest which accrues at the rate of one percent of the balance each month and shall be subject to such costs as are from time to time provided by the Code for delinquent ad valorem taxes. Taxes delinquent under the provisions of this article shall be subject to and collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes in Putnam County. 
( Ord. of 6-18-2013 ) 
Chapter 58 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; roads and bridges, ch. 46; cable television franchise, app. A. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

Sec. 58-1. - Purposes. 
These regulations are designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of Putnam County, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the sighting of telecommunication towers (excluding HAM and other amateur radio towers, emergency service radio towers, etc.) within Putnam County so as to protect the welfare, safety, character and integrity of residential neighborhoods and the overall community; provide the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities to serve the residents of Putnam County; protect the environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunication facilities; minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, sighting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; to avoid adverse impacts to other communication carriers; avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful sighting of telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout Putnam County; maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures and co-location as a primary option rather than construction of single use towers; provide for location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned residential; and provide for the removal of all towers that are either abandoned or fail to meet the requirements set forth in these regulations. 
(Amend. of 6-21-2011) 
Sec. 58-2. - Registration required. 
In order to provide the governing authority with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications providers who offer or provide wireless telecommunications services within Putnam County; to assist the governing authority in enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County; to assist the governing authority in the collection and enforcement of any fees or charges that may be due Putnam County; and to assist the governing authority in monitoring compliance with local, state, and federal laws, all owners of telecommunications towers that offer or provide any telecommunications service within Putnam County, Georgia shall register annually with the Putnam County Planning and Development Department for a registration fee of $50.00, on forms to be provided by the Putnam County Planning and Development Department, which form shall include the following: 
(1)  The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registrant's information; 
(3)  A description of the telecommunications service the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses, or institutions within Putnam County; 
(4)  Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license, or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunication services or facilities within Putnam County; 
(5)  A narrative and map description of the applicant's existing wireless telecommunication facilities towers that are within Putnam County, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The governing authority may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this chapter or with other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of Putnam County; provided, however, that the governing authority is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. Any loss of use, increase in use, or change in use of existing antennas or towers must be reported at the time the change occurs; 
(6)  Such other information as the Putnam County Planning and Development Department or Board of Commissioners may reasonably require; 
(7)  Failure to register as required and to truthfully report all information required in the annual registration shall be an offense and a conviction for violation thereof shall be punished as provided in the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. 
(Amend. of 6-21-2011) 
Sec. 58-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, terms shall have the meanings indicated below. 
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, flag poles, light poles, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers (such alternative design structures are also known as "stealth design"). 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Co-location means the placement of antennas of two or more service providers on a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
Governing authority means the governing authority of Putnam County, Georgia. 
Macro telecommunications facilities means those facilities that are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without lattice-work and without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Nonresidential district means C-1, C-2 and C-3 commercial district, and I-M industrial-manufacturing district as set forth in the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. 
Residential district means AG-1 and AG-2, R-1-R, R-1, R-2, RM-1, RM-2, RM-3, Village and MHP districts as set forth in the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. 
Temporary telecommunications tower means mobile wireless telecommunications towers mounted upon trailers, operated temporarily. Also known as "cellular on wheels." 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunications towers, alternative tower structures, and other similar structures. 
Tower height means the distance measured from base level of the tower to the highest point on the tower including antennas. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities means all buildings, cabinets, structures and facilities, including generating and switching stations, repeaters, antennas, transmitters, receivers, towers and all other buildings and structures relating to low-power mobile voice transmission, data transmission, video transmission, and radio transmission, or wireless transmission; accomplished by linking a wireless network of radio wave transmitting devices (including, but not limited to, wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, portable phones, pagers, mobile phones, or similar facilities) to the conventional ground-wired communications system (including, but not limited to telephone lines, video and microwave transmission) through a series of short range, contiguous cells that are part of an evolving grid. 
(Amend. of 6-21-2011) 
Sec. 58-4. - Exclusions. 
The following will be exempt from these regulations: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna less than 70 feet in total height and owned and operated to receive only antenna designed for over the air reception of television broadcast signals, multi-channel, multipoint distribution services or direct broadcast satellite service; 
(2)  Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by Putnam County used for governmental or emergency purposes unless otherwise directed by the local governing authority and further provided that a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority of Putnam County. 
(Amend. of 6-21-2011) 
Sec. 58-5. - Placement by zoning district. 
Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be authorized in the zoning districts of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County as follows: 
(1)  Not permitted. Except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, telecommunications towers or antennas shall not be permitted in R, RM, or MHP districts, or along any corridors described below: 
a.  Within a half mile of the center line of county road Old Phoenix Road, beginning at the intersection of Old Phoenix Road and State Route 44 and continuing for one mile along Old Phoenix Road; 
b.  Within a half mile of the center line of county road Harmony Road, beginning at the intersection of Harmony Road and State Route 44 and continuing for one mile along Harmony Road; and 
c.  Within a half mile of the centerline of state highway State Route 44, beginning at the Putnam County boundary with Greene County and continuing south for two miles beyond the intersection of Old Phoenix Road, Harmony Road, and State Route 44. 
(2)  Corridor exception. Telecommunication towers or antennas, subject to the remaining provisions within this chapter, shall be permitted within the corridors described in subsection (1) of this Code section where the proposed tower is: 
a.  The tower is a monopole; 
b.  One hundred feet or less in height; 
c.  At least 200 feet from the roadway; and 
d.  Separated from other telecommunication towers or antennas at least 1,200 feet in all directions. 
(3)  Conditional use. The placement and installation of all towers and antennas shall be conditional uses in the following zoning districts: 
a.  Towers and antennas in the industrial-manufacturing district IM. 
b.  Towers and antennas in agricultural districts (AG). 
c.  Towers and antennas in C-1, C-2 and C-3. 
d.  Antennas attached to buildings in the C-1, C-2 and C-3 districts; provided, however, that antennas will add no more than 20 feet to the height of the building and will be installed on any building in such a way as to minimize the visual impact of the installation from public streets to the absolute minimum; to minimize visual impacts of the antenna from habitable living areas of residential units which directly face the antenna within 100 feet horizontal distance; if back-up equipment is installed on any roof, the back-up facility shall be low lying and set back or otherwise located to minimize visibility, no building mounted antenna shall extend more than four horizontal feet from the building. 
e.  Monopole towers (or alternative tower structures of stealth design) and antennas no greater than 100 feet in total height along the protected corridors set forth in section 58-5, provided the tower and antenna is setback from said roadways at least 200 feet and is separated from all other towers at least 1,200 feet in all directions. Antennas on existing structures will be subject to the conditions of the previous paragraph. Towers that are taller than prescribed in this paragraph may seek a conditional use, but there is no guarantee of an approval. 
f.  Temporary telecommunications tower for a period not to exceed six months in any nonresidential district provided height does not exceed district requirements and provided the temporary tower is setback from any protected corridors set forth in section 58-5 a distance of at least 200 feet from the right-of-way. A temporary permit is all that may be conditionally approved. 
(4)  Prohibitions. No new cell tower may be established if there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the search area that the new cell is to serve. A propagation study will be required to show proof that coverage objections cannot be met, should a carrier seek a variance to this provision. 
(5)  Preferred location sites. Any telecommunications towers being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication and any existing structure shall be a preferred location site for antenna where located within nonresidential districts; provided, however, that locations which meet these criteria shall be subject to the design and sighting components of this article. 
(Amend. of 6-21-2011; Amend. of 7-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 58-6. - General provisions. 
The following provisions are applicable to all towers and antennas regardless of location unless context limits application to towers only: 
(1)  Landscaping and maintenance. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent properties. As such, a landscaping buffer consisting of evergreen material that is at least six feet in height, xeriscape tolerant, or irrigated, shall be planted on all sides of the site, said landscaping plan shall be submitted to the planning and development department when the building permit is applied for. Said buffer shall be maintained and any loss of vegetation within the buffer shall be replaced by the applicant. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as tower sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may provide a sufficient buffer as determined by the appropriate county authority. Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. The landscaping maintenance set forth herein shall be a required condition for approval of the annual occupation registration. No more than two parking spaces per facility shall be allowed, and a minimum ten-foot-wide turnaround drive with an all-weather surface shall be required if parking spaces are provided. 
(2)  Lighting. Towers and antennas shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area and views, or the tower shall use a dual lighting system consisting of a strobe light during the day and a slow flashing red light at night unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(3)  Removal of abandoned towers and antennas. After a continuous period of 12 months during which an antenna or tower is not used for its original purpose (including upgraded equipment), it shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from Putnam County Planning and Development Department notifying the owner of such abandonment. The owner may request a three-month extension prior to the end of the 12-month period. Said three-month extension may be granted administratively by the planning and development department if the request is received in writing by the planning and development department prior to the end of the 12-month period. If a three-month grace period is granted, then a notice of abandonment will be given to the owner at the end of the three-month period. If any abandoned antenna or tower is not removed by the owner within said 90 days after notice of abandonment, then the governing authority may remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective for the tower until all users cease using the tower. Within 30 days of the owner's receipt of said notice of abandonment, any owner aggrieved by said notice of abandonment may file a written request to be heard before the governing authority. 
In addition, prior to the issuance of any tower construction permit, the applicant shall submit security for the costs of removal of the structure in an amount estimated by the applicant and approved by the building official as sufficient to cover the costs of removal. Such security may be in the form of: 
a.  An 18-month security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, payable to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department; the security bond shall be renewed at the time the annual operating permit is renewed in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of removal at the time of renewal. Such renewal bond must be approved by the building official. 
b.  A deposit of cash with the Putnam County Planning and Development Department or an escrow of any other instrument readily convertible to cash at face value with a financial institutional; and in case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are deposited, being subject to the approval of the Putnam County Planning and Development Department. In the case of an escrow account, the applicant shall file with the Putnam County Planning and Development Department an agreement between the financial institution and the applicant specifying the funds that are in the escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the Putnam County Planning and Development Department and may not be used or pledged by the applicant as security in any other matter during that period and that, in the case of the applicant's failure to remove the tower and antennas in accordance with the terms set forth above, then the bank shall immediately make the funds available to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department for use of completion of the removal of the structure. Said deposit of cash shall be kept current to cover the actual costs of removal. 
c.  A letter of credit from a financial institution in a form approved by the Putnam County Planning and Development Department providing that the financial institution does guarantee funds in an amount equal to the aforementioned cost of removal and that in the event the applicant fails to remove the structure in accordance with the terms set forth above, the financial institution shall pay to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department immediately and without further action, such funds as necessary to finance the removal of the structure up to the amount specified in the letter of credit. Such amount shall be kept current to cover the actual costs of removal. 
(4)  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers: 
a.  Freestanding towers must be set back a distance equal to the total height of the tower from adjacent property lines, as measured radially from the base of tower to the property line of the subject property; and the design must be able to fully collapse upon itself. 
b.  Freestanding towers must also be set back from all single- and two-family residential districts and historic districts or historic landmarks, a distance of the total height of the tower in all directions, as measured radially from the base of the tower to the district boundaries or landmark boundaries. 
c.  Guy wires and accessory facilities associated with towers must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for buildings. 
d.  All lattice or guy-wired towers constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall conform to the following minimum tower separation requirements as set out in chart form below. Antennas mounted on rooftops, monopole towers, or alternative tower structures shall be exempt from these minimum separation distances as set out in chart form below. Except in the industrial district, monopole towers shall be separated from any other tower at least a distance equal to 1,200 feet in all directions. In the industrial district the separation distance between monopole towers shall equal the height of the tallest tower adjacent to the monopole tower. All freestanding towers which are alternative in design (stealth design) shall be separated from any other towers a minimum distance of the height of the tallest tower to which it is adjacent. 

 
(5)  Tower color. The color of the tower shall be either painted gray or left in its natural gray metallic state unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(6)  Insurance. Commercial general liability insurance shall be required with combined single limits of liability coverage of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, for bodily injury and property damages, with respect to the construction, use of the property, maintenance, operation, or other liabilities associated with a telecommunication tower. 
(7)  Federal and state requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the federal government or state government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the compliance schedule mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna by the owner or by the local governing authority at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided above. 
(8)  Building codes and safety standards. To insure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the latest edition of the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. A professional engineer shall certify that all antennas, towers, and wireless telecommunications equipment are erected and installed so as to comply with said codes and standards. The tower design must be able to fully collapse upon itself. 
(9)  Security fence. All towers shall have a security fence of not less than six feet in height with anti-climbing devices on the fence. A sign no larger than 32 square feet in size shall be placed on the security fence or other outermost structural element of the telecommunication facility; which sign shall state the name and telephone number of a person responsible for the safety and maintenance of said facility and emergency contact numbers. No other signs, symbols, or advertisements shall be allowed on the security fence or on any monopole, tower, or antenna. Check with the office of Putnam County Planning and Development for sign permits and allowable sign sizes. 
(10)  Noise. The intensity level of sound from the wireless telecommunications facility including temporary generators used during power outages, measured at the property line of abutting property zoned for residential use shall not at any time exceed 70 decibels from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 55 decibels from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.; and abutting property zoned for nonresidential use the same shall not exceed 80 decibels at any time. 
(11)  Maintenance of telecommunications facilities. Towers must be properly and routinely maintained in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all included in submittal information. The owner shall provide the Putnam County Planning and Development Department with a certified copy of the engineer's inspection report, which includes, but is not limited to, the condition of the grounding system, the structural integrity of the facility, any damage incurred over the past year, the condition of the bolts, and a plan to correct any deficiencies. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communications towers as follows: Guyed tower at least once every two years; lattice or self-supported towers every three years; and monopoles every three to five years to insure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department. If, upon inspection, the Putnam County Planning and Development Department concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days from the date of the mailing of such notice, to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, or the owner may submit an alternate schedule for approval within 30 days of notice. There is no guarantee an alternate schedule will be approved. The governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense, if the deadline is not met. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided. 
(12)  Fire prevention. All telecommunication facilities shall be designed and operated in such a manner so as to minimize the risk of igniting a fire or intensifying one that otherwise occurs. To this end all of the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunications facilities when determined necessary by the state fire marshal. Demonstration of compliance with requirements a. through f. shall be evidenced by a certificate signed by the state fire marshal on the building plans submitted. 
a.  At least one-hour, fire-resistant interior surfaces shall be used in the construction of all buildings; 
b.  Monitored automatic fire extinguishing systems approved by the state fire marshal shall be installed in all equipment buildings and enclosures; 
c.  Rapid entry (KNOX) systems shall be installed as required by the state fire marshal; 
d.  Type and location of vegetation and other materials within ten feet of the facility and all new structures, including telecommunication towers, shall have review for fire safety purposes by the state fire marshal. Requirements established by the state fire marshal shall be followed; 
e.  The access road must be designed for emergency services vehicles to reach the site and turn around; 
f.  All tree trimmings and trash generated by construction of the facility shall be removed from the property and properly disposed of prior to building permit finalization or commencement of operation, whichever comes first. 
(13)  Co-location. Each telecommunications tower application shall be required by affidavit of the applicant to make a good faith effort to substantially demonstrate that no existing or planned towers within the applicant's search ring can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna/transmitter as described below: 
a.  The applicant shall contact the owners of all existing or planned towers within the applicant's search ring of a height roughly equal to or greater than the height necessary to accommodate the applicant's antenna. Such contact shall be by certified mail/return receipt requested. The applicant shall provide a list of all owners contacted, the date of such contact, the form and content of such contact, and a copy of the return receipt of the certified mail. 
b.  The applicant shall request the following information from each owner contacted: 
1.  Identification of the site by location, tax map and parcel number, existing uses on or adjacent to the site, and tower height; 
2.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the antenna proposed by the applicant without requiring structural changes be made to the tower. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
3.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the tower. If so, the owner shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required; 
4.  If structurally able, would shared use on such existing tower be precluded for reasons related to RF interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing tower or antenna(s) or the proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if at all; 
5.  If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing tower would charge for such shared use; 
6.  Co-location on an existing tower will only require a building permit, as the tower would have already obtained a conditional use. 
c.  Such request shall be made at least one month prior to the filing of an application for a building permit or conditional use. Responses to such request shall also be included. 
1.  Failure of a listed owner to respond shall not be relevant if a timely, good faith effort was made to obtain one. However, where an existing or planned tower is known to have capacity for additional antennas of the sort proposed, that application for a new tower shall not be complete until the response of such owner is filed, or in the case of a failure to respond, proof of the applicant's attempted contact with the correct owner to the correct address by certified mail/return receipt requested is filed by the applicant, or by way of a propagation study which shows the tower is technically flawed for the required coverage. 
2.  The governing authority shall maintain and provide, on request, records of responses from each owner. 
3.  Once an owner demonstrates an antenna of the sort proposed by the application cannot be accommodated on the owner's tower, the owner need not be contacted by future applicants for antennas of the sort proposed. 
d.  The governing authority may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee for shared use and the costs to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared tower are reasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. Shared use is not precluded simply based on fee and cost structures, unless found to be unreasonable by the local governing authority. 
e.  If the owner of an approved or pre-existing tower refuses to allow co-location, an affidavit shall be required that states the reason for the refusal. An unsubstantiated refusal by the owner of a tower to allow for co-location not supported by the required engineering evidence shall be a reason for the governing authority to refuse to renew the annual operating permit of said approved or pre-existing tower. It is understood that pricing is propriety and therefore can and will be considered a valid reason. Generally however, the only other reasons for revoking a tower permit would be for continued noncompliance of health, safety, and general welfare issues, relating to tower maintenance. In addition, evidence submitted by the applicant based on a report by a certified engineer to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall be required and shall consist of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
5.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure are in excess of the cost of new tower development and location to the extent that co-location would impose a significant financial burden on the applicant; 
6.  The applicant demonstrates there are other limiting factors that render existing towers or structures unsuitable. 
7.  If co-location on an existing tower or structure is not possible as set forth above, and a new tower is deemed appropriate, then the new tower must be constructed to allow co-location of antennas and the applicant must agree to accommodate the co-location of other antennas on the new tower, according to the following: For towers up to 100 feet in height, the tower and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least two users; for towers up to 125 feet in total height, the tower and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three users; and for towers more than 125 feet in height, the tower and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four users, unless the proposed tower is an alternative tower structure or stealth design. 
(14)  Any new antenna/provider shall ensure there will be no interference to other providers or customers in the area. If such occurs this may result in an immediate rescission of the permit and service may be required to be terminated immediately. 
(15)  The county shall be afforded the vertical real estate opportunity to place public safety radio equipment on the tower and the necessary ground real estate for all applicable supporting infrastructure at no charge (except for reinforcing the existing tower design). 
(Amend. of 6-21-2011) 
Sec. 58-7. - Permits. 
(a)  Procedures for conditional use permits. The following provisions shall govern the application for and consideration of conditional use permits for towers and antennas: 
(1)  Conditional use permits shall be applied for and considered in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County. All requirements as listed in subsection 58-6(13) must be met at least one month prior to filing application for conditional use. The fee for conditional use application is $500.00. Conditional use permits are not required for co-locations on an existing tower. When appropriate in achieving the purposes of the section, the governing authority may waive or reduce any requirements or standards during the conditional use process. Additional fees shall be charged to cover the actual cost to the local government of obtaining expert opinion and studies in reviewing applications for conditional use. The initial deposit for such additional fees shall cover a minimum of ten hours of an expert consultant's hourly rate to provide consultation to Putnam County. If the actual cost to the government is greater than the initial deposit, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and shall pay the bill in full prior to the hearing before the commission. If the actual cost to the government is less than the initial deposit, the actual cost will be deducted from the initial deposit and the remainder of the deposit will be refunded to the applicant within ten working days following the hearing before the commission. In addition to the requirements of this section, the staff shall provide to the zoning commission substantial evidence contained in a written record in support of the staff's written recommendation regarding the petition for consideration by the zoning commission at its regularly scheduled meeting. In addition to the requirements, the zoning commission's written recommendation to the commission shall be based on substantial evidence contained in a written record provided to the commission. 
(2)  Any engineering information, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, that an applicant submits shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer; however, information relative to radio frequency information by radio frequency engineers does not require certification. 
(3)  If an environmental assessment is required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), a copy of the assessment, must be submitted at the time of application. All documentation of the FCC's approval must be submitted at the time of application. In addition, the applicant shall be required to submit documentation that the proposed wireless telecommunications facility complies with current Federal Communications Commission standards for radio frequency emissions, as adopted by the FCC at the time of application. Under no circumstances shall emissions cause interference with other communication providers (cellular or noncellular) and documentation shall be provided to this end. 
(4)  In considering a conditional use permit, the governing authority may impose conditions, to the extent necessary, to minimize any adverse effects the proposed tower or antenna may have on the adjoining properties if after considering all of the factors required, the governing authority decides conditions can reduce such adverse impacts upon adjoining properties to an acceptable and reasonable level. 
(5)  The governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit; provided, however, the governing authority may consider additional factors if the governing authority concludes that the goals of this section are better served thereby: 
a.  Height and setbacks of the proposed antenna and tower; 
b.  Proximity of the antenna and tower to other structures and zoning district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of the uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the antenna or tower, with particular reference to design features that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Availability of suitable existing antennas or towers or other structures for antenna co-location; 
h.  Proximity of the antenna or tower to other antennas or towers; 
i.  Impact of the tower and antenna upon scenic views and upon visual quality of surrounding areas; and 
j.  Such other and additional standards of review as set forth concerning conditional uses, of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County. 
(6)  Any decision to deny a conditional use permit shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. No decision to deny a conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna shall be based on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent such facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission's regulations concerning such emissions. 
(7)  Public notice for location of tower: In addition to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County, the following additional public noticing shall be provided for towers more than 150 feet in total height to be located within 1,200 feet of any residential district: at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the required public hearing, the applicant shall cause to be floated from the proposed tower site a balloon of the standard size used in aerial line of sight surveys. Said balloon shall be floated to the height of the proposed tower for a period of three working days so that the visibility of the tower from locations surrounding the proposed tower site can be viewed by the public prior to the required hearing. It is required that one of the three days be a Saturday. In addition, during the three-day period the balloon shall be taken down every day at 5:00 p.m. and refloated at sunrise. After the three-day period required herein, the balloon may be taken down permanently by the applicant. The applicant shall send certified/return receipt letters (at least 15 days prior to the testing) to property owners within a distance of 1,200 feet of the proposed tower as measured from the base of the tower to the subject property lines; the applicant will furnish receipts to the planning department. The owners of record shall be as shown on the Putnam County Tax Commissioners records. In addition, the required legal notices shall explain the applicant's request including date and time of public hearing and the presence of and the purpose of said balloon. It is acknowledged that inclement weather may have an affect on this procedure. As such this procedure may require some mutually agreed alteration. The applicant, shall also post the purpose of the balloon. Said sign shall be erected, in a conspicuous location, on or adjacent to the proposed tower site and be at least four feet by eight feet in size. 
(b)  Administrative procedures for tower and antenna building permit. A building permit issued by the building official is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any tower or antenna permitted. Additionally, only a building permit shall be required for a provider intending to co-locate on an existing tower. 
All telecommunication facilities which have received conditional use approval shall obtain a building permit and be required to submit to the Putnam County Planning and Development Department all applicable forms and documentation. Permit fees shall be subject to the Putnam County Planning and Development fee schedules. 
(c)  Annual operating permit required. All wireless telecommunication facilities must obtain an operating permit on or before April 1 of each calendar year. The operating permit shall be issued by the planning and development department after written application to the planning and development department on a form to be supplied by the planning and development department. Any change in the five-year build out plan must be submitted with the application for the operating permit. Within 90 days of receiving a complete application for a renewal permit, the planning and development department shall issue a written determination granting or denying the operating permit in whole or in part, based on the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Code section. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. 
No operating permit shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the permittee's performance have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective actions to be taken by the permittee has been approved by the planning and development department. 
The fee for the operating permit shall be $35.00 annually for each operating permit issued pursuant to this section and shall be submitted with the application for the operating permit. The fee for the operating permit is intended to reimburse the local governing authority for costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting, and supervising performance under this Code section. 
In order to provide the local governing authority with current information concerning nonconforming towers and in order to enforce the provisions of the section that will apply to nonconforming towers upon adoption of this section, the owners of nonconforming towers shall be required to obtain an annual operating permit at the time the structure becomes nonconforming by adoption of this chapter. 
(d)  Pre-existing towers/nonconforming uses/structures. All pre-existing towers that do not satisfy the requirements of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming uses and/or structures, according to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County. All nonconforming towers shall be subject to the landscaping, lighting, removal of abandoned towers and antennas, insurance, federal and state requirements, building codes and safety standards, noise, maintenance and co-location, at the time of adoption of this section. Any unsubstantiated refusal by an owner of a nonconforming tower to allow for co-location as set forth in subsection 58-6(13)e. shall be cause for revocation of the annual operating permit for the nonconforming tower. 
If an additional antenna is co-located upon a pre-existing tower after the adoption of this section, then requirements noted above shall be met as part of the permitting process; however, without violating any state and federal law the building inspector may waive certain requirements he deems overly burdensome or unnecessary for any additional antenna to be attached to an existing tower or simply to an existing tower, as is. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinance, for the purposes of this subsection, abandonment of the nonconforming use or structure shall occur if the tower is not used for telecommunication purposes at any time. Removal of such abandoned towers shall be required according to the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Expiration of permits. If substantial construction on the telecommunications facilities has not begun within 180 days of the granting of the conditional use, then a conditional use permit shall expire, and the applicant shall be required to resubmit an application for conditional use based on the latest technical and development requirements in the zoning ordinance. If substantial construction on the telecommunications facilities has not begun within 180 days of issuance of building permit, then the building permit shall expire, and the applicant shall be required to resubmit an application based on the latest technical and development requirements in the zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Coordination with federal law. Whenever the governing authority finds that the application of this chapter would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless telecommunication services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless telecommunication services, a conditional use permit waiving any of the provisions of this chapter may be granted. Any decision by the local governing authority to deny a request pursuant to this subsection shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(g)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any official of Putnam County or affected by any decision of a zoning official related to the issuance, denial, revocation, or suspension of any permit governed by this section may request a hearing in writing within 30 days of the date of said decision. Appeals from any decision by the local governing authority (board of commissioners) shall be made to the superior court within 30 days of the decision. 
Appeal of decision of building official shall be heard by the zoning board. 
Appeal of decision of zoning board shall be heard by the board of commissioners. 
Appeal of decision by board of commissioners shall be heard by superior court. 
(Amend. of 6-21-2011; Amend. of 7-17-2014 ) 
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 38; roads and bridges, ch. 46; traffic and parking requirements for permitted uses, § 66-458. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376 and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road", and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-13. 
Secs. 62-2—62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 62-36. - Established on authority of state law. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning local authorities power to alter lawful speed limits, speed limits and speed zones are hereby established in this article, based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1997) 
Sec. 62-37. - On-system. 
On-system speed zones are as follows: 
State Route 16 from the Jasper County line (M.L. 0.00) to the west Eatonton city limit (M.L. 6.62) 0.48 mile east of the Little River Bridge-BRS00020, a distance of 6.62 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 16 from the east Eatonton city limit (M.L. 11.79) 0.72 mile east of City Street No. 637-Thru-Way Road to the Hancock County line (M.L. 24.06), a distance of 12.27 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 24 from the Baldwin County line (M.L. 0.00) to the south Eatonton city limit (M.L. 9.28) 0.29 mile north of County Road No. 178-Sweet Shrub Road, a distance of 9.28 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 24 from the north Eatonton city limit (M.L. 15.52) 0.04 mile south of County Road No. 174-Glenwood Drive to the Morgan County line (M.L. 23.85), a distance of 8.33 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 44 from the Jones County line (M.L. 0.00) to the south Eatonton city limit (M.L. 8.53) 0.51 mile south of State Route 24, a distance of 8.53 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 44 from the north Eatonton city limit (M.L. 13.79) 0.55 mile northeast of City Street No. 638-Medical Acres Boulevard to the Greene County line (M.L. 22.68), a distance of 8.89 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 142 from State Route 16 (M.L. 0.00) to the Jasper County line (M.L. 5.93), a distance of 5.93 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 212 from the Jasper County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Baldwin County line (M.L. 8.96), a distance of 8.96 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
Signs shall be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1997) 
Sec. 62-38. - Off-system. 
Off-system speed zones are as follows: 
County Road No. 43-Hillsboro Road from the Jasper County line to State Route 16, a distance of 6.91 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 44-Browns Chapel Road from State Route 16 to County Road No. 212-Glenwood Spring Road, a distance of 3.28 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 62-Folds Road from County Road No. 212-Glenwood Spring Road to State Route 44, a distance of 3.27 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 66-Dennis Station Road from County Road No. 72-Twin Bridges Road to State Route 24, a distance of 4.58 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 72-Twin Bridges Road from State Route 212 to State Route 24, a distance of 7.25 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 90-Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive from the Eatonton city limit to County Road No. 217-Pea Ridge Road, a distance of 4.05 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 116-New Phoenix Road from State Route 44 to State Route 16, a distance of 4.87 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 122-Wards Chapel Road from County Road No. 218-Old Phoenix Road to County Road No. 116-New Phoenix Road, a distance of 3.73 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 135-Denham Road from County Road No. 138-Tanyard Road to County Road No. 133-Alexander Road, a distance of 2.77 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 138-Tanyard Road from County Road No. 214-Lower Harmony Road to State Route 44, a distance of 1.74 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 212-Glenwood Spring Road from Smith Bridge to the Eatonton city limit, a distance of 5.17 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 215-Parks Mills Road from County Road No. 218-Harmony Road to the Morgan County line, a distance of 2.89 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 216-Oconee Springs Road from the Eatonton city limit to State Route 16, a distance of 9.30 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 217-Pea Ridge Road from State Route 24 to State Route 16, a distance of 8.13 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 218-Old Phoenix Road from State Route 16 to State Route 44, a distance of 5.55 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 218-Harmony Road from County Road No. 24-Lower Harmony Road to State Route 44, a distance of 5.27 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 296-Glades Road from County Road No. 294-Godfrey Road to County Road No. 17-Reids Road, a distance of 3.51 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 294-Godfrey Road from the Eatonton city limit to the Morgan County line, a distance of 8.99 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 295-Glades Road from the Jasper County line to County Road No. 294-Godfrey Road, a distance of 4.54 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road No. 296-Union Chapel Road from County Road No. 17-Reids Road to State Route 24, a distance of 3.03 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
Signs shall be erected by the county. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1997) 
Sec. 62-39. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1997) 
Chapter 66 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution of July 17, 2007, repealed ch. 66, which consisted of §§ 66-1—66-711, and enacted new provisions to be designated ch. 66, §§ 66-1—66-179, to read as herein set out. Former ch. 66 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for legislative history. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; development regulations, ch. 28; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; signs, ch. 48. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Authority of chapter. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ IV, as amended, and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the community of Putnam County and other purposes, this chapter regulates the location, construction and use of buildings, structures and land; and divides the unincorporated county into districts for such purposes and establishes boundaries therefore; provides for the method of administration and amendment; and prescribes penalties for the violation of its provisions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is made and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to prevent flooding of improved property; to provide adequate light and air; to protect the aesthetic beauty of the county; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sanitation, schools, parks, housing, communications, health care and other public requirements; to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the county; and to improve the quality of life through protection of the county's total environment including, but not limited to, the prevention of air, water and noise pollution. Such regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other buildings and structures throughout the county. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-3. - Title of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Putnam County Zoning Ordinance of 2007." 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-4. - Interpretation and application of chapter provisions. 
In interpreting and applying this chapter's provisions, the requirements contained in this chapter are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Except as provided in this chapter, this chapter shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height of buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this chapter shall govern unless elsewhere provided in this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-5. - Compliance with chapter required. 
No land, building or structure shall be used; no building or structure shall be erected; and no existing building, use or structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged or altered except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-6. - Jurisdiction of chapter. 
This chapter shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-7. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and validity of prior approvals and actions. 
(a)  This chapter is the Putnam County Zoning Ordinance of 2007, and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of zoning, or use, or building permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this chapter. 
(b)  All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners, on appeal, shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against these violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
(c)  Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-8. - Administration. 
On a day-to-day basis the director of planning and development department shall administer this chapter's provisions. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 66-9. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Secs. 66-10—66-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-20. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. This section is intended to define terms frequently used throughout this chapter. It is not intended to be exhaustive, and definitions also may appear in article IV of this chapter (the performance standards). Words not specifically defined in this section shall be construed to have the customary or preferred meaning given by Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, latest edition published. 
(b)  Use and interpretation. The following shall apply to the use of all words in this chapter: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(4)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(5)  The nouns "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the zoning districts established by this chapter. 
(6)  The noun "use" shall mean the manner in which a structure, building or parcel of land actually is occupied. 
(7)  The noun "map" means the "Official Zoning Districts Map of Putnam County, Georgia," (aka the "Official Zoning Map" (see section 66-32)) adopted contemporaneously with this chapter, but as amended from time to time as permitted in this chapter. 
(8)  The word "structure" includes, but is not limited to, the word "building." 
(9)  The word "lot" is a lot in a recorded subdivision and does not include the words "piece," "plot," and "parcel." 
(10)  The word "should" is suggested but not mandatory. 
(11)  The words "his" or "her" are not intended to be gender specific. 
(c)  Specific definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where a more specific definition or use of the term may be found among articles I, II, III, and IV of this chapter as may be amended from time to time by the board of commissioners: 
Accessory building means a subordinate building, which is customarily incidental to the principal building located on the same lot. 
Accessory use means a subordinate use, which is customarily incidental to the principal use and which is located on the same lot with the principal use. 
Acre means 43,560 square feet. 
Adult entertainment. Adult entertainment uses are defined as any establishment in which more than 20 percent of its stock in trade is offered for sale for any form of consideration, which includes arcades, book stores, cabarets, movie theaters and any similar establishment that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, display or featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity appealing to prurient interests. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes (a) less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and, (b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activity means and includes (a) intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or (b) excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in (a) above. 
Allowed use means a use by right, which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Amusement facility means an establishment in which 30 percent or more of the gross floor area is utilized by amusement machines or their patrons. This can be a primary or secondary use within the establishment. 
Amusement machines means any mechanical, electronic and/or coin-operated game and/or device for the amusement of patrons. This definition shall not be construed to include coin-operated music players, coin-operated mechanical kiddy rides or coin-operated television. 
Applicant means the owner of record of land, or an agent appointed in writing by the owner. 
Assembly halls include armories, union halls, conference halls, business meeting locations, civic halls, religious facilities, and internal gathering places for activities of a similar nature. 
Automobile repair garage means any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail service of major repairs, minor repairs and painting of automobiles, including the incidental services of lubricating and cleaning. Those garages in which major repairs and painting may occur will also be referred to as "automotive repair garages." 
Bar/tavern/pub/cocktail lounge means a commercial structure open for public use in which alcoholic beverage sales may constitute more than 50 percent of the gross sale of goods. All such facilities must operate in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq., as amended, or any other applicable state law. 
Basement means an area below the first floor, having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. Synonymous with the term "cellar." 
Bedroom means that room within a dwelling unit, which is normally used to provide sleeping accommodations for the residents of the unit, regardless of its daytime use. 
Berm is an elongated raised earthen mound intended to be a permanent natural barrier mitigating the effects of sound and sight from one use to another. See also "buffer". 
Block means a piece or parcel of land usually bounded on all sides by public streets or other transportation routes, such as railroad lines, or by physical barriers such as water bodies or public open spaces, and not transversed by a through street. Blocks may be divided into lots. 
Board of commissioners means the local legislative body of Putnam County, Georgia, which is empowered to make changes to the official zoning maps and text amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
Buffer means that portion of a lot set aside as a natural undisturbed vegetative screen that may be replanted to achieve the desired screening purpose. A buffer may be used to separate differing use districts or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. See also "berm". 
Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Building code means any state minimum standard code as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 and made effective by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 
Building permit means a permit, issued by the department of planning and development, which authorizes actual construction, alteration, placement, or relocation of a physical structure on any property within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
Camper means a motor vehicle with space and equipment, either in a rear compartment or in an attached trailer, for sleeping and simple housekeeping. 
Campground or campsite means an area or place designated for camping activities. A place where people can put up a tent or park a camper and that may have toilet and shower facilities for campers to use. 
Carport means an accessory roofed structure providing space for one or more vehicles that may have one or more walls but no door to secure the contents. It is not a garage. 
Clinic means a use where medical examination and treatment is administered to persons or to animals as outpatients or that may be lodged on an overnight basis after surgery or treatment has been administered. 
Comprehensive plan means the adopted Eatonton/Putnam County Comprehensive Plan. 
Conditional rezoning means the attachment of special conditions to a rezoning by the board of commissioners that are not found in the text of this chapter and are considered appropriate to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. 
County means Putnam County, Georgia. 
Covenant means a private agreement or contract running with and intended to burden and benefit a particular tract of land. Under no circumstances does the county enforce such covenants. 
Coverage. See "lot coverage." 
Crematorium means an establishment containing a furnace, which is used to reduce a dead body to ashes by burning. 
Custodial care includes the following terms: 
Assisted living facility means a residential facility providing living quarters restricted to individuals who require access to services but not daily nursing or medical intervention. Incidental uses and/or services may include protective supervision, personal care, social and recreational services, assistance with medical requirements, assistance with meals, and laundry and transportation service. 
Day nursery/kindergarten means a facility for pre-elementary school children, ranging in age from three through six years. 
Day care means a facility that takes care of children during the day or after school, generally ranging in age from three through 12. 
Group home means residences in which two or more unrelated persons with disabilities reside that provide one or more personal care services including, but not limited to, assistance with or supervision of self administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting, that do not provide nursing or medical care and are licensed by the state department of human resources as a personal care home under Title 31. 
Hospice means a home for terminally ill persons with less than six months to live in which palliative care and social services, including bereavement counseling, are provided. 
Nursing/convalescent home means a use in which domiciliary care is provided to three or more elderly or convalescing nonfamily members who are provided with food, shelter and medical care. 
Retirement home means an apartment building or buildings designed for occupancy primarily for elderly persons, which may contain, for the convenience of its residents, common eating areas, personal/infirmary care, common recreational areas and accessory retail uses. 
Density means, as used in principally multifamily residential districts, the number of dwelling units permitted per gross acre. 
Developer is synonymous with the term "applicant". 
Development means the culmination of a land improvement process through which an allowed use is created. 
Development agreement means an express written agreement between the board of commissioners and a developer seeking approval of a zoning change, setting forth specific requirements, conditions and/or variances (and may include preliminary development plan) to a proposed zoning change under division 3 of this chapter. 
Development permit means a permit issued pursuant to the Development Regulations of Putnam County, which authorizes initial clearing, grubbing, grading, dredging, excavating, filling, construction of roadways and drainage structures, or other site preparation for the use, construction upon or alteration of any property within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
Director means the primary employee or designee authorized to administer and enforce this chapter. The term also includes "director of planning and development department" or the "director of the department of planning and development". The director is directly responsible to the county manager. 
District means a section of the county within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Dwelling means a building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families on a permanent or long-term basis. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment physically set apart from any other dwelling unit in the same structure. 
Dwelling unit, occupancy types: 
Apartment means a multifamily building in which the single-family dwelling units are for rent on a short- or long-term basis. 
Mixed-use means a building with both residential (condo/apartment) and commercial (retail/office) in combination. 
Multifamily attached dwelling (duplex, triplex, quadruplex) means a residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by multifamilies in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling in which one family resides. 
Dwelling unit, structural types: 
Single-family dwelling means a building, whether site-built, modular or manufactured designed for occupancy by one family. 
Townhouse means a one-, two- or three-story building with the single-family dwelling existing vertically with none other above and containing more than two single-family dwelling units side-by-side. 
Mid-rise means a two- or three-story building containing multiple single-family dwelling units in a variety of structural arrangements. 
Eating establishments: 
Cafeteria means an eating establishment where persons serve themselves or are served from one common food service area. 
Drive-in restaurant means an eating and/or drinking establishment, which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes food/drink while sitting in a vehicle or where curb or carryout services are provided. 
Drive-through restaurant means a food service establishment, which sells food from a counter or window for consumption on-premises or off-premises. Tables may be provided and food may be served at a table, but may not be ordered from a table. 
Restaurant means a facility, which provides food served exclusively inside an enclosed building. It may include inside and outside seating areas. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or not more than six unrelated persons living as a single household. 
Family apartment means an accessory dwelling unit for a single family, located on the same lot with, and subordinate to, a primary single-family residence. 
Floodplain means that area within the intermediate regional flood contour elevations (IRF) subject to periodic floods as designated by the Director of FEMA, based upon the U.S. Corps of Engineers' floodplain information reports and other federal, state or county hydrologic studies. 
Floor area means the sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls or the center of common or connected walls, including common public areas such as lobbies, restrooms and hallways; but excluding attic space with headroom of less than seven feet, uncovered steps or fire escapes, open porches, accessory water or cooling towers, permanent mechanical and elevator housing, accessory off-street parking spaces, accessory off-street loading berths and basement storage area. 
Funeral home or mortuary means a building used for human funeral services. The building may contain space and facilities for embalming and other procedures used in preparation of the dead for burial; the storage of caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral supplies; the storage of funeral vehicles; a funeral chapel. 
Garage, private means an accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. 
Grade means the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to all sides of any structure. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from the average finished grade along all walls of a structure to the highest point of the coping, or gutter, or parapet of a flat roof or to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Home occupation means an occupation customarily carried on by an occupant in a dwelling unit as a secondary use, which is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling unit. 
Hospital means a structure in which is provided inpatient health care for people, including general medical and surgical services, psychiatric care and specialty medical facilities. Outpatient facilities within such structures in which such services are provided are included. 
Individual water well or water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks or other facilities, utilizing groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof, which is manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrial Building Act and the rules of the commissioner of community affairs issued pursuant thereto and which must bear a seal of approval issued by the commissioner of the department of community affairs. 
Junked vehicle means any wrecked or nonoperable automobile, truck or other automotive vehicle, which does not bear a current license plate. 
Junkyard means any use on public or private property involving the parking, storage or disassembly of junked vehicles, or wrecked or nonoperable automobiles, trucks or other automotive devices; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap iron and other metals; used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, old refrigerators and old household appliances; and used brick, wood or other building materials. These uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or part of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in addition to or accessory to other uses of the premises. 
Kennel means any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of is carried on, and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
Landfill, private means an area of land on which or an excavation in which solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not associated with a development permit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile, as those terms are defined by current Georgia Law or current DNR regulations. Private landfills are prohibited anywhere in Putnam County. 
Loading dock means a space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
Lodgings, transient: 
Bed and breakfast means a building in which lodging and board is provided for more than three and fewer than 20 persons. 
Boarding house means a building, where for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for not more than ten persons, providing that a single-family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boarding house by reason of a contribution to or expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging, or board and lodging, are provided for more than 20 persons and offered to the public for compensation, and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is made through the interior of the building. 
Inn means a building in which lodging, or board and lodging, are provided and offered to the public for compensation, having no more than 20 guestrooms. 
Motel means a building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made primarily from an exterior walkway rather than from an interior lobby. 
Lot means a tract of land in single ownership, which is legally transferable as a single unit of land. The term "lot" is not synonymous with the term "parcel." A lot must meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must front on a public street or on an approved private street. 
Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot having a frontage on two streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, frontage means the shortest property line of a lot coincident with a right-of-way line. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot in a subdivision that front on a subdivision street. 
Lot, lease access means the land that Georgia Power owns from the lake or navigable stream to the 350-foot contour line. 
Lot, on-lake means any lot that is directly adjacent to a lake or navigable stream or a lease access lot. 
Lot coverage means the percentage of a lot, which may be covered with buildings or structures, excluding walks, drives and other similar uses and recreational facilities which are accessory to a permitted use. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court; or a parcel of land or a parcel not a part of an approved subdivision the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court prior to the adoption of this chapter and which at the time of its recordation, conformed to all the applicable regulations precedent to the adoption of this chapter. 
Lot width is the length of a line drawn parallel to the front property line that is measured at the front setback line. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. The term "manufactured home does not include campers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles (RVs), motor homes or modular homes. 
Manufactured home lot means a parcel of land in a manufactured home park for the placement of a single manufactured home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single ownership on which three or more manufactured homes are located for the purpose of residential use. 
Manufactured home stand means that part of a manufactured home lot which has been reserved for the actual physical placement and tie down of a manufactured home for nontransient use. 
Marina means an area on a lake in which boats may be stored or serviced and from which boats and boating supplies, including food, fuel and recreational items, may be purchased or rented. 
Maximum square feet means the total allowable floor area that may exist on a lot or in a development. 
Meat processing and packaging means a facility where the preparation and storage of animal products for human consumption occurs, but does not include the slaughtering of animals. 
Mining: 
Surface mining means any activity constituting all or part of a process for the removal of minerals, ores or other solid matter for sale or for consumption in the regular operation of a business. 
Mini-warehouse/self-storage means a building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and secured compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of customers' goods or wares. 
Mobile office/sales center means a temporary sales center, in a mobile or "spec" structure, that may be used to market homes during the development and building phase of a subdivision. 
Model home means a dwelling used initially for display purposes, which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision and complies with this chapter. 
Modular home means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the International Building Code Congress, Inc. 
Nonconforming lot, use and building means a lot of record, use or building which fails to comply with any provision of this chapter either at the effective date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, or as the result of subsequent amendments; synonymous with the term "grandfathered lot, use or building." 
Nonresidential use means all commercial, office, institutional, manufacturing, industrial, recreational, and similar uninhabited uses. 
Open space means a natural area providing limited human interaction, which may include playgrounds, walking trails, picnic areas, parks or similar uses. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation, or any other legal entities having legal title to the land. 
Parcel means a development or undeveloped tract of land in a single ownership, which may be subdivided into individually owned lots. A parcel must meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must front on a public street or on an approved private street. 
Parking bay means an area where more than one vehicle is parked side by side and, in some configurations front-to-front as well as side-by-side that is most commonly associated with multifamily and commercial uses. 
Parking lot/garage means any area designed for temporary accommodation of motor vehicles whether for a fee or as a service. 
Parking space means an area where a vehicle is parked. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section or subdivision indicating the surveyed location and boundaries of properties. 
Principal use means the primary purpose for which land, a structure or a building is used. 
Private school means an educational use not operated by the Putnam County Board of Education. 
Property lines: 
Front property line means the line coincident with the street right-of-way line between the two corners of the property on the street right-of-way line. See "lot frontage" and "setback". 
Rear property line means the line most nearly parallel to the front property line and located between the side property lines. 
Side property lines means the lines most nearly parallel to each other running between the front and rear property lines. 
Public well or water supply system means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year. 
Quarry means the removal of rock, minerals and other natural materials, together with the necessary accessory buildings, machinery and appurtenances thereto. 
Recreational vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle with self-contained kitchen, living and sanitary facilities that is designed to accommodate and transport people for recreational enjoyment. (See also "travel trailer.") 
Religious facilities includes churches, convents, monasteries and other places of worship. 
Residential district means any district the primary purpose of which is for residential dwelling units. 
Right-of-way means a portion of land over which a local, state or federal government has designated a right of use. 
Right-of-way, future means the rights-of-way of arterial and collector roads as shown on the comprehensive plan. 
Road and street network, state system, as periodically categorized and defined by the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT): 
Arterial means a high-capacity road with the primary function of delivering traffic from collector roads to freeways, and between urban centers at the highest level of service. 
Collector means a low to moderate-capacity road which serves to move traffic from local streets to arterial roads; also designed to provide access to residential properties. 
Freeway means streets used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic and which are divided with full control of access and no crossing at grade. The required future right-of-way for freeways will be based upon design criteria established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Road and street network, county system: The design and construction standards for these roads are found in the development regulations. 
Alley means a service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. An alley does not constitute "lot frontage". 
County arterial means a road that links places of importance such as schools, subdivisions, communities, etc. to towns, cities or other places of importance including arterial roads or other higher classified roads on the state system and serve as important intracounty travel corridors. An arterial on the county roadway network, whose average daily traffic (ADT) count is 2,000 or over shall be considered an arterial road. A list of county arterials is maintained by Putnam County Planning and Development. 
County collector means streets, which carry traffic from local streets to the major system of arterials or to activity centers. It carries a relatively high traffic volume. 
Local street means it provides the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property and it connects to streets of higher classification such as the state and county systems. 
Sanitarian means the legally entitled official of the Putnam County Health Department. 
Sanitary disposal station means a facility provided for the emptying of waste-holding tanks. 
Sawmill, portable/temporary means a sawmill moved onto one tract of land for purposes of clearing prior to actual permitted development. 
Service station means any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automotive accessories and incidental services, including facilities for lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting, major repair or automatic washing. Minor auto repair and maintenance shall include the installation of tires, carburetors, ignition parts and other minor accessory parts as shall be incidental to the normal upkeep of an automobile, but shall not include engine or body dismantling. This use also may include accessory convenience stores. 
Setback generally means the minimum required distance between a property line and a building or a structure. Depending on the shape of the property, there could be more than one side setback or no rear or more than one rear but there will always be a front setback. 
Setback, front means a line drawn between the two side lot lines, parallel (or as close as practical) to the front property line the minimum distance required by the applicable zoning district. 
Setback, rear means a line drawn between the two side lot lines, parallel (or as close as practical) to the front setback line the minimum distance required by the applicable zoning district. 
Setback, side means a line drawn parallel to a side lot line the minimum distance required by the applicable zoning district. 
Sign means any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. 
Sign area. See chapter 48 for sign regulations. 
Site built construction means a dwelling unit constructed on a building site from basic materials delivered to the site; and which is constructed in accordance with the International Building Code and CABO. 
Site plan means a detailed scaled and dimensioned drawing based on a certified boundary survey, showing but not limited to the specific locations of all buildings, building elevations, structures, drainageways, roads, internal roadway circulation, means of ingress and egress, recreation areas, parking areas, landscape strips and buffers, public roads and facilities adjacent to the property for which the site plan has been drawn. 
Slaughterhouse means a facility for the killing and butchering of animals for their meat and by-products. 
Solar energy farm means an energy conservation system, including appurtenances, which converts solar energy to a usable form of energy to be used on-site or to transfer to the public electric grid in order to sell electricity to a public utility entity. 
Story. See definition in the International Building Code. 
Sketch/concept plan means a drawing to scale, based on a certified boundary survey, reflecting the requirements of a rezoning or subdivision or development request. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare used by vehicular traffic, which may contain public and private utilities and drainage structures. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed. 
Subdivider. See "development regulations." 
Subdivision is the division of land into two or more parcels. A "major" subdivision is the creation of five or more parcels. 
Technical review process may be initiated for certain large scale developments and involves potentially affected federal, state, and county agencies and departments performing an impact analysis pertaining to their area of responsibility and/or expertise. The technical review process is initiated at the discretion of the director of planning and development and a list of participating agencies/departments will be maintained in the planning and development department. 
Tenant dwelling means a residential dwelling unit located on a farm and occupied by a nontransient farm worker and his family, who is employed by the farm owner. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular unit of no more than 400 square feet that is designed as a temporary mobile dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation purposes and possessing a current Georgia license plate. It shall not be construed to be a dwelling unit as defined in this chapter (see "recreational vehicle"). 
Travel trailer/RV park means any lot on which are temporarily parked two or more travel trailers or recreational vehicles, for a period of less than 30 days per calendar year, per travel trailer or recreational vehicle. 
Truck stop means a facility for the sale of gasoline and related products for primary use by trucks with more than four wheels and two axles. Such facilities may include, if internal to a structure, restaurants, areas for bathing and retail sales of convenience goods. 
Yard means that area of a lot between the principal building and adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward. A yard shall not be confused with a setback. See "setback" for further information. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 11-16-2010; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Secs. 66-21—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-31. - Establishment and conversion of zoning districts. 
The zoning districts as shown in the following table as "new zoning districts" are hereby established. Those zoning districts as were established under the previous Zoning Ordinance of Putnam County are hereby renamed as shown in such table. All regulations, requirements and provisions of this zoning ordinance applicable to a zoning district established under this chapter shall apply to the previously named zoning districts as shown in such table. 

 
Note: The listed zoning districts may be referred to hereinafter without their numeric suffix. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-32. - Designation on official zoning map. 
The boundaries of the various zoning districts are shown upon the official zoning maps of Putnam County, as they may be amended from time to time and which are hereby made a part of this chapter and which shall be maintained in the office of the clerk to the board of commissioners as a public document available for public inspection and examination. The official zoning maps shall be those tax parcel maps entitled, "The Official Zoning Maps of Putnam County, Georgia, July 17, 2007," signed by the chairman of the board of commissioners, which contain land lot, district, parcel and street boundaries located in the county; and the "Aerial Photo-Sheet Index" map. All such official zoning maps and all notations, references and information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all the matter and information set forth by the maps were fully described in this section. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-33. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the Official Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline or right-of-way line of streets and alleys, land lot lines, militia district lines or lot lines, these lines shall be construed to be these boundaries. 
(b)  In unsubdivided property or tracts, where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of these boundaries, unless they are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on these maps. 
(c)  Where boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerline or right-of-way line of streets, alleys or highways, these boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning maps. If no distance is given, this dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the maps. 
(d)  In case any further uncertainty exists, the board of commissioners shall determine the location of boundaries as a request for interpretation and only after public hearing as per the policies and procedures set forth in division 2 of article IV of this chapter. 
(e)  No single lot or parcel shall be located in more than one zoning district, nor shall only a portion of a lot or parcel be rezoned. In the event an owner desires to rezone a portion of a tract, the land must be separated into a lawful lot, and the remainder must also be a lawful lot, which requires a re-survey and a recorded plat. In the event a lot appears to have been placed in two separate zoning districts, the interpretive rules above shall apply, and the entire lot shall be considered to be located in the district that covers the greatest area of the lot. The sole exception shall be parcels split by a municipal boundary, since the County's zoning powers do not extend into a municipality. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008) 
Sec. 66-34. - General requirements. 
Statements in this section apply to the entirety of this chapter. The specific applications are dependent on the extent of the dissimilarity between the existing zoning district and the new one the following shall apply: 
(a)  The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
(b)  No outside display of merchandise shall create traffic or other safety hazard. 
(c)  Allowed uses. Within the various zoning districts, as described in this article and shown on the official zoning map, no land, building or structure shall be used as a matter of right except in accordance with the uses and standards of this chapter. 
(d)  Buffers and berms. 
(1)  A buffer or berm, at the director's discretion, unless the board of commissioners has mandated otherwise, shall exist between any Village, C, or I-M district and any R, RM, or MHP district or existing use. 
(2)  Required buffers must be separated by at least a five-foot setback from a parking area or a structure. 
(3)  All buffers shall be replanted, where sparsely vegetated, with evergreen trees of at least two inches measured at diameter breast height (DBH) and with evergreen shrubs to create an understory among the trees. An evergreen ground cover shall exist throughout the buffer. 
(4)  The spacing of trees when creating a buffer shall be approximately ten feet between each tree at time of planting. In order to create a solid appearance, another row of trees shall be planted ten feet behind the first row, also spaced ten feet apart so that the trees in one row visually fill the gaps in the next row (as depicted in the following diagram). 
(5)  Where the use to be protected exists (or will exist) above or below the new one, the slope of the cut/fill shall constitute the buffer, provided the angular length of the slope is at least equal (in feet) to the width of the required buffer. The densest plantings of trees and understory occurs at the top of the slope diminishing as the slope proceeds downward. An evergreen ground cover shall be planted on the slope. A six-foot high fence constructed of opaque material shall be placed at the top of the cut slope. 
(6)  A berm shall be no flatter than a three to one slope achieving a height above the ground throughout its entire length of not less than six feet. It may exist throughout the length of a buffer or as a separate entity within a setback. 
(7)  A berm shall be planted with evergreen trees, shrubs, and ground cover in the same fashion as a buffer. If natural vegetation does not exist along a buffer area, a berm must be installed. 
(8)  Unless certifiable low water consumption plantings are used, an irrigation system shall exist through the buffer or berm to ensure the continued vitality of the vegetation. 
(9)  When the ground between the new and the existing uses is relatively flat, either a buffer or a berm, at the discretion of the director, shall be used. A berm may be located within a setback but a buffer may not. 
(e)  Double frontage and corner lots. Lots that adjoin a public street on any side shall provide the minimum required front setback on each street. 
(f)  Lot sizes. The following minimum lots sizes are established as follows for all residential zoned districts, unless greater amounts are required by the Putnam County Board of Health. No variance may be granted for a reduction in minimum lot size. 
(1)  Individual well and septic system: 
a.  Off-lake lot: 1.1 acre. 
b.  On-lake lot: 1.5 acre. 
(2)  Public well and septic system: 
a.  Off-lake lot: 30,000 square feet (.69 acre). 
b.  On-lake lot: 36,250 square feet (.83 acre). 
(3)  Individual well and sewer: 
a.  Off-lake lot: 30,000 square feet (.69 acre). 
b.  On-lake lot: 36,250 square feet (.83 acre). 
(4)  Public well and sewer: 20,000 square feet (.46 acre). 
(g)  Modular and manufactured, homes are structural types that house a single family. However, unless the zoning district specifically lists these structural types as a permitted use for single-family purposes, they are not permitted. 
(h)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard, provided that fences, walls or hedges on a corner lot in a residential district shall not exceed four feet in height. See performance standards for specific requirements on fences and walls. 
(i)  Other regulations. The property owner should be aware of and consult the other ordinances that may apply to the development or use of any property, including but not limited to any conditions applied by the Board of Commissioners at the time the property was rezoned, the International Building Code; Chapter 18, Buildings and Building Regulations; Chapter 22, Businesses; Chapter 28, Development Regulations; Chapter 30, Environment; Chapter 32, Fire Code; Chapter 46, Roads and Bridges; Chapter 48, Signs; and Chapter 50, Solid Waste and Scrap Tires. 
(j)  Parking requirements. See development standards in each district for residential requirements. For commercial and industrial/manufacturing see chapter 28, development regulations. 
(k)  Projections into setbacks. Every part of a required setback shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features, provided that these features do not project more than three feet into any required setback. Decks, porches, patios, carports, and similar structures (including steps to access the foregoing) are not permitted to project into the setback area. 
(l)  Street access. Except as provided in this chapter, each building shall be located on a lot or parcel that abuts a public paved street or has access to a public street by means of a recorded access easement. However, should an owner of a tract of property subdivide it so as to provide smaller parcels only to other family members for their residential use, then the new parcels so created may be accessed by recorded, permanent and private easements between the original owner (grantor) and his grantees, upon approval of the director. 
(m)  Parking of trailers. Commercial vehicles with more than four wheels, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers, buses, motorized homes, boat trailers and haulers, and boats shall not be parked in the front yard in any residential district. Travel trailers, recreational vehicles, campers, motorized homes, boat trailers and haulers, and boats may be parked or stored in an enclosed garage or carport or in rear or side yards, provided that they remain more than 20 feet from the rear property line and ten feet from the side property line. No such vehicle shall be occupied for sleeping or as a residence, either permanently or temporarily, when so parked. 
(n)  All exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Sec. 66-35. - Exceptions to general development standards. 
(a)  Double buffer. When a required buffer area would abut and be continuous to an established buffer area, which meets all requirements of this chapter, then this additional required buffer area need not be established. 
(b)  Height requirements. The height limitations as stated in this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Barns, silos or other farm structures when located on farms, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio or television towers, masts and aerials; and 
(2)  Bulkheads, elevators, penthouses, water tanks and scenery lofts and similar structures, provided that these structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which these structures are located. 
(c)  Special building height restrictions. Where a new Village, C, or I-M district is adjacent to an R, RM, or MHP district or to an existing residential use, the building height of the nonresidential structures shall not exceed two stories along the property line(s) adjacent to the herein listed residential districts. 
(d)  Special setbacks. 
(1)  Setbacks of the I-M when adjacent to an R, RM, or MHP zoning district or to a property on which a residential use is located shall be set back 200 feet. Setbacks in C districts similarly situated shall set back 100 feet and the same shall apply to the Village district unless the residential component of the Village district is adjacent to any R, RM, or MHP district or uses, in which case, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet. 
(2)  The setbacks of subsection (d)(1) above may be reduced by 50 percent if, in the opinion of the director, a buffer or berm would provide equal or better protection. The above reductions do not apply to the Village district. 
(3)  Setback on arterial roads: 50 feet. 
(e)  Combining of acreage between lake lots and Georgia Power property. The owner of a lot who has exclusive use of property owned by Georgia Power by written lease, license, or other document may combine the acreage of said lot with the acreage of the property owned by Georgia Power in order to meet the requirements of the development standards of the zoning district in which said lot is located provided that both the lot and property are depicted as a single lot filed in the land records of Putnam County. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Sec. 66-36. - Undefined uses. 
It is impossible to set forth each and every use of land, which may exist now or in the future in the county. If approval is sought for a use not specifically identified, the director shall consider the requested use to determine whether it is substantially similar to identified uses. For purposes of this section, the term "substantially similar" shall mean that the unidentified use shares the same characteristics as an identified use in terms of nature of operation, size of operation, impact from operation and requirements of the use. The director's decision in this regard may be appealed to the board of commissioners pursuant to the provisions in this chapter pertaining to the appeal of an administrative decision. The decision shall be kept in the official records of the county so as to ensure consistency of decision-making about heretofore-unidentified uses. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-37. - Planned developments. 
Planned development standards were repealed in 2007. Any reference to planned developments is hereby eliminated throughout or in any portion of this zoning ordinance. 
Projects which received final approval under the prior planned development standards shall be considered conforming provided such projects conform to the site plan and conditions upon which they were approved, and the projects have either been completed or work is diligently being carried on within any time limits that may have been stipulated with final approval. Any expansion shall conform to the regulations of the particular zoning district; no expansion in area beyond the area approved as a planned development shall be considered. Any modifications to the previously approved final planned development site plans shall be reviewed under the RM-3 multi-family residential standards in sections 66-95—66-97 of this ordinance. 
( Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Secs. 66-38—66-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 

Sec. 66-51. - Nonconformities. 
This division sets out the provisions that protect uses, structures, and lots that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of the chapter or a subsequent amendment, but no longer conform to the new regulations. The primary intent of the treatment of nonconformity is to allow continuation of these uses, structures and lots until the end of their useful life, while encouraging conformance to the new regulations when it becomes reasonable to do so. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-52. - Nonconforming development; in general. 
Lawful nonconforming uses, structures and lots are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with land uses, structures, and lots that conform to the requirements of the zoning districts in which the nonconformity exists. However, such nonconforming uses, structures, and lots may continue as set forth in this division. (Refer to chapter 48, section 48-10, for nonconforming signs.) 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-53. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses, defined. A nonconforming use is a use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right or no longer meets or conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
(1)  To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of the chapter or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, except that the nonconforming use: 
a.  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
b.  Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
c.  Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this chapter and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
(2)  Any intended but not yet existing nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired prior to the adoption of this chapter or the adoption of an amendment to it shall be prohibited unless such intended nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired is actually commenced within one year of the adoption of this chapter or the adoption of an amendment to it regardless of the intent or expectation to commence or abandon such nonconforming use. 
(c)  Re-establishment of a discontinued nonconforming use. A lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land shall not be re-established after its removal from the property, or after its discontinuance for six months or more, regardless of the intent of the owner or occupier to resume the nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of a property for occupancy by a manufactured home may be resumed if it is replaced by a conforming structure. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-54. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)  Nonconforming structures, defined. A nonconforming structure is a structure or building whose size, dimensions, location on a property or other features were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the chapter, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or conforms to one or more such requirements of this chapter. (Refer to chapter 48, section 48-10, for nonconforming signs.) 
(b)  Continuance of nonconforming structures. 
(1)  A nonconforming structure may continue to be occupied and used, except that: 
a.  A nonconforming structure shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage or destruction of 50 percent or more of its fair market value, unless the structure is a residence and meets all requirements set forth by the Putnam County Health Department. 
b.  A nonconforming structure may be repaired, rebuilt or altered to its original configuration after damage or destruction not exceeding 50 percent of its fair market value. 
c.  Allowed reconstruction is to begin within one year after the damage or destruction is incurred; and 
d.  The value shall be the then fair market value of the building or structure as determined by the Putnam County Tax Assessor. 
(2)  A nonconforming structure, which is not a residence, shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(3)  A nonconforming manufactured structure may be replaced with another nonconforming manufactured structure provided the structure is a residence, but it must be placed in the same location and not exceed previous nonconformity. 
(4)  The strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any nonconforming structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health shall be allowed upon order of such official. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Sec. 66-55. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Nonconforming lots, defined. A nonconforming lot is a lot of record whose area, frontage, width or other dimensions, or location were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, and which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or exceeds one or more such requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots of record. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership as of the adoption of this chapter, and these lots have a total frontage or lot area of less than two-thirds of what is required by the district in which they are located, these lots shall be replotted or reparceled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district. 
(c)  Continuation of nonconforming lots. 
(1)  Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this chapter or the owner's successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable such person to conform to the dimensional requirements of the chapter, either: 
a.  Such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence in a district where residences are permitted; or 
b.  Such lot may be used as a building site for any other use permitted in the zoning district; 
provided, that said lot requirements or building setbacks are not reduced below the minimum specified in this chapter by more than 50 percent; and provided that the minimum requirements of the Putnam County Board of Health can be met for lots on septic systems. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 1-12-2010; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Secs. 66-56—66-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICTS 
AG-1 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-71. - Purpose. 
This district is primarily designed to protect and to promote dairying and other forms of agriculture in Putnam County. Stand alone commercial or industrial uses not directly associated with and on the same property as the operation of an agricultural enterprise are not permitted. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-72. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the AG-1 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses: 
Animal husbandry, livestock sales. 
Slaughterhouse. 
Meat processing and packaging facilities. 
Fruits/vegetable/field crops/greenhouses/nurseries. 
Produce stands. 
Forestry and timber/logging but not including a permanent sawmill or the preparation or treatment of lumber for commercial sale. 
Landscaping materials and plant stock. 
Fish hatcheries. 
Fishing lake. 
Public and private hunting club. 
Bait sales. 
Cabin/hunting lodge. 
Camping and overnight recreation area/campground. 
Kennels, noncommercial. 
Riding stable. 
Dwellings: one for property owner. 
Single-family: 
Site-built. 
Manufactured. 
Modular. 
Bed and breakfast. 
Day cares/day nurseries/kindergartens. 
Group home/hospice with greater than six individuals. 
Athletic field. 
Racetrack. 
Solar energy farm. 
Churches. 
Clinic. 
Helicopter pad. 
Transmission/communication towers. 
Carnivals, rodeos, and sporting events (temporary). 
(b)  Accessory uses that may be contained within the principal use or shall exist on the same property as the principal structure are as follows: 
Commercial: 
Barbershop. 
Beauty salon. 
Small engine repair. 
Welding. 
Grooming of animals. 
Home occupation, general. 
Dwellings: In addition to the primary residence, the owner may subdivide three additional parcels for family use only, with a minimum of 1.25 acres each without rezoning as long as there is a deeded and platted easement from a public road to these parcels. 
Group home of six or fewer individuals not including supervisory staff. 
Hospice of six or fewer patients. 
Swimming pool. 
Tennis court. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Sec. 66-73. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: 20 acres. 
(b)  Minimum road frontage: 50 feet. On a cul-de-sac: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet or where minimum lot width is achieved, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet. From lake or river: 100 feet. 
(e)  Maximum height of structures: three stories (except silos or water towers). 
(f)  Minimum residential heated floor area: 450 square feet. 
(g)  Minimum off-street parking spaces is two spaces for the principal use and one additional off-street space for each 1,000 square feet of accessory use. 
(h)  Maximum of three tenant dwellings. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  Slaughterhouses are only allowed on a minimum of 20 acres; not allowed on existing nonconforming lots of record. 
(k)  Racetracks are not allowed on existing nonconforming lots of record. 
(l)  Solar energy farm applicants shall demonstrate that the use will not have an adverse affect on neighboring properties by providing a detailed site plan to include aerials of the site, graphic renderings and site lines. Appropriate vegetated buffers and/or plantings may also be required to help limit the visual impact of the site and possible glare issues. The site shall be restored to as natural condition as possible within six months of decommissioning. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
AG-2 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14. 

Sec. 66-74. - Purpose. 
This district is intended to provide for large lot single-family residential subdivisions, having a limited number of agricultural uses. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-75. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the AG-2 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Cabin/hunting lodge. 
Camping and overnight recreation areas/campground. 
Churches. 
Dwellings: Single-family: 
Site-built. 
Manufactured home. 
Modular home. 
(b)  Accessory uses as part of a subdivision. 
Athletic field. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Swimming pools, clubs and other recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
Meat processing and packaging facilities. 
(c)  Accessory uses that shall be on the same property as the primary use are as follows: 
Family apartment. 
Home occupation, general. 
Group home of six or fewer individuals excluding supervisory staff. 
Hospice of six or fewer patients. 
Produce standards: Produce stands shall be temporary or seasonal stands for the sale of produce. There shall be a minimum of four off-street parking spaces. Such stands shall have access to at least a collector street and shall not be operated so as to create a traffic hazard. 
Meat processing and packaging facilities. 
Personal equine facility. 
Swimming pools. 
Tennis courts. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Sec. 66-76. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: Five acres. 
(b)  Minimum road frontage: 50 feet. On a cul-de-sac: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(e)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet or where minimum lot width is achieved, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet. From lake or river: 100 feet. 
(f)  Maximum height of structures: three stories. 
(g)  Minimum heated floor area: 1,200 square feet. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking spaces: Two spaces per dwelling unit. The director shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces necessary for a subdivision recreational facility depending on the number of people the health department determines can be in the pool areas and the fire marshal determines the occupancy rating for any building. 
(i)  Only one dwelling unit per lot, except for one family apartment. 
(j)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage or carport, and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
R-1R SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-77. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to encourage the development of subdivisions with larger homes with larger floor areas than the other single-family districts. The uses in this district are severely restricted as compared to other single-family districts. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-78. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the R-1R zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Churches. 
Dwellings: Single-family: 
Site-Built. 
Modular. 
(b)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot. 
(c)  Accessory uses as part of a subdivision. 
Athletic field. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Swimming pools, clubs and other recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(d)  Accessory uses that shall be on the same property as the principal use are as follows: 
Family apartment, which is enclosed as part of the principal structure. 
Home occupation, general. 
Swimming pool, private. 
Tennis courts, private. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-79. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: See subsection 66-34(f). 
(b)  Minimum road frontage: 50 feet. On a cul-de-sac: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(e)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet or where minimum lot width is achieved, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet. From lake or river: 100 feet. 
(f)  Maximum height of structures: Three stories. 
(g)  Minimum heated floor area: 1,600 square feet. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit. The director shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces necessary for a subdivision recreational facility depending on the number of people the health department determines can be in the pool areas and the fire marshal determines the occupancy rating for any building. 
(i)  Only one dwelling unit per lot, to include one family apartment. 
(j)  Enclosed garages (attached or detached) only: Carports are prohibited in this district. 
(k)  Accessory buildings: One per lot, excluding one garage and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-80. - Purpose. 
The R-1 district is similar to the R-1R with respect to the uses permitted, but differs with respect to the minimum floor area and allowed uses. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-81. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the R-1 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Bed and breakfast/boardinghouse. 
Churches. 
Dwellings: Single-family: 
Site-built. 
Modular. 
Manufactured. 
(b)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot. 
(c)  Accessory uses as part of a subdivision. 
Athletic field. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Swimming pools, clubs and other recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(d)  Accessory uses that shall be on the same property as the principal use are as follows: 
Day care of six or fewer children. 
Family apartment. 
Group home of six or fewer individuals excluding supervisory staff. 
Home occupation, general. 
Hospice of six or fewer patients. 
Swimming pools, private. 
Tennis courts, private. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-82. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: See subsection 66-34(f). 
(b)  Minimum road frontage: 50 feet. On a cul-de-sac: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(e)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet or where minimum lot width is achieved, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet. From lake or river: 100 feet. 
(f)  Maximum height of structures: three stories. 
(g)  Minimum heated floor area: 
(1)  1,200 square feet: site-built, modular. 
(2)  1,000 square feet: manufactured. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit. The director shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces necessary for a subdivision recreational facility, depending on the number of people the health department determines can be in the pool areas and the fire marshal determines the occupancy rating for any building. 
(i)  Only one dwelling unit per lot, except for one family apartment. 
(j)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage, or carport and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-83. - Purpose. 
This district is intended to encourage residential subdivisions of homes with less floor area than the other single-family districts to foster the development of starter homes. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-84. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the R-2 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Bed and breakfast/boardinghouse. 
Cabin/hunting lodge. 
Churches. 
Dwellings: Single-family: 
Site-built. 
Modular. 
Manufactured. 
(b)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot. 
(c)  Accessory uses as part of a subdivision. 
Athletic field. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Swimming pools, clubs and other recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(d)  Accessory uses that shall be on the same property as the principal use are as follows: 
Day care of not more than six children. 
Family apartment. 
Group home of six or fewer individuals excluding supervisory staff. 
Home occupation. 
Hospice of six or fewer individuals. 
Swimming pools, private. 
Tennis courts, private. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-85. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: See subsection 66-34(f). 
(b)  Minimum road frontage: 50 feet. On a cul-de-sac: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(e)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet or where minimum lot width is achieved, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet. From lake or river: 100 feet. 
(f)  Maximum height of structures: Three stories. 
(g)  Minimum heated floor area: Site built/modular: 1,000 square feet; Manufactured home: 600 square feet. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit. The director shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces necessary for a subdivision recreational facility, depending on the number of people the health department determines can be in the pool areas and the fire marshal determines the occupancy rating for any building. 
(i)  Only one dwelling unit per lot, except for one family apartment. 
(j)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage, or carport and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-86. - Purpose. 
Manufactured home park district, abbreviated in this division as MHP, is a parcel of land under single ownership on which three or more manufactured homes are located for the purpose of residential use and does not include sales, manufacture or storage of such units. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-87. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the MHP zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Churches. 
Dwellings: 
Site-built or modular home for exclusive use of owner/manager residing on site. 
Manufactured homes. 
Travel trailers/recreational vehicles, less than 30 days. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use within the park. 
Athletic field. 
Home occupation, general. 
Community facilities: 
Neighborhood recreation facilities. 
Day care with six or fewer children. 
Laundry facility. 
Parks/playgrounds, community or individual. 
Store, small. For the exclusive use of the MHP residents. 
Swimming pool, community or individual. 
Tennis centers, clubs and facilities (private). 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-88. - Development standards. 
(a)  Development standards for total MHP area. 
(1)  Minimum MHP lot area: Ten acres. 
(2)  Maximum density: Five manufactured homes per acre. 
(3)  Minimum MHP setback requirements (before individual lots are established): 
From state/federal highway: 150 feet. 
From county roadway: 100 feet. 
Front: 50 feet. 
Sides: 25 feet, 100 feet if the side abuts other R districts. 
Rear: 40 feet, 100 feet if the side abuts other R districts or from lake or river. 
(4)  Minimum open space requirement: 15 percent, which may include recreational uses. 
(5)  Streets: Streets within MHPs shall be privately owned, constructed and maintained. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with chapter 28, development regulations, for local streets and shall provide direct accessibility to each lot and residential unit. No lot or unit shall be accessible except by way of an internal street. Internal streets shall have a minimum of a 40-foot right-of-way and a minimum of 20 feet of paved surface. 
(6)  Parking and traffic requirements: 
a.  Minimum entrance width: 50 feet. 
b.  Parking spaces: Two per manufactured home space. 
c.  Internal driveways must be paved and have a minimum width of 12 feet. 
(7)  Buffer or berm: 25 feet (or 50 feet when adjacent to other R or RM districts) densely planted with evergreen and hedge-type shrubs designed to provide full screening on the park. 
(8)  Illumination: Street lighting shall be provided not less than every 250 feet to ensure the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. Such lighting shall not create a direct glare into surrounding residential areas. 
(9)  Unit requirements: See chapter 18, buildings and building regulations. 
(10)  Travel trailer/RV's: See travel trailer/RV park guidelines in article III, performance standards. 
(11)  Commercial uses: If permitted accessory commercial uses are developed on the site, those uses must comply with the setback, buffer, minimum lot size and minimum lot width of the C-1 district in this article. Any portion of a manufactured home park tract used for such purposes cannot be counted as available acreage for purposes of calculating dwelling unit density. No more than ten percent of the park may be used for commercial purposes. 
(b)  Minimum development standards for each manufactured home lot: Each home shall be located on an individual lot. Each lot shall have all corners clearly marked. Each lot shall have the parking areas required in this section and, in addition, shall have a concrete patio of at least 100 square feet, which shall be convenient to the entrance of the home. In no event shall the home and parking areas cover more than one-third of the space of the individual lot. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 8,600 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building setback line: 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 80 feet. 
(4)  Minimum required setbacks/yards: 
a.  From right-of-way of interior streets: 25 feet. 
b.  From adjacent units: 20 feet end-to-end, and 40 feet side-to-side. 
(c)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage, or carport and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
RM-1 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-89. - Purpose. 
This district is the lowest density multiple-family district. It may be used as a transition district between the single-family districts and the districts permitting nonresidential uses. The density limit allows two dwelling units on the minimum lot area and more as the lot area becomes larger. This district is the first and the lowest density of the three multifamily districts. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-90. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the RM-1 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Bed and breakfast/boardinghouse. 
Churches. 
Dwelling: 
(1)  Structural types: 
Site-built. 
Modular. 
Manufactured. 
(2)  Occupancy types: 
Duplex. 
Triplex. 
Quadruplex. 
Group home greater than six individuals. 
Hospice with greater than six patients. 
(b)  Accessory uses as part of a development. 
Athletic field. 
Central laundry facility. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Swimming pools, clubs, tennis courts and other recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the residents. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
Day care of not more than six children. 
Group home of six or fewer individuals excluding supervisory staff. 
Home occupation, general. 
Hospice of six or fewer individuals. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-91. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum parcel size: 20,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum road frontage: 50 feet. On a cul-de-sac: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 125 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(e)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet. From lake or river: 100 feet. 
(f)  Maximum height of structures: Two stories. 
(g)  Minimum heated floor area: 750 square feet. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit. The director shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces necessary for a subdivision recreational facility, depending on the number of people the health department determines can be in the pool areas and the fire marshal determines the occupancy rating for any building. Parking shall be provided on the same lot as the use it serves. 
(i)  Density: Four dwelling units per acre. 
(j)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage, or carport and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
RM-2 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-92. - Purpose. 
This is the medium density multifamily district. It requires a greater minimum lot area, while allowing for more dwelling units per acre and a variety of housing types. It could be used as a transition district between the single-family districts and the districts permitting nonresidential uses. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-93. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the RM-2 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Bed and breakfast/boardinghouse. 
Churches. 
Convalescent home, hospice/nursing home/assisted living. 
Dwelling: 
(1)  Structural types: 
Site-built. 
Modular. 
Manufactured. 
(2)  Occupancy types: 
Duplex. 
Triplex. 
Quadruplex. 
Townhouse. 
Group homes greater than six individuals. 
Hospice with greater than six patients. 
(b)  Accessory uses as part of a development. 
Athletic field. 
Central laundry facility. 
Marinas. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Swimming pools, clubs, tennis courts and other recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the residents. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
Day care of not more than six children. 
Group home of six or fewer individuals excluding supervisory staff. 
Home occupation, general. 
Hospice of six or fewer individuals. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-94. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum parcel size: Two acres (with community water and an approved EPD septic system or sewer). 
(b)  Minimum road frontage: 50 feet. On a cul-de-sac: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 125 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(e)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet. From lake or river: 100 feet. 
(f)  Maximum height of structures: Three stories. 
(g)  Minimum heated floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking spaces: Two spaces per dwelling unit. The director shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces necessary for a subdivision recreational facility, depending on the number of people the health department determines can be in the pool areas and the fire marshal determines the occupancy rating for any building. Parking shall be provided on the same lot as the use it serves. 
(i)  Density: Six dwelling units per acre. (All numerical values not yielding a whole number shall be rounded down to the lesser whole number.) 
(j)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage, or carport and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
RM-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-95. - Purpose. 
The primary purpose of this district is to facilitate, through a sensitive single design solution, the incorporation of a development into the natural environment by using an increased density as the reward. Properties in this district shall be developed as integrated whole with offering a variety of housing design solutions in one ownership. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-96. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the RM-3 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Amusement, recreational and entertainment activities carried on wholly within a permanently enclosed building. 
Churches. 
Dwellings: 
(1)  Structural types: 
Site-built. 
Modular. 
(2)  Occupancy types: 
Single-family dwelling. 
Duplex. 
Triplex. 
Quadruplex. 
Townhouse. 
Mid-rise. 
Hotel/inn. 
Private schools. 
(b)  Commercial uses may be allowed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Maximum commercial land area is ten percent of total acreage not to exceed ten acres. 
(2)  May not be developed until at least 50 percent of the dwelling units are occupied. 
(3)  May not have vehicular access directly from the existing public street from which the development derives its means of ingress and egress. 
(4)  Uses are restricted to retail commercial (excluding an automobile service station), services, and professional offices. 
(c)  Accessory uses as part of the development. 
Athletic field. 
Home occupation, general. 
Marinas. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Pedestrian system (includes walking trails and bicycle paths). 
Restaurant (if commercial permitted). 
Sewage treatment plant. 
Swimming pools, clubs, tennis courts, golf courses and other recreation facilities. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-97. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum parcel size: 20 acres (with community water and an approved EPD septic system or sewer). 
(b)  Total parcel size, if commercial is included, must have a minimum of 50 acres. 
(c)  Minimum lot width shall not be less than 500 feet, excluding the first 200 feet of lot depth from the road. 
(d)  Minimum requirements are dependent on what can be determined from the concept plan with respect to how the proposed development relates to surrounding properties and what efforts and design solutions are in place to mitigate potential adverse effects on the natural environment, and how the development utilizes the topography to best achieve a harmonious design. 
(1)  A 50-foot-wide natural undisturbed buffer or a berm, replanted where sparsely vegetated, shall exist adjacent to all property lines. 
(2)  Minimum setback from lake or river: 100 feet. 
(3)  Environmentally sensitive areas, i.e. wetlands, flood zones, etc. These areas shall be demarcated in the field and shall remain undisturbed. 
(4)  All drainage courses shall remain pristine with 25-foot-wide buffers on each side. 
(5)  No vehicle parking areas shall exist between the proposed buildings and the boundary property lines. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(e)  Maximum density per lot is eight dwelling units per acre with 35 percent open space or ten units per acre with 50 percent open space. 
(f)  Minimum heated floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
(g)  Building height: Three stories. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking space: Two spaces per dwelling unit. The director shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces necessary for any recreational facility, depending on the number of people the health department determines can be in the pool areas and the fire marshal determines the occupancy rating for any building. Parking for the commercial portion shall be one space for each 200 square feet of total commercial floor area. Parking shall be provided on the same lot as the use it serves. 
(i)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage, or carport and one well house. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
VILLAGE DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-98. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to encourage developers to create a "village" atmosphere of various types of residential solutions intermixed with small scale commercial. The end product should provide opportunities for residents and nonresidents to interact as the commercial and public spaces and uses are experienced. The village should answer the needs of people who choose not to live in the conventional single-family house with all of the attendant time consuming aspects of it. Village life should be an active environment attractive to people who prefer to find answers to their needs within walking distance of their front door. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-99. - Plan. 
The architectural goal is to recreate the center of a small town where most daily needs can be satisfied through an overall site design. Most housing types, occupancies and forms of small shop commercial expression are part of the landscape of the village. The pedestrian scale should be emphatically apparent with vehicles hidden from view. Vegetation, benches, kiosks, gazebos, [and] ornamental lighting should punctuate the design in significant quantities to be meaningful to the overall design solution. Residential may be at grade, over or among the commercial spaces or freestanding. An equalization of both use categories is unlikely to occur by chance, thus a three-fifths to two-fifths relationship shall be the rule. Either use category may be the larger of the two but both shall exist. This relationship is determined by equating the total floor area of one to that of the other. For residential it is heated floor area and for commercial it is the total floor area including all interior spaces regardless whether for storage, preparation, or retail. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-100. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the village zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses. 
Athletic field. 
Bed and breakfast/boardinghouse. 
Churches. 
Commercial uses as set forth in subsection 66-103(b). 
Convalescent home, group home/hospice/nursing home/assisted living. 
Day care. 
Dwelling: 
(1)  Structural types: 
Site-built. 
Modular. 
(2)  Occupancy types: 
Duplex. 
Triplex. 
Quadruplex. 
Townhouse. 
Home occupation, general. 
Marinas. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Private Schools. 
Swimming pools, clubs, tennis courts and other recreation facilities. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-101. - Development standards. 
(a)  Parcel size: 
Minimum parcel size: 15 acres (with community water and an approved EPD septic system or sewer). 
Maximum parcel size: 35 acres (without community water and with an approved EPD septic system or sewer). 
(b)  Minimum setback from lake or river: 100 feet. 
(c)  This district shall provide sidewalks, curb, gutter and streetlights throughout. 
(d)  Berms must be constructed adjacent to all residential districts or adjacent to any lot used for residential. 
(e)  Maximum potential total commercial floor area shall not be greater than 10,000 square feet per acre of the entire lot being rezoned. 
(f)  The maximum potential residential density shall not exceed eight dwelling units per acre of the entire lot being rezoned, with each dwelling unit having a minimum of 1,000 heated square feet. 
(g)  Allocation of commercial: So that no one or two commercial uses consume the entirety or majority of the total commercial floor area, the total commercial floor area shall be allocated as follows: 
(1)  If the total commercial floor area is 100,000 square feet or less, the following applies: 
Only one use as large as 10,000 square feet, excluding exterior eating and/or displays. 
The balance of the total commercial floor shall be distributed accordingly: 
30 percent in uses between 800 to 2,400 square feet. 
70 percent in uses between 2,401 and 3,600 square feet. 
(2)  If the total commercial floor area is greater than 100,000 square feet the following applies: 
Only two uses as large as 12,000 square feet each, excluding exterior eating and/or displays. 
The balance of the total commercial floor area shall be distributed accordingly: 
30 percent in uses between 800 to 2,400 square feet. 
70 percent in uses between 2,401 and 3,600 square feet. 
(h)  Internal open space requirement: Excluding vegetation that exists in all buffers or berms on the periphery of the village or within the parking bays, there shall exist internal to the collection of buildings forming the village and intermingled among the residential and commercial environment, open space designed to provide shade, seating, seasonal color, building separation, and recreation activities. At least ten percent of the combined total commercial and residential floor areas proposed by the property owner shall exist in this type of open space. The open space shall consist of a combination of planting beds of annuals or perennials, trees, ornamental grasses and shrubs. 
(i)  Parking: Commercial requirement is five spaces per each 1,000 square feet of total floor area; residential is two spaces per dwelling unit. Parking shall be underneath the buildings or behind the residential and commercial uses. 
(j)  Maximum height of structures: Five stories; if adjacent to Lakes Sinclair and Oconee: Three stories. 
(k)  Hours of operation: All commercial uses shall cease operation by 1:00 a.m. if within 100 feet of any residential use within the village. 
(l)  Signage: Within the commercial aspect of this development, only directional and building signs are permitted. Freestanding signs and blinking change of copy or articulated signage and signs that project above the gutter line of the uppermost floor or on the roof are prohibited. Lighted signs within a direct line of sight from any residential dwelling in the village shall be extinguished by 1:00 a.m. See chapter 48, signs, for further requirements. 
(m)  Loudspeakers or sound emanating from within a use are prohibited. 
(n)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(o)  Accessory buildings: Maximum of two per lot, excluding one garage, or carport and one well house. 
(p)  Minimum buffer around development: 100 feet. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businessess, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 66-102. - Purpose. 
This is the district wherein typical community commercial uses are to be found. As a group these uses satisfy the local consumer's daily needs for professional, retail, and for goods and services as well as the needs of the transient and recreational consumers with limited residential use. It is intended that all establishments be operated wholly within permanently enclosed buildings. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-103. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the C-1 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses: 
Ambulance service. 
Amusement, recreational and entertainment activities carried on wholly within a permanently enclosed building. 
Athletic club. 
Automobile service station. 
Automobile parts and tire store; retail. 
Auto wash carried on wholly within a permanently enclosed building which is secured and shuttered during non-business hours. 
Churches. 
Clinic, urgent care facility. 
Community facilities: 
Assembly halls. 
Cultural facilities (museums, galleries, live theater). 
Fraternal club or lodge. 
Cultural facilities. 
Day care/day nursery/kindergarten. 
Day spa. 
Eating and drinking places. 
Feed and seed sales. 
Funeral home. 
Furniture upholstery. 
Housing: 
24-hour security residence. 
Assisted living facilities. 
Group home of six or more individuals. 
Hospice of six or more individuals. 
Mixed-use building. (Maximum of eight dwelling units per building and residential must be above ground floor commercial.) 
Transient lodgings. 
Marinas. 
Mini-warehouses. 
Offices. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Private schools. 
Retail commercial uses. 
Commercial shooting/archery range: Indoor. 
Small animal care and sales. 
Trade schools. 
Transmission/communication towers. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Sec. 66-104. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum setbacks requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet. 
(2)  Side setback: 15 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet; from lake or river: 100 feet. 
(4)  A 50-foot setback is required when any commercial use or district adjoins any residential use or district. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: Three stories. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: One space per each 200 square feet of space designated for retail sales. See chapter 28, development regulations, for other commercial uses. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(g)  A berm or a 50-foot buffer is required when any commercial use or district adjoins any residential use or district and shall be included within the required setback. 
(h)  Mixed-use residential component minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 1,000 square feet. Only two buildings per acre. 
(i)  Maximum commercial floor area is computed at 15,000 square feet per acre. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 66-105. - Purpose. 
The uses in this district are those most commonly expected to be present in a commercial environment serving a large consumer area. Very large floor area commercial uses, multiplex theaters, large hardware and indoor building supply stores, existing as anchors in a mall or on a single-user site are encouraged. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-106. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the C-2 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Additionally, all uses permitted in the C-1 district are permitted in the C-2 district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses: 
Ambulance service. 
Amusement, recreational and entertainment activities carried on wholly within a permanently enclosed building. 
Athletic club. 
Automobile parts and tire store; retail. 
Automobile service station. 
Automobile repair garage. 
Automobile, manufactured homes sales and rentals. 
Automotive, boat and trailer sales and service. 
Auto wash. 
Boat and dock: Service and accessories. 
Cemeteries/mausoleums. 
Churches. 
Clinic. 
Commercial shooting/archery range: Indoor 
Community facilities: 
Assembly halls. 
Cultural facilities (museums, galleries, live theater). 
Fraternal club or lodge. 
Crematoriums. 
Eating and drinking places. 
Fabrication shops. 
Feed and seed sales. 
Food service and grocery stores. 
Funeral homes. 
Furniture upholstery. 
Hospitals, private. 
Housing: 
24-hour security residence. 
Group home of six or more individuals. 
Mixed-use building. (Maximum of eight dwelling units per building and residential must be above ground floor commercial.) 
Hospice of six or more individuals. 
Transient lodgings. 
Kennels. 
Laboratories, medical. 
Manufactured home sales. 
Marinas. 
Meat processing and packaging facilities. 
Mini-warehouses. 
Offices. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Private schools. 
Professional services. 
Recreational vehicle sales. 
Retail commercial uses. 
Small animal care and sales. 
Small equipment repair. 
Tractor sales. 
Trade schools. 
Transmission/communication towers. 
Truck stop. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-107. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: One acre. 
(b)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 30 feet. 
(2)  Side setback: 15 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 20 feet; from lake or river: 100 feet. 
(4)  A 50-foot setback is required when any commercial use or district adjoins any residential use or district. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: Three stories. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: One space per each 200 square feet of space designated for retail sales. See chapter 28, development regulations, for other commercial uses. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(g)  A berm or a 50-foot buffer is required when any commercial use or district adjoins any residential use or district and shall be included within the required setback. 
(h)  Mixed-use residential component minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 1,000 heated square feet. Only two buildings per acre. 
(i)  Maximum commercial floor area is computed at 25,000 square feet per acre. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
C-3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-108. - Purpose. 
This district is intended to accommodate entertainment, recreational, [and/or] leisure type uses on a substantial scale and/or intensity. The uses may be indoor, outdoor, [and/or] a combination and may be integrated with housing types. While not limited to resort developments, they are encouraged. Under certain circumstances, as seen herein below, this district may be considered an expanded version of the village district in conjunction with the principal recreation/entertainment themes. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-109. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the C-3 zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Additionally, all uses permitted in the C-1 district are permitted in C-3 district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses: 
Ambulance service. 
Amusement, recreational and entertainment activities whether indoor or outdoor. 
Athletic club. 
Athletic field. 
Automobile service station. 
Auto wash. 
Campground. 
Cemeteries/mausoleums. 
Churches. 
Commercial shooting/archery range: indoor/outdoor. 
Community facilities: 
Assembly halls. 
Cultural facilities (museums, galleries, live theater). 
Fraternal club or lodge. 
Crematoriums. 
Dwellings of any occupancy or structural configuration permitted by this chapter. 
Eating and drinking places. 
Fishing lake, public. 
Funeral homes. 
Golf clubhouse/course. 
Golf driving range. 
Helicopter pad. 
Marinas. 
Meat processing and packaging facilities. 
Mixed-use building. (Maximum of eight dwelling units per building and residential must be above-ground floor commercial.) 
Offices. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Polo fields. 
Private schools. 
Racetrack, automobile. 
Racetrack, horses. 
Recreational vehicle park. 
Retail commercial uses. 
Spa (overnight). 
Swimming pools. 
Tennis courts. 
Transient lodgings. 
Transmission/communication towers. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
Zoos. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Sec. 66-110. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: Ten acres. 
(b)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line is 200 feet. 
(c)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 100 feet. 
(2)  Side setback: 50 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 100 feet; from lake or river: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: Three stories. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: One space per each 200 square feet of space designated for retail sales. See chapter 28, development regulations, for other commercial or recreational uses. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(g)  Buffer and berm requirement: 100 feet if adjacent to any residential district. 
(h)  Mixed-use residential component minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 1,000 square feet. 
(i)  Density: For permanent residential (apartments/condos/rental cottages), eight dwelling units per acre is the maximum density permitted in this district. All numerical values not yielding a whole number shall be rounded down to the lesser whole number. 
(j)  Maximum commercial floor area is computed at 25,000 square feet per acre. Exterior recreation uses such as golf courses or swimming facilities are not included in the floor area computation. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
I-M INDUSTRIAL-MANUFACTURING DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-111. - Purpose. 
This district is intended to provide areas for industries that manufacture, fabricate, change, or alter materials to form a product or subassemblies. Uses that in the normal course of business must store materials outdoors, have vehicles, equipment, and liquids parked or stored in containers or that the nature of the industry necessitates outdoor assemblage of all or part of the goods produced should be in this district. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-112. - Uses allowed. 
The uses allowed in the I-M zoning district as a matter of right are subject to section 66-34, general requirements, of this article, to performance standards of article III, and to the requirements and development standards of this district. Uses not listed herein are not permitted in this district, except as provided in section 66-36, undefined uses, of this article. Consult article III, performance standards, or the other zoning districts if the use you seek is not listed in this district. 
(a)  Allowed uses: 
Adult entertainment. 
Airport. 
Alcohol manufacturing. 
Athletic field. 
Automobile repair and paint shops. 
Automobile service stations. 
Automobile/truck service stations with or without repair facilities, including wash service. 
Automobile, truck, boat and trailer, sales, service, lease and rentals. 
Automobile wrecking yards. 
Automobile and truck wash. 
Boat sales and service. 
Bottled gas, storage and distribution. 
Building contractors' places of business and storage yards. 
Chemical manufacturing. 
Clinic. 
Cold storage. 
Community facilities: 
Restaurants. 
Assembly halls. 
Fraternal club or lodge. 
Construction equipment sales and service. 
Cosmetic and pharmaceutical manufacturing. 
Dry cleaning plant. 
Electrical supply stores. 
Fabrication shops. 
Fertilizer manufacturing. 
Food manufacturing and processing. 
Funeral homes. 
Furniture upholstery. 
Junkyards. 
Lumber and other building materials including lumber treatment and lumber yard. 
Manufactured home sales. 
Manufacturing, industrial, fabrication uses. 
Meat processing and packaging facilities. 
Mining and quarries. 
Mini-warehouses. 
Printing plant. 
Sewage treatment plant (subject to article III, performance standards). 
Solar energy farm. 
Storage yards. 
Tire retreading and recapping. 
Tractor and farm equipment sales, service. 
Trailer sales room, sales lot, and repairs. 
Transmission/communication towers. 
Transportation. 
Truck stop. 
Upholstery shop for all items. 
Vehicle impound yards. 
Warehousing. 
Water treatment plant, private. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures: Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-113. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: One acre. 
(b)  Minimum lot width at the building setback line: 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Front setback: 50 feet. 
(2)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear setback: 50 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures: Three stories. 
(e)  Basic parking requirement: One space per each 200 square feet of space designated for retail sales. See chapter 28, development regulations, for other commercial or recreational uses. 
(f)  Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent. 
(g)  Buffer and berm requirement: 100 feet if adjacent to any residential district. 
(h)  Maximum floor area is computed at 15,000 square feet per acre, excluding exterior storage spaces and structures. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  Minimum setback from lake or river: 100 feet. 
(k)  This zoning district is prohibited adjacent to, and within 500 feet of Lake Sinclair or Oconee. 
(l)  Solar energy farm applicants shall demonstrate that the use will not have an adverse affect on neighboring properties by providing a detailed site plan to include aerials of the site, graphic renderings and site lines. Appropriate vegetated buffers and/or plantings may also be required to help limit the visual impact of the site and possible glare issues. The site shall be restored to as natural condition as possible within six months of decommissioning. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Secs. 66-114—66-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 66-131. - Defined and restricted. 
(a)  Scope. The following material is intended to define and regulate those uses allowed in any given zoning district as a matter of right. In each instance the use also must comply with any development standards of the zoning district in which it is/will be located and the performance standards of this article. All uses shall have their customary dictionary definition unless specifically provided in article I, section 66-20, definitions. 
(b)  Governmental uses. Such uses shall include buildings, structures and uses of land by a unit of local government, not listed elsewhere including, but not restricted to, convenience centers, libraries, public schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and fire stations and are exempt from the development standards of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-132. - List of uses and performance standards. 
(a)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any allowed use. 
a.  An accessory structure shall be located on the same lot and within the same zoning boundary as the principal building/use to which it is accessory. 
b.  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. If the principal building has not been completed within 12 months of the issuance of a building permit, then the accessory use shall be continued only with express permission of the director of the planning and development department based upon unusual circumstances or hardship. Under no circumstances shall the accessory structure or use continue for more than 24 months if the principal structure/use has not been completed. 
c.  An accessory structure, with the exception of garages and carports, shall be permitted in the side or rear yard of any R, RM or Village district. 
d.  Setback use on Lakes Oconee and Sinclair. A detached accessory structure may be located in the portion of the setback between the house on the property and the street. Setbacks for the district must be followed. 
e.  No accessory structure in a nonresidential district shall be used by other than employees or relatives of the owner unless otherwise allowed by provisions of this chapter. 
f.  Accessory structures shall not exceed two stories in height and may not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
g.  Where a corner lot in a residential district adjoins another lot, no accessory structure shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer than 25 feet to the rear property line. The setback of 25 feet will not be required when the adjoining yard is a rear yard. 
h.  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, the accessory structure shall comply with the setback requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
i.  Private accessory structures such as swimming pools in a residential district shall comply with the minimum side and rear setback requirements of that district. Setback minimums shall be measured from the decking or closest part of the pool structure to the applicable property line. Accessory swimming pools shall be permitted only upon written approval by the director of planning and development department. 
j.  Accessory uses in an apartment development may include laundry facilities and must be housed in a separate area for the convenience of residents. 
k.  In no case shall an accessory building or structure exceed the square footage of the principal building or structure to which it is accessory, except in the AG districts. 
l.  Accessory structures shall be constructed in conjunction with or after a building permit for the principal building is lawfully approved. 
(2)  Commercial. The businesses in AG-1 do not conform to the standards specified for the businesses as a home occupation. Requirements for these commercial businesses are as follows: 
a.  Setbacks: 
Front: 200 feet. 
Side setback: 100 feet. 
Rear setback: 100 feet. 
b.  Outside storage shall be in the rear of the building and must be screened from view. 
c.  If property abuts a residential district there shall be a 50-foot buffer that screens use from view. 
d.  Building must be frame construction with a residential or agriculture facade. 
e.  Driveway must be paved at least five feet into the property. 
f.  The maximum number of employees is five. 
(3)  Specific accessory use restrictions. 
a.  Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rentals, as an accessory use to an automobile service station. 
1.  This use shall not occupy more than ten percent of the lot area. 
2.  No more than four trailers, trucks or cars shall be permitted outdoors on the lot at any one time. 
3.  Parking areas for the permitted trailers shall be located only in portions of the lot where off-street parking is permitted, but no area or space shall occupy spaces set aside for required off-street parking or use by cars awaiting service. No trailer shall be parked in any way that interferes with normal traffic flow to, within, or out of the lot. 
4.  All parking areas shall be clearly marked and no trailer, truck or car shall be parked outdoors other than within these boundaries except when being serviced. 
b.  Accessory retail sales and services. Retail sales and services accessory to the operation of an office building or institutional use, motel or hotel, conducted wholly within the building housing the use to which these activities are accessory, provided that the floor space used or to be used for these secondary uses shall be limited to a total of 25 square feet per room in a hotel or motel, or ten percent of the net floor area in an office building or institutional use, and provided that: 
1.  Every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure. 
2.  No show window, advertising or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
3.  No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside of the primary use structure. However, the requirements of this section shall not apply to restaurants and cafeterias secondary to a hotel or motel and office building or institutional use; these secondary uses may be located in a structure other than the primary use structure. 
4.  The following accessory uses are permitted: barbershops, beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning pickup and distribution stations and other similar personal service establishments; drugstores; bookstores; florists; convenience food stores; gift shops; cafeterias and restaurants; private clubs; laundry facilities for the convenience of residents; newsstands; and shoe repair shops. 
(b)  Adult entertainment. The following applies to any type of adult entertainment (see article I, definitions): 
(1)  Minimum yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard: 500 feet. 
b.  Side yard: 500 feet. 
c.  Rear yard: 500 feet. 
(2)  Maximum height of structures: Two stories. 
(3)  Basic parking requirements: One space per 200 square feet of building space. 
(4)  Setback requirements: The boundaries of this use shall be 1,000 feet from the boundaries of all residential uses or districts. The boundaries of this use shall be 1,000 feet from any historic district or structure defined or created pursuant to this chapter or by applicable state or federal law. 
(5)  Distance requirements for alcoholic beverage sales: No bar, tavern, saloon, nightclub, or restaurant serving alcohol or any place where alcohol is sold for consumption on the premises shall be established, operated or maintained within 2,000 feet of an adult entertainment establishment. In addition, an adult entertainment establishment shall not be established, operated or maintained within 2,000 feet of a bar, tavern, saloon, nightclub, or restaurant serving alcohol or any place where alcohol is sold for consumption on the premises. The distance established by this section shall be radial distances determined by a straight line and not street distance, measured from property line to property line. Adult entertainment establishments are prohibited from serving or selling any alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed on the property. 
(6)  Distances from existing structures: This use shall not be established, operated or maintained within 1,000 feet of a property line of a dwelling unit, a church or other place of worship, park or recreation area, a school, a day care facility, kindergarten or play school, colleges and universities, group homes, orphanages, halfway houses and existing structures. This use shall not be established, operated or maintained within 2,000 feet of another adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Agriculture and forestry. 
(1)  Produce stands. Produce stands shall be temporary or seasonal stands for the sale of produce. There shall be a minimum of four off-street parking spaces. Such stands shall have access to at least a collector street and shall not be operated so as to create a traffic hazard. A permit from the director of planning and development department is required prior to the establishment of the stand. 
(2)  Riding stables. No structure shall be located within 50 feet from any property line, except in AG-1 district. 
(3)  Sawmill, permanent/temporary. 
a.  This use must be set back at least 500 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes or a school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
b.  A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be required. 
c.  This use is subject to hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
d.  All vehicular access shall be from an arterial street. 
(d)  Animal care facilities. 
(1)  Animal hospitals and/or veterinary clinics. 
a.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property or building zoned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  All structures shall have adequate soundproofing and odor-proofing shall be provided so the use does not create a nuisance. 
c.  No boarding shall be allowed unless required in connection with medical treatment. 
(2)  Boarding or breeding kennels. All structures used for boarding or breeding kennels shall be at least 100 feet from any property or building zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(3)  Noncommercial kennels/shelters. All noncommercial kennels and shelters shall be located on a site of not less than one acre; all structures must be set back at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes; and all facilities shall be constructed and activities conducted so as not to create a nuisance. A six-foot fence shall enclose all property on which such shelters are operated. All structures shall have adequate soundproofing, and odor-proofing shall be provided so the use does not create a nuisance. 
(e)  Automotive, boat and trailer, sales and service. 
(1)  Automobile, boat, trailer and truck sales. No vehicle parked for sale or service shall be located within a street right-of-way as shown by any transportation and thoroughfare plans of the county, by the zoning maps or by conditions or right-of-way dedication by which rezoning is approved. No external display of merchandise shall interfere with sight lines so as to create traffic or other safety hazards. 
(2)  Automobile service station, minor repairs. 
a.  There shall be no body and fender repair, painting or related dismantling of vehicles on the premises. 
b.  All minor auto repair, maintenance, service, storage of materials or similar activities connected with this use shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building, which shall be located at least 100 feet away from any residential district or use. 
c.  Property on which such service station is to be located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital or public library. 
d.  Property shall have minimum frontage on public street of 100 feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from the right-of-way lines, and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from the same. 
e.  Gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the right-of-way line and also shall not be located less than 60 feet from the centerline of the arterials or collectors or 45 feet from the centerline of local streets. 
(3)  Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rentals. 
a.  All vehicles shall be set back at least 30 feet from the street right-of-way lines. 
b.  All parking areas shall be clearly marked, and no trailer, truck or car shall be parked outdoors other than within these boundaries, except when being serviced. 
(4)  Automobile/truck wash service. A paved area shall be located on the same lot as the principal use for the storage of vehicles awaiting service equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the wash machines. 
(5)  Automobile wrecking yards. 
a.  This use shall not be established on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any R, RM, MHP or Village district. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the boundary of any R, RM, or Village district. 
c.  A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines. 
d.  This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
e.  This use shall be permitted only if located on property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same. 
(6)  Retail automobile parts and tire store. 
a.  There shall be no dismantling of vehicles on the premises to obtain auto parts. 
b.  Auto part installation shall only include the installation of tires and the installation of minor maintenance or accessory parts. 
c.  Major auto repair shall not be permitted. Minor auto repair and maintenance may be permitted, provided this repair and maintenance shall be incidental to the normal upkeep of an automobile. 
(7)  Truck stop. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any R, RM, MHP or Village district. 
c.  The principal structure associated with this use shall be set back at least 200 feet from all property lines. 
d.  A minimum buffer of 100 feet or a berm shall be required. 
(f)  Commercial recreation and entertainment. 
(1)  Carnival, rodeos and sporting events (temporary). 
a.  The user must apply for a permit from the director of planning and development department. 
b.  All buildings or other structures must be set back a minimum of 500 feet from all property lines. 
c.  Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
d.  This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
e.  This use may be restricted to property with frontage on a county arterial or county collector with access limited to the same, if deemed appropriate by the director of planning and development department. 
f.  Permittee must provide evidence that suitable parking is available/present. 
h.  The director may require additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect public health, human life and the environment. 
(2)  Fairgrounds and amusement parks (permanent). 
a.  All buildings and structures associated with this use shall be set back not less than 500 feet from any property line. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of an R, RM, MHP, or Village district. 
c.  Vehicular access shall be derived only and directly from an arterial street and never through an R, RM, MHP, or Village district. 
d.  If within 1,000 feet of residential districts or uses, hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; and a maximum average sound level of 60 dBa (maximum peak sound level of 75 dBa) shall be maintained at all property lines. 
e.  The facility shall be enclosed by a security wall or fence not less than six feet in height. 
(3)  Commercial/public shooting range (indoor and outdoor)/archery range. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted adjacent to or across the right-of-way from an R, RM, MHP or Village district. In the case of an outdoor range, it shall not be permitted adjacent to or across the right-of-way from a dwelling unless there is a 2,000-foot setback from the property line adjacent to the dwelling or consent is obtained from any affected owner(s) of the dwelling(s) for a lesser distance. 
b.  The outdoor range shall have at least a 300-foot planted or naturally forested buffer or berm from any property line. 
c.  The downrange direction of an outdoor range shall be in a direction that is the least likely to cause any harm or damage in the case of a gross accident but in no case shall bear directly upon a street, dwelling or place of business. 
d.  A berm of at least 20 feet in height shall run downrange and to the outside of the outdoor range and encompass the shooters' booth/bench or discharge point. At the end of the range (indoor or outdoor) there shall be some type of bullet trap whether earthen or of a manufactured/constructed nature and shall be of a suitable height but no less than 20 feet in the case of an outdoor range. 
e.  There shall be some means of protection between each shooter bench or position in the case of a lateral discharge. 
f.  Any exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
g.  A six-foot minimum fence shall completely encompass at least the physical outdoor shooting range. 
h.  Adequate ventilation shall be provided for indoor facilities. 
i.  Operational hours may be established and/or restricted by the director, as he deems appropriate. 
j.  In the case of compound bows, recurved bows or other forms of weapon ranges, as well as the above, the director may waive certain conditions or place additional conditions as he deems necessary. 
(4)  Racetrack, auto. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the boundary of an R, RM, MHP or Village district. 
c.  A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines. 
d.  A minimum buffer of 100 feet or a berm shall be required. 
e.  This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
f.  This use shall be permitted only if located on property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same. 
(5)  Racetrack, horse. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the boundary of an R, RM, MHP or Village district. 
c.  A fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines. 
d.  A minimum buffer of 100 feet or a berm shall be required. 
e.  This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
(6)  Swimming pool (public, neighborhood). 
a.  Site plans shall be approved by the director to ensure compatibility of the facility with the neighborhood in which it is to be located. If the facility is part of a residential subdivision or multifamily development, the site plan shall be submitted to the director at the time of the application for a development permit. 
b.  Buildings and structures established in connection with this use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line except that the front setback of the zoning district shall apply along all property lines adjacent to the public rights-of-way. 
c.  A swimming pool, public or private, shall be enclosed by a fence having a height of not less than four feet. 
d.  Outdoor activity shall cease by 12:00 midnight. 
e.  Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
f.  This use shall be permitted only upon written approval of the Putnam County Health Department to indicate compliance with the health department swimming pool regulations prior to the issuance of a permit by the director. 
(7)  Tennis centers, clubs and facilities (private). 
a.  All buildings and structures associated with such use shall be set back not less than 50 feet from property zoned for R, RM, MHP or Village district. 
b.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
c.  Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
d.  Outdoor activity shall cease by 12:00 midnight. 
(8)  Zoos. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
b.  A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines. 
c.  A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be required. 
d.  This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
e.  Parking shall be provided per recommendations of the director of the planning and development department. 
(g)  Communication. 
(1)  Radio, television and other communication transmission towers. 
a.  All towers in excess of 100 feet must be set back from any lot used or zoned for a residential structure a distance equal to one-half the height of the tower. 
b.  All towers in excess of 100 feet must be set back from any off-site structure a distance of one-third the height of the tower or 100 feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  All towers less than 100 feet must be set back from all property lines a distance of one-third the height of the tower. 
(h)  Community facilities. 
(1)  Assembly halls. 
a.  Any building or structure established in connection with these uses shall be set back not less than 75 feet from any property line, except where this adjoining property is zoned for nonresidential use, in which case the setback shall be the same as required for the adjoining nonresidential district. Where this property line is a street line, the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. 
b.  These uses shall be permitted only on a lot that has direct access to an arterial or collector street. 
(2)  Crematorium. All buildings used for a crematorium shall be set back not less than 200 feet from all property lines and not less than 1,000 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(3)  Landfills, sanitary. This use is prohibited by the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Parks, private. Private parks are limited to planetariums, aquariums, botanical gardens and other nature exhibitions. 
(i)  Group homes/assisted living facilities. 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be the minimum required by the zoning district within which the home is located. 
(2)  No group home shall be established or erected within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of an existing group home. 
(3)  All group homes/assisted living facilities shall be set back from the road right-of-way and from all property lines as required by the zoning district within which the group home is located except: 
a.  Where adjacent to properties zoned for residential use, the minimum setback shall be 50 feet. 
b.  When adjacent to a state highway the minimum set back shall be 50 feet. 
(4)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to the issuance of required permits and certificates by federal, state, and local agencies. 
(5)  Group homes/assisted living facilities shall provide linkages with hospitals and community services and provide access to transportation for residents. 
(6)  Group homes/assisted living facilities shall provide timely assistance to residents for response to urgent or emergency needs, including but not limited to, timely response to the home by emergency medical services (EMS). 
(7)  Group homes serving as halfway houses, drug rehabilitation centers and centers for treatment of drug dependency are allowed by conditional use permit only and follow special public hearing requirements in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(f). 
(j)  EMS services. 
(1)  Ambulance and emergency medical services (private). 
a.  These uses shall be permitted only on property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to that arterial or collector. 
b.  The proposed development shall be reviewed and written approval granted by the director of emergency services and the director of planning and development prior to the issuance of any permit or license. 
c.  The owner of the business shall bear all costs for traffic signs and signals necessary to advise the motoring public of emergency vehicle access. The requirement for, and location of, these warning signs and signal devices shall be determined by the director and shall not be located within the public rights-of-way. 
(k)  Lodging (temporary). 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Travel trailer park/recreational vehicle (RV) park. 
a.  No travel trailer/RV park shall be located except with direct access to a county, state or federal highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for access points. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
b.  The minimum lot area per park shall be ten acres. 
c.  Spaces in travel trailer/RV parks may be used by travel trailers/RVs, provided that they meet any additional laws or ordinances and shall be rented by the day or week only, and an occupant of such space shall remain in the same trailer park for a period of not more than 30 days per six-month period. 
d.  Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided that: 
1.  No space shall be so located so that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, arterial or collector streets. 
2.  In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the Putnam County Health Department. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot buffer or a berm is required when adjacent to any residential use, 25 feet for other districts, densely planted with evergreen and hedge-type shrubs designed to provide full screening for the park. 
4.  Setbacks, open space requirement, parking, refuse collection and illumination shall meet the standards of MHP district regulations. 
(l)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. No plant shall be designed to operate in a manner that will emit smoke, odor or objectionable waste materials or produce noise or vibration so as to create a nuisance. 
(1)  Fertilizer manufacturer. 
a.  The use may not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference so as to arise to the level of a nuisance. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
(2)  Mining and quarries. 
a.  General requirements. 
1.  This use, exclusive of office and administrative space, shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground, hospital and any property zoned for residential or commercial use. 
2.  The boundary of the property shall not be within 2 miles of Lake Sinclair or Lake Oconee. 
3.  A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected no less than 300 feet from the excavated area. 
4.  A minimum buffer of 200 feet shall be required along all property lines. 
a.  Access through properties used for or zoned for residential uses is prohibited. 
b.  The use shall have direct access to a state highway or an arterial road having a minimum of six inches graded, aggregate base. 
5.  A minimum of 100 acres is required. 
a.  The operators or owners of the quarry/mine must present to the director of planning and development and to the board of commissioners an acceptable comprehensive plan for the re-use of the property at the cessation of the quarry/mining operation. The plan shall include: 
• Plans for the property after the operation has ceased; 
• Re-vegetation plans; 
• Maintenance of the site during the operation; 
• Return water turbidity levels. 
6.  All blasting shall be done in accordance to O.C.G.A. §§ 25-8-1 through 25-8-12. 
7.  At the time of application for the building permit, the owners or operators shall present to the administrative officer documentation and permit number which confirms that a permit has been issued in accordance with the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended O.C.G.A. § 12-4-75. 
8.  The board of commissioners may require a performance bond in an amount satisfactory to cover any exposure to the citizens that is not required by EPA. 
b.  Removal or extraction of dirt, sand, soil and other natural materials. The removal area shall be completely enclosed with a fence not less than six feet in height. 
1.  Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit. 
2.  This section shall not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district for land development purposes, upon issuance of a development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Removal or extraction of rock and other natural materials for the production and processing of crushed stone. 
1.  Blasting shall coincide with the period between 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday—Friday, except when on-site hazards to safety dictate otherwise. 
2.  This use shall be permitted only if located on property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same. 
(m)  Public events or tents (specific duration of less than one month). 
(1)  The user must apply for a permit from the director. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties. 
(3)  This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
(4)  This use shall be permitted only if located on property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same. 
(5)  Must make satisfactory provision for sanitation and parking. 
(6)  Additional conditions may be required by the building official as deemed necessary to protect health, human life and the environment. 
(n)  Sewage treatment plants (private). 
(1)  The design and operation of a sewage treatment plant facility shall be approved by the directors of the county health, water and sewer departments, and the state department of natural resources. 
(2)  Any building or structure comprising the facility shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line and 500 feet from the nearest property zoned for or used for residential purposes. 
(o)  Storage. 
(1)  Bottled gas; storage and distribution. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the boundary of an R, RM, MHP, or Village district. 
b.  There shall not be outside storage of materials, supplies, equipment or vehicles. 
(2)  Junkyards. 
a.  Minimum area: Five acres. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 300 feet. 
c.  Access shall be limited to arterial or collectors. 
d.  Setbacks: 500 feet from any residential use other than residence of the property owner; 100 feet from all property lines. 
e.  Fence: A solid fence at least eight feet high shall be erected around the entire perimeter of the property with a gate to be opened only to access the site. The gate shall contain a lock to prevent unauthorized entry. 
f.  Minimum buffer: 100 feet. 
g.  Approval is subject to the provision of a plan for rodent/pest control by the Putnam County Health Department. 
(3)  Mini-warehouse. 
a.  All structures must be set back 100 feet from the front property line. 
b.  The property line must be fenced with a minimum six-foot security barrier. 
(4)  Storage yards not otherwise classified. 
a.  This use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a residence, school, park, church, playground or hospital. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of the boundary of an R, RM, MHP, or Village district. 
c.  A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected along all property lines. 
d.  The maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. 
e.  A minimum buffer of 100 feet or berm shall be required. 
(p)  Temporary uses associated with construction activity. 
(1)  Mobile office/temporary sales center. Mobile office and temporary sales centers may be permitted as long as such use shall cease at such time as 80 percent of the lots are sold or occupied. 
(2)  Storage or occupancy during construction. Temporary structures may be used during construction for storage or security; provided, however, that they shall be removed within ten days after the sale of the last structure or issuance of a building permit to construct the last structure, whichever first occurs. 
(3)  Camper. Campers may be used by permit but not to exceed 14 days in any one consecutive month period. No permit is required when a valid building permit has been issued. 
(q)  Tent shows and flea markets. 
(1)  The property owner must apply for a permit from the director on the form provided. 
(2)  This use may not be established on a lot that is in an R, RM, MHP or Village district. 
(3)  The use must be set back at least 50 from the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Exterior lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties. 
(5)  This use may be subject to limitation upon hours of operation or noise levels. 
(6)  This use shall be permitted only if located on property with frontage on an arterial or collector with access limited to the same and after proof that the use will not be located on the public rights-of-way. There shall be only one means of ingress and egress, which shall not be located within 150 feet of the intersection of roads, whether public or private. Off-street parking shall be located entirely on the property of the owner applicant. 
(7)  The use cannot exceed 30 consecutive days in duration within any six consecutive months. 
(8)  Additional conditions may be required by the director as deemed necessary to protect public health, human life, and the environment. 
(r)  Home occupations. 
(1)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, other than a non-illuminated identification sign having an area of not more than six square feet, which shall be attached to the dwelling below the roof line, or, if not attached to the dwelling, may be placed in the front yard between the dwelling and the right-of-way, the height of which shall not be more than four feet above the ground. 
(2)  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, excessive traffic, smoke, glare or electrical interference that would be detected beyond the dwelling unit. 
(3)  This use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed at the location of the home occupation. Non-owner applicants for home occupations must have expressed authorization from the property owner. 
(4)  No more than 25 percent of the heated floor area of the dwelling unit may be used for the conduct of the home occupation. 
(5)  Any use involving the sale of products or services, or public contact on the property, shall require the obtaining of a "home occupation registration" permit. 
(6)  Other than the personal vehicles of the legal residents, no more than two business visitor vehicles may be parked on the property at any one time. In addition, any material or equipment must be stored out of public view within the premises or within an enclosed garage or storage shed. One business vehicle, the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed one and one half tons, may be kept on the premises. There shall be no storage of any mechanical earthmoving or similar equipment unless the property is five acres or more and the equipment is screened from public view. 
(7)  A permit for a home occupation shall expire every year or whenever its holder ceases to occupy the premises for which it was granted, whichever shall first occur; provided, however, that this provision should not prevent reapplication for a new permit. This permit must be renewed and a fee paid by January 1 of each year. 
(s)  Home occupation day care. 
(1)  Home occupation day care services with six or fewer children may be established. 
(2)  A home occupation day care service means a private residence operated by any person who receives therein pay for the supervision and care for children less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, who are not related to such persons, and whose parents are not residents in the same private residence. 
(3)  No more than 25 percent of the heated floor area of the residence may be used for a home occupation day care service, and an outdoor play or exercise area must be provided. 
(4)  No home occupation day care service may be established and operated in the county until a permit to do so has been obtained in accordance with the Georgia Department of Human Services (DHS) to issue final permits to operate, and the county does not enforce or supervise such permits. Said permit shall be presented to the director prior to initiation of use. 
(5)  A permit for a home occupation day care service shall expire every year or whenever its holder ceases to occupy the premises for which it was granted, whichever shall first occur; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent reapplication for a new permit. This permit must be renewed by January 1 of each year. 
(t)  Fences and walls. No fences or freestanding wall in a required yard, other than a retaining wall, shall be more than eight feet in height, or be constructed in a public right-of-way or future street or right-of-way. Any fence in a required front yard in a residential district shall not exceed four feet in height. No fence, wall or shrubbery, which creates an obstruction to vision or traffic safety hazard, shall be erected, permitted or maintained. When this chapter requires a fence to be constructed, such fence shall be completed prior to occupancy of the primary use structure. 
(u)  Family apartments. Any accessory dwelling structure may serve as a family apartment on condition that: 
(1)  The square footage of the additional dwelling unit shall not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the principal residence or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less; 
(2)  The accessory dwelling is not a manufactured home; 
(3)  The accessory dwelling may not be rented or leased separately from the principal residence; however, this provision shall not restrict the rental or lease of the accessory structure to family of the occupants of the primary structure. Family, as used in this subsection, shall mean one or more persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 11-16-2010; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Secs. 66-133—66-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - ESTABLISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Jan. 12, 2010, amended div. 1, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 1 was entitled "In General," and pertained to responsibility of director; board of commissioners: scope of authority; and procedures for public hearings and meetings. 

Sec. 66-150. - Creation, membership, organization and meetings. 
(a)  Creation. The planning and zoning commission is hereby established with the number of members equal to the number of commissioners on the board of commissioners as of each January 1. 
(b)  Membership; qualifications. Each district commissioner on the board of commissioners shall nominate one member, in accordance with section 2-53, from the full-time residents of their district, for a term of two years except for the initial appointment which will terminate on December 31, 2010, and the chairman of the board of commissioners shall nominate, in accordance with section 2-53, from among the full-time residents of the county, one member for a term of two years except for the initial term which will terminate on December 31, 2010. Nothing shall prevent a member from succeeding him or herself, and, except as otherwise provided herein, all members of the planning and zoning commission shall hold office for the term specified and until the board of commissioners shall have appointed such member's successor. Any vacancy on the planning and zoning commission shall be filled in the same manner as the position was filled prior to the occurrence of the vacancy for the unexpired term of the member. Within three months of their initial appointment, each member must receive 12 hours of training in zoning procedures and/or comprehensive planning conducted and/or sponsored by ACCG or the University of Georgia's Carl Vinson Institute of Government or equivalent as determined by the director of planning and development. No member shall be allowed to vote on any zoning matter until at least six hours of the aforementioned training has been received. The appointed member may participate in all meetings, discussions, and activities, but may not vote until six hours of training has been received. Failure to receive 12 hours of training within three months of appointment will be automatic grounds for removal from office. Members are removable only for cause by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Organization and meetings. 
(1)  Officers. The member appointed by the chairman of the board of commissioners shall serve as chairperson. The planning and zoning commission members shall elect a vice-chairperson on an annual basis. The chairperson shall: Preside at all meetings of the planning and zoning commission and at all public hearings as called by the planning and zoning commission; sign all documents authorized by the planning and zoning commission and transmit reports, plans and recommendations of the planning and zoning commission to the board of commissioners; act as spokesman for the planning and zoning commission; appoint committees, and the chairs thereof, as may be necessary to perform the tasks of the planning and zoning commission. An employee of the planning and development department shall act as secretary to keep a minute book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; and keep records of examination and hearing and other official action. 
The planning and zoning commission shall have the right to request interpretation of this chapter by the county attorney, in writing through the planning and development department. 
(2)  Rules. The following shall be the rules as to how and where meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held: 
a.  The regular meeting of the commission shall be held the first Thursday of the month at 6:30 p.m., unless there is no cause for holding such meeting. If there is no reason to have a regular meeting, the secretary shall inform the members of the commission at least five days in advance. The planning and zoning commission has the authority to reschedule any meeting should a conflict arise to include but not limited to holidays, conferences, or inclement weather. 
b.  All meetings shall be held in a county-owned or leased facility. The regular meeting place will be the Putnam County Courthouse at 100 South Jefferson Avenue or such facility as established by the board of commissioners. Any change in meeting place will be advertised as required by law. 
c.  Special meetings may be called by the planning and zoning chairperson, provided that at least 24 hours' notice of such meeting is given each member and that such public notice as required by law is provided. 
d.  Three members shall constitute a quorum to conduct all business. 
e.  No member of the planning or zoning commission or the director, the secretary, building inspector, or code enforcement officer shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the commission. No member of the planning and zoning commission shall hear or vote upon any matter in which he/she is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial way. 
f.  The order of business at each meeting shall be as follows: Roll call. Approval of minutes of previous meeting. Unfinished business. Hearing of agenda items. New business. 
g.  Failure to attend three consecutive meetings without notice shall be considered automatic resignation from the planning and zoning commission, and upon resignation or other vacancies occurring in office, the director shall inform the board of commissioners of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the relevant appointing commissioner shall appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
h.  The planning and zoning commission shall be free to adopt such additional rules to govern further the conduct of its meetings and of public hearings as are consistent with state laws and county codes and are appropriate to its responsibilities, which shall be published and available to the public. 
(3)  Compensation. Members of the planning and zoning commission shall be entitled to a per diem as provided in the established schedule of per diems for boards and committees. In addition, the members may be reimbursed, at the current county rate, for up to 50 miles of travel each month for official planning and zoning business. Mileage reimbursement is not allowed for travel to the monthly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(3); Amend. of 1-12-2010 ; Amend. of 3-1-2013 ) 
Secs. 66-151—66-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SCOPES OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROCEDURES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Jan. 12, 2010, amended div. 2, in its entirety to read as herein setout. Former div. 2 was entitled "Establishment and Responsibilities of the Planning and Zoning Commission," and pertained to creation, membership, organization and meetings. 

Sec. 66-156. - Director, scope of authority. 
(a)  Issuance of permits. Supervise the issuance of development and building permits so as to make sure that all new development and construction complies with this chapter and other relevant chapters. 
(b)  Variances. Review variance requests and refer, with recommendations to the planning and zoning commission, including any conditions that may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
(c)  Enforcement; penalties for violation of chapter. 
(1)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, covered or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the director, shall in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this chapter requiring the presence of the violator in the magistrate's court; or institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent this unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate this violation or to prevent the occupancy of this building, structure or land. Where a violation of the regulations of this chapter exists with respect to a structure or land, the director may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service be withheld until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Any firm, person or corporation that shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as they exist, or as they may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation, shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Any violation of this chapter shall be regarded as a misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year's imprisonment and/or a fine of $1,000.00. Each day that this violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  Appeals from decisions of the director. It is the intention of this article that all questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this article shall be presented first to the director and that these questions shall be presented to the planning and zoning commission only on appeal from decision of such official. Fees shall be set from time to time by the board of commissioners governing the cost of such appeals. All appeals must be filed within ten days of the issuance of the decision being appealed. Division 2 of this article shall govern policies and procedures for such appeals. A permit applicant proceeds with construction at his own risk until the appeal period expires and while an appeal of the issuance of a permit is pending. 
(Res. Of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-157. - Planning and zoning commission, scope of authority. 
(a)  Initiation. All planning and zoning issues, including those relative to the official zoning maps, shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission. Amendments to the official zoning maps may only be made by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Conditional use permits. If a use is not permitted in any zoning district, the planning and zoning commission may hear and recommend a conditional use permit approval application as submitted according to the rezoning process. In granting such a conditional use permit, the planning and zoning commission may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Conditional use permits shall be issued for a period of two years and will be reviewed for compliance. 
(c)  Variances. The planning and zoning commission shall hear applications for all variances from the development standards and performance standards of this chapter. Such variances may be granted only: 
(1)  Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, which at the time of adoption of this chapter, was a lot or plat of record; or 
(2)  Where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions to include floodplains or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of a piece of property, strict application of the development requirements of this chapter would result in practical difficulties to, and undue hardship upon the owner of this property, which difficulty or hardship is not the result of acts of the applicant; and further provided that this relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter and is not contrary to the public welfare. 
(3)  In granting a variance, the planning and zoning commission may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. However, the planning and zoning commission shall not be authorized to grant a density variance or a use variance to permit a density or use in a district in which the density or use is otherwise prohibited. The planning and zoning commission shall not be authorized to grant a variance to development standards set forth in a statement of zoning conditions accompanying a conditional zoning. 
(d)  Appeals of administrative decision. 
(1)  Who may seek an appeal. Any person, firm or officer, department, board or agency directly affected by the decision of the planning and development department director may bring an appeal before the planning and zoning commissioners. Such request shall be made within ten days following notification of the decision from which an appeal is taken by filing with the director a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The director shall forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Extent of commission power. The planning and zoning commission may, in conformity with this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed. 
(3)  Effect of appeal. An appeal waiting for a hearing shall not stay the effectiveness of the permit or decision being challenged. However, if the owner of property who has received the permit, variance or favorable interpretation proceeds with development at the property owner's own risk that such development may be halted if the appeal is successful. 
(Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-158. - Board of commissioners, scope of authority. 
(a)  Initiation. This chapter, including the official zoning maps, may be amended by the board of commissioners on its own motion or by private petition or on recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Variances. The board of commissioners shall hear and decide on applications for variances from the development standards or performance standards of this chapter only on appeal of the decision of the planning and zoning commission. Such variances may be granted only: 
(1)  Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, which at the time of adoption of this chapter, was a lot or plat of record; or 
(2)  Where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of a piece of property, the strict application of the development requirements of this chapter would result in practical difficulties to, and undue hardship upon, the owner of this property, which difficulty or hardship is not the result of acts of the applicant; and further provided that this relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter and is not contrary to the public welfare. 
(3)  In granting a variance, the board of commissioners may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The board of commissioners is authorized to grant a density variance or a use variance to permit a density or use in a district where otherwise prohibited. 
(c)  Appeals of administrative decision. 
(1)  Who may seek an appeal. Any person, firm or officer, department, board or agency directly affected by the decision of the planning and zoning commission may bring an appeal before the board of commissioners. Such request shall be made within ten days following notification of the decision from which an appeal is taken by filing with the director a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The director shall forthwith transmit to the board of commissioners all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Extent of commission power. The board of commissioners may, in conformity with this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed. 
(3)  Effect of appeal. An appeal waiting for a hearing shall not stay the effectiveness of the permit or decision being challenged. However, if the owner of property who has received the permit, variance or favorable interpretation proceeds with development at the property owner's own risk that such development may be halted if the appeal is successful. 
(Res. Of 7-17-2007(4); Amend of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-159. - Procedures for public hearings and meetings. 
(a)  The following rules of procedure govern meetings and public hearings on all amendments, rezoning, variances, appeals, matters of interpretation and similar matters relating to this chapter before the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners. These rules apply to all such public hearing items appearing on any agenda. 
(1)  Individuals desiring to address the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners regarding an agenda item are required to sign in prior to the commencement of the meeting or public hearing. Such comments by any one person should not exceed three minutes. Applicants or proponents of an item on the public hearing agenda shall be heard first and shall have a minimum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Opponents of the issue may respond and shall have a minimum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Applicants or proponents may use any unused portion of their ten minutes for rebuttal. Opponents shall not have the right of rebuttal. No demonstrations will be permitted. 
(2)  Written comments on the subject of the meeting or hearing may be submitted by any person at any time prior to the adjournment of the hearing. 
(3)  Following the presentation of positions by members of the public, a recommendation from the county staff shall be presented. 
(4)  Following the staff recommendation, members of the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners may ask of anyone present questions pertinent to the issue. 
(5)  Following questions and/or comments by the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners, a motion for action on the issue will be in order. 
(6)  Authorized action by the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners, with respect to any motion pending before it, consists of one of the following: Approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice, or deferral to a time certain. Any vote shall be by roll call. A tie vote acts as a denial. 
(7)  No official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least three members of the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners, or a majority of a quorum. 
(8)  Minutes of the meetings of the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners shall be maintained and any written or other tangible materials presented at the hearing must be kept as a permanent record. Any person desiring a transcript of the hearing must arrange for a court reporter at their own expense. 
(9)  The board of commissioners shall confirm, in writing to the applicant, its decisions with respect to any matter pending before it at the request of a private applicant. Any map amendment shall be posted by the director of the planning and development department on the official zoning maps within 30 days of its approval by the board of commissioners. On the effective date of the amendment of the official zoning maps, such amendments shall be posted in an appropriate manner; and records accompanying or references upon the maps shall enable the identification of the official action by which such amendment was made and the date of such action. No such amendment shall become effective until such change in entry has been made on the official maps, it being the intent of this chapter that the public shall be able to rely on such maps as correct and final authority as to current zoning status without investigating for possible errors or omissions. No change of any nature shall be made in the official zoning maps except in conformity with the procedures and requirements of this division. 
(b)  If the official zoning maps become damaged, lost or difficult to interpret by reason of the nature or number of changes, the commission may by ordinance authorize new official zoning maps which shall supersede the prior maps; provided, however, that if there is uncertainty about the zoning status of any area because of the condition of the maps or any part thereof, such action shall take the form of an amendment to this chapter, and shall resolve the uncertainty. The new official zoning maps may correct drafting or other omissions or errors in the prior maps. The new official zoning maps shall be authenticated and attested as for the original, with wording indicating when and by what instrument the prior document was adopted. Unless the prior official zoning maps have been lost or wholly destroyed, such documents, or any remaining significant parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with any significant records pertaining to its adoption or amendment, as a guide to prior zoning status of areas. 
(Res. Of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING CHANGES 

Sec. 66-161. - Application for a zoning change. 
(a)  Authority to initiate amendments. Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend part or all of the official zoning maps (a rezoning) or by actions initiated by the board of commissioners. An application for an amendment to the official zoning map, affecting the same property, shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months. Such interval begins with the date of the final decision by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners, in its discretion and by unanimous vote, may reduce or waive the final six-month time interval to amend the official zoning map affecting the same property. However, an application to alter conditions of rezoning as contemplated in subsection 66-166(b) of this division may be submitted at any time. Applications shall be the same as for a rezoning and shall comply with the requirements of this section, excluding subsections (b) and (c) hereof. 
(b)  Application: receipt and acceptance. 
(1)  Whenever an application is initiated by a person or persons other than the board of commissioners, the following requirements shall be met. Prior to processing any such application, the applicant shall be required to file the necessary documentation and follow the procedures as set forth in this section. 
(2)  An application shall be made in writing to the planning and development department on forms provided by the department. Each application shall include the signatures of the applicant and property owner. It shall affirm the owner is in fact the current owner of record. The letter of agency form shall be notarized. 
(3)  No application will be considered to have been made until such form(s) as described in subsection 66-161(c) herein have been completed and submitted to the planning and development department with the application fees as established by the board of commissioners and supporting materials as required under this article. 
(4)  Any communication relative to an application for a zoning change will be regarded as informational only until a proper and complete application is accepted by the director of the planning and development department or designee. The planning and development department shall review the application for completeness within five workdays following the submission deadline. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant with a written list of deficiencies and signed by the director. The application submittal deadline shall be the last Thursday of every month, unless said day is a holiday, as may be established by the board of commissioners, then the deadline shall be the day before. 
(c)  Application contents. An application is to be submitted in one signed original copy and in a number of copies as established by the planning and development department. The following is required for all residential and commercial subdivision rezoning requests. All other requests must include subsections (c)(1)—(13). 
(1)  Properly executed application form supplied by the planning and development department, including the owner's signature and a letter of agency form or a specific notarized written authorization by the owner delegating the applicant to act on behalf of the owner and that the applicant may agree to any conditions and stipulations on the behalf of the owner that may be attached to the application by the approval of the application by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The location of the subject property, including street number, if any; 
(3)  Copy of warranty deed; 
(4)  Legal description and recorded plat of the property to be rezoned; 
(5)  Existing zoning district classification of the property and adjacent properties; and the proposed zoning district desired; 
(6)  The comprehensive plan future land use map category in which the property is located. If more than one category applies, the areas in each category are to be illustrated on the concept plan; 
(7)  A detailed description of existing land uses; 
(8)  The area of land proposed to be rezoned, stated in square feet if less than one acre and in acres if one acre or more; 
(9)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply; 
(10)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal; 
(11)  Statement of political contributions by the applicant and the applicant's attorney as required by the Georgia Conflict of Interest in Zoning Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-67A); 
(12)  The application designation, date of application and action taken on all prior applications filed for rezoning for all or part of the subject property; 
(13)  Proof that property taxes for the parcel(s) in question have been paid; 
(14)  Concept plan. (If the application is for less than 25 single-family residential lots, a concept plan need not be submitted.) 
a.  An application shall be accompanied by a concept plan. A concept plan may be prepared by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner or any other person professionally involved in and familiar with land development activities. 
b.  The concept plan shall be drawn on a boundary survey of the property. The boundary survey shall have been prepared by a currently registered Georgia Registered Land Surveyor and meet the requirements of the State of Georgia for such a map or plat under O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(b). 
c.  The concept plan shall show the following: 
1.  Proposed use of the property. 
2.  The proposed project layout including: 
i.  For residential subdivisions, commercial, or industrial applications, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot. 
ii.  For multifamily and nonresidential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, dumpsters, zoning buffers, parking areas, loading stations, stormwater detention facilities, and driveways, entrances and exits. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, if different than the owner. 
4.  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities and the location shown. 
5.  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property particularly with respect to the compatibility of the proposed use with adjacent properties. 
(15)  Impact analysis. (If the application is for less than 25 single-family residential lots, an impact analysis need not be submitted.) The impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner or any other person professionally involved in and familiar with land development activities. 
a.  The application must be accompanied by a written, documented analysis of the proposed zoning change with regard to each of the standards governing consideration, which are enumerated under subsection 66-165(d). 
b.  A traffic impact analysis is to include the existing average daily traffic on road/streets leading to the nearest intersection and the projected average daily traffic. Additional requirements of the analysis may be provided by the planning and development department and included with the application. 
c.  The estimated number of dwelling units and total floor area of nonresidential uses (if applicable) of the proposed development. 
d.  Effect on the environment surrounding the area to be rezoned including the effect on all natural and historic resources. (State source of the information.) 
e.  Impact on fire protection with respect to the need for additional firefighting equipment or personnel. (State source of the information.) 
f.  What are the physical characteristics of the site with respect to topography and drainage courses? 
g.  Adjacent and nearby zoning and land use. 
(d)  Processing of zoning change applications by staff. 
(1)  Prior to a public hearing for any zoning change pursuant to section 66-161, the director shall send a copy of the agenda to each member of the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Conflict of interest. Following receipt of the agenda and prior to the first public hearing, the individual officials shall file a conflict of interest disclosure report as may be required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A. 
(3)  Staff review and recommendation. The planning and development department director shall prepare, with the assistance of the technical review process when applicable, a written recommendation and zoning analysis that shall include: The items listed in subsection (c)(14)c.1.—5. as appropriate, and the items listed in subsection (c)(15)a.—g. as appropriate, and the following: 
a.  Comments on a site review of the property and surrounding area, as well as an analysis of any previous zoning history relative to the tract; and 
b.  Statement as to the conformity with Putnam County's Comprehensive Plan; and 
c.  The opinions and findings resulting from the technical review process. 
(e)  Recommendation distribution. In advance of the public hearing by the planning and zoning commission, copies of the written recommendations and the attachments shall be provided to each member of the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners. A copy of the recommendation shall be provided to the applicant within a reasonable time after distribution has been made. A reasonable number of copies will be available to the public on a first-come basis. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 1-12-2010; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2)) 
Sec. 66-162. - Application scheduling and fees. 
(a)  Applications shall be submitted in accordance with subsection 66-161(b)(4) and shall be heard by the planning and zoning commission at a public hearing on the first Thursday of the second month following the application deadline and the board of commissioners at a public hearing on the third Tuesday following the planning and zoning public hearing. Applicants will be notified if a hearing is cancelled per subsection 66-150(c)(2)a., along with the rescheduled date of the new hearing. 
(b)  Application fees for an application to amend the official zoning map shall be established by the board of commissioners and made available by the planning and development department. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-163. - Public notification of zoning hearings. 
(a)  Legal notice. Due notice of the public hearings before the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the county in which are carried the legal advertisements of the county by advertising the nature of the application and the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearings at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the first hearing conducted by the planning and zoning commission, and not more than 45 nor less than 15 days prior to the date of any deferred public hearing as contemplated in subsection 66-165(f)(2). If the application is for amendment to the official zoning maps, then the notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning district of the property, and the proposed zoning district of the property. 
(b)  Signs. As to an application to amend the official zoning maps, the planning and development department director shall post at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the planning and zoning commission's public hearing and not more than 45 days nor less than 15 days prior to the date of any deferred public hearing in a conspicuous place adjacent to the public right-of-way along all frontages of the property for which an application has been submitted, signs containing information as to the application as set forth in section 66-161 and the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
(c)  Publishing of notice. In the event the rezoning is initiated by the board of commissioners, the legal notice published need only contain the time, place and purpose of the hearing, and there is no requirement that a sign be placed. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-164. - Withdrawal of application. 
An application shall not be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising, as required by this article, has first appeared, except as may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners at their public hearing. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-165. - Action on rezoning application or text amendment. 
(a)  Hearing. The planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners shall hold public hearings on each application or text amendment as provided in section 66-162. 
(b)  Director's reports. 
(1)  The director of the planning and development department at the public hearings shall state staff's recommendation for each application or text amendment after hearing proponents and opponents issues. 
(2)  For the BOC hearing, the director will also state the P & Z recommendation. 
(c)  Considerations. In addition, the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners shall, with respect to each application or text amendment, consider each of the matters set forth in subsection (d) of this section, the opinions and findings of the technical review process and the recommendation of the director of the planning and development department. 
(d)  Standards governing consideration of a zoning change. All amendments to the zoning map shall be viewed by the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners in light of the following standards used to determine the balance between an individual's unrestricted right to the use of his or her property and the public's right to the protection of its health, safety, morality, or general welfare of the community. These standards shall be printed and copies thereof shall be available to the general public during regular business hours. Emphasis may be placed on those criteria most applicable to the specific use proposed: 
(1)  Is the proposed use consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district that is being requested? 
(2)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(3)  Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use, value or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(4)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
(5)  Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(6)  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services or exceed the present or funded capabilities, including but not limited to streets, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
(7)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the comprehensive plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
(8)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, and a reasonable private use of the subject property? 
(9)  In addition to the standards enumerated in items (1)—(8) of this section, the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners may consider the following standards in a rezoning application if applicable: 
a.  Duration for which the property has been vacant; 
b.  Development patterns and trends in the community; and 
c.  Potential air, water, noise and light pollution. 
(e)  Amendments to the application or to text amendments. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend amendments to an applicant's request which would: reduce the land area, change the district requested, number of dwelling units, locations of ingress and egress, and building height. The planning and zoning commission may also apply buffers, increase setbacks and hours of operation and impose conditions of rezoning, which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, and the health, public safety and general welfare are secured. 
(2)  The board of commissioners is hereby authorized also to enter into a development agreement setting forth the conditions placed on the approval of a zoning application. The development agreement will be referred to the planning and zoning commission to draft the conditions and terms before resubmitting to the board of commissioners for approval. 
(3)  If the request is for a rezoning of a portion of a parcel, the approval of such rezoning shall be conditioned upon the resurveying and the recordation of the plat. If conditions have been made to the rezoning approval, the new zoning district designation on the official zoning maps shall include an asterisk (*), such conditions being reflected in the official minutes of the meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Planning and zoning commission's and board of commissioners' decisions. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend approval or deny the application, or change, reduce or modify any part of the application to best achieve a balance between rights of the applicant and the public interest. 
(2)  The board of commissioners may grant approval or deny the application, or change, reduce or modify any part of the application to best achieve a balance between rights of the applicant and the public interest. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners may defer its vote to another hearing date, or allow an application to be withdrawn with or without prejudice with respect to the 12-month limitation of this division. An action by the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered. However, if the second public hearing will allow continued presentation of positions or information by proponents or opponents, the deferred hearing also shall be readvertised in compliance with section 66-163. 
(g)  Communication to property owner after approval. After each application has been disposed of by the board of commissioners, the property owner shall receive notification from the director of the planning and development department of the zoning change and the conditions related thereto. The director shall also notify the property owner to survey and plat new divisions of property for recording, if applicable. 
(h)  File maintenance. The department of the planning and development shall maintain a file containing each application, which shall remain current throughout the development's construction to completion. The file shall contain references to all other permits issued pursuant to the approval of the rezoning. The department may maintain a summary of the pertinent data and status of the development in a computer database. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 3-18-2008; Amend. of 1-12-2010; Amend. of 4-17-2012(2); Amend. of 9-17-2013(2) ) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Jan. 12, 2010, changed the title of § 66-165 from "Board of commissioners action on rezoning application or text amendment" to "Action on rezoning application or text amendment." 
Sec. 66-166. - Changes. 
(a)  All approved rezoning applications are subject to the Putnam County Code of Ordinances and to the conditions as may have been applied by the board of commissioners. All the approved rezoning applications must comply with the International Building Code, the development regulations, and to the performance standards of this chapter prior to any disturbance of land. The director may modify the application to the extent that compliance with the International Building Code, development regulations, and performance standards may require. 
(b)  Any alterations of conditions of rezoning as applied by the board of commissioners shall be processed in accordance with all provisions applicable to changes to the official zoning maps. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Sec. 66-167. - Conflict of interest and disclosure rules for rezoning, map or text amendment. 
(a)  A member of the planning and zoning commission, the board of commissioners, or any other county official must comply with O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-3, as amended. 
(b)  When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
(1)  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
(2)  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the local government or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
(c)  When any applicant for a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
(1)  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
(2)  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. The disclosures required by this section shall be filed within ten days after an application for the rezoning action is first filed. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4); Amend. of 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 66-168. - Compliance with zoning procedures law. 
This article, as from time to time amended, is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and copies of this article's provisions shall be available to the public upon request. 
(Res. of 7-17-2007(4)) 
Secs. 66-169—66-179. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 089-002  AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE GRANT OF NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISES TO OPERATE AND MAINTAIN CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS IN THE UNINCORPORATED AREAS OF PUTNAM COUNTY; REGULATION OF THE OPERATION, PAYMENTS, SERVICE, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE OF SUCH SYSTEMS, CONTAINING CERTAIN PROHIBITIONS; PRESCRIBING CERTAIN PENALTIES; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OF PUTNAM COUNTY, GEORGIA 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's cable television franchise as set forth in Ordinance Number 089-002, as adopted by the board of commissioners on February 7, 1989. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; telecommunications, ch. 58. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Putnam County Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." 
Section 2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely director. 
a.  County or franchise authority is the County of Putnam, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
b.  County commissioners are the county commissioners of Putnam County, Georgia. 
c.  Person means individual, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
d.  Cable system shall mean the lines, fixtures, equipment attachments, poles, conduits, manholes and appurtenances thereto which are used in the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable television system herein authorized. 
e.  Gross revenues shall include any and all compensation or receipts derived from recurring monthly service charge in connection with the carriage of broadcast signals of Federal Communication Commission mandated non-broadcast services, but shall not include any refunds or credits made to subscribers or any taxes imposed on the services furnished by Grantee; nor shall it include revenue from advertising leased channels. 
f.  Basic cable is the tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals and the public, educational and governmental channels, if required by the terms hereof. 
g.  Cable service means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
h.  FCC means Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity thereto. 
i.  Franchise shall mean the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service or other service to subscribers. 
j.  Grantee means the person granted a franchise hereunder or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
k.  Public way shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the franchise authority in the service area which shall entitle the franchise authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. Public way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the franchise authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchise authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting grantee's cable service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, compliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system. 
l.  Service area means the area specified in the franchise agreement, together with extensions thereof as provided herein. 
m.  Service tier means a category of cable service or other services, provided by grantee and for which a separate charge is made by grantee. 
n.  Subscriber means a person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable services or other service therefrom with grantee's express permission. 
o.  Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Section 3. - Grant of authority; nonexclusive. 
[The] county is hereby authorized to grant nonexclusive rights and privileges to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under, the streets, alleys, public ways and public places, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the county, wires, poles, cables, underground conduits, conductor and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the county of cable television systems for the reception and distribution of television signals and energy, frequency modulated radio signals, and commercial visual, aural and other electronic signals which are not otherwise herein prohibited. 
The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth, shall be nonexclusive, shall be limited to the service area specified, and the county reserves the right to grant the use of streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of the franchise ordinance. 
Grantees shall have the right to enter into agreements for the attachment onto and the use of facilities owned and operated by public utilities operating within the county and copies of all agreements made with other public utilities operating within the county shall be provided to [the] county. No such agreement shall provide for exclusive use so as to prevent similar use thereof by other grantees. 
Section 4. - Franchise term; required for operation. 
The franchise, authority and permit authorized herein shall terminate 15 years from date of grant, and may be renewed on the same terms or conditions as contained herein, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the board of commissioners, and consistent with the requirements of the FCC. No person shall operate a cable system in the unincorporated areas of the county without a franchise issued under the provisions hereof. 
Section 5. - Application for franchise. 
(a)  No franchise or renewal or extension thereof shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The form shall set forth facts in detail as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignment for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this chapter. 
(2)  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of the said corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the securities and exchange commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all facilities; and shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(8)  A detailed plan of construction including, proposed construction schedule and/or schedule of service of the franchise area, and a detailed map of the area to be served, together with the public ways upon which any part of the system is to be located. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may request such other information as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the board of commissioners, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)  All applications shall be considered firm offers to the county, shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(f)  Those persons holding revocable permits for such systems on January 1, 1989, shall make application as provided herein, providing the information required as to their existing system and full information as to any proposed extensions of service. These applicants [applications] shall be filed on or before March 1, 1989. All revocable permits are hereby revoked upon the signing of the franchise agreements provided herein or on June 1, 1989, whichever first occurs. 
Section 6. - Liability and indemnification. 
a.  Liability coverage. Grantee shall hold [the] county harmless from all loss sustained by the county on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the construction, operation and maintenance of systems by grantees. Grantees shall maintain and keep in full force and effect at all time[s] during the term of the franchise[s] sufficient general comprehensive public liability insurance coverage to protect the county against any such claims, suits, judgments, executions or demands in a sum not less than $400,000.00 per person in any one claim, $500,000.00 as to any one accident or occurrence, and not less than $100,000.00 for property damage as to any one accident or occurrence or in such larger sums on all coverage as may, from time to time, be required by the county of all grantees. 
b.  Workman's compensation coverage. Grantees shall also maintain in full force and effect throughout the duration of the franchise sufficient workman's compensation insurance coverage to adequately and fully protect its agents and employees as required by law. 
c.  Certificate of insurance. All insurance policies as required of grantees shall be subject to approval by the county, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Certificates of all coverage shall be promptly filed by grantees with the county. No franchise shall be effective until such coverage is in force with copies to county. 
Section 7. - Conditions on street occupancy and system construction. 
a.  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by grantees within the county shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience [of] property owners who adjoin any said public ways. 
b.  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalks, driveways or other surfacing, grantees shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the county replace and restore such places so disturbed in as good condition as before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in a condition approved by the county for a period of one year thereafter. 
c.  Relocation. In the event that at any time during the period of the franchise the county shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley or public way, or if any other action by [the] county requires the removal of any part of grantees' system, upon reasonable notice by the county, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment at its own expense in public streets, alleys or public way or public easements dedicated by the county for such purposes. 
d.  Tree trimming. Grantees shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the county so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables and equipment of grantees, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the county and at the expense of grantees. 
e.  No property right. Nothing in this franchise ordinance or franchises issued hereunder shall grant to grantees any right to property in county-owned property, nor shall the county be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than in the county's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
Section 8. - Violations by grantees. 
The county shall have and maintain the right to inspect the constructions, operation and maintenance of the system by grantees to insure [ensure] the proper performance of the terms of this franchise ordinance. In the event a grantee should violate any of the terms of this franchise ordinance, or any of the rules and regulations of state law applicable thereto, the county shall immediately give grantees 30 days written notice to correct such violation, stating specifically the alleged violation. In the event a grantee does not make such correction or take reasonable steps to correct such violation, within said 30 days of receipt of such written notice, the county may: 
a)  Make such correction itself and charge the reasonable cost of same to the company; 
b)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; 
c)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or 
d)  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages. 
The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the county to enforce prompt compliance. 
The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. 
Section 9. - FCC franchise standards. 
This franchise is governed by and subject to all applicable rules and regulation[s] of the Federal Communications Commission, to the extent they specifically supercede the provisions hereof. Grantees shall comply with all FCC requirements in addition to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 10. - Service standards. 
Grantees shall maintain a business office or a toll-free telephone listing in the county for the purpose of receiving inquiries and complaints from its customers. Grantees shall initiate an investigation of all complaints within three days of their receipt and shall in good faith attempt to resolve them swiftly and equitably. Any complaints which, in the opinion of grantees, have not been resolved within 30 days of receipt shall be referred to the county by grantees. 
Section 11. - Payment to county. 
a.  Gross subscriber revenue tax. Grantees shall pay to the county for the privilege of using such streets, alleys and other public places, including the operation of community antenna television systems under this franchise ordinance, a sum equivalent to a percent[age] of the gross revenues (as defined herein) received by grantees from its customers within the unincorporated limits of the county as follows: 
1.  Percent of gross revenues. For each month during the effective date of the franchise …. the maximum percentage provided by FCC up to five percent. 
2.  Manner of payment. All payments as required by grantees to the county shall be made semiannually on or before July 31st for the months of January through June of that year and on or before January 31 for the months of July through December of the preceding year. 
Section 12. - Records and reports. 
The county shall have access at all reasonable hours to those records of grantees necessary to the enforcement of the franchise. The following records and reports shall be filed with the county: 
a.  Company rules and regulations. Copies of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted by it for the conduct of its business. 
b.  Gross subscriber revenue. An annual report showing gross subscriber revenues by the grantee from its operation within the county. 
c.  [ Review by county. ] The county may review such of grantees' books and records, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. The county agrees to treat any information disclosed by the grantee to it on a confidential basis, and only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. 
Section 13. - Construction schedule. 
Upon issuance of a franchise, grantee shall accomplish significant construction of the cable system in the county within one year and shall complete construction with[in] 18 months after receiving the franchise. Grantees shall connect subscribers for service within a two year period from the date of the franchise. Failure to substantially perform within the time limits imposed, except where such failure is due to events beyond grantees control, will result in the forfeiture of the franchise, and in such event, the same shall be null and void. 
Section 14. - Bankruptcy. 
In the event of a bankruptcy or receivership of a grantee, all rights given to a grantee shall, at the option of the county, be forfeited and terminated. The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provision of this franchise nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto where such noncompliance of alleged default are caused by acts of God or other events reasonably beyond grantee's control. 
Section 15. - Indemnity. 
Grantees shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend and save harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  These damages or penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(2)  A grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise, specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the county, in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include but no [not] be limited to all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
Section 16. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five subscribers within 1,000 feet of its system shall extend such system to such subscribers at no cost to the subscribers for system extension other than the usual connect fees for all subscribers. The 1,000 feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. 
(b)  In addition, the county manager may upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the service area or adjacent thereto, order the extension of the system to such subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to a grantee. In such cases, the manager in his discretion may order such extension to any subscriber only upon reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of said extension. 
Section 17. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the system for a continuous period of six months from the date of said occurrence. 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct said system as hereinabove and hereafter provided. 
(3)  The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided herein. 
(4)  Any public improvement and/or at the request of the county for removal or relocation. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the county setting forth one or more of the occurrences hereinabove enumerated or such other occurrence hereinbefore or hereinafter provided and shall have 90 days from the date upon which said notice is received to remove such properties as hereinabove required. 
Section 18. - Restrictions against assessment. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by act of a grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the board of commissioners. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the board of commissioners to any assignment, lease transfer, sublease or mortgage of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the county in and to the streets. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person of said system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. Any such mortgage, pledge or lease shall be made only with the prior approval of the board of commissioners and shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the county under this contract or applicable law. 
Section 19. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the county for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the county nor for the failure of the county to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the county to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the county or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions thereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against a grantee and in favor of the county. 
Section 20. - Failure of county to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the county upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
Section 21. - Time essence of agreement. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of a grantee to perform within time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the county to revoke the franchise. 
Section 22. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the county in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the county had not power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
Section 23. - Rights reserved to the county. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the county might otherwise have, the county does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the county. 
(2)  To determine through the board of commissioners any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(3)  To grant additional franchises within the county to other persons for the conduct of a cable system under any conditions whatsoever acceptable to the county, notwithstanding the same might be alleged to be more favorable than the rights granted herein. 
Section 24. - Acceptance. 
This chapter [appendix] and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by grantee and filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. Said agreement shall incorporate grantee's written application to the county for the franchise and shall bind grantee to the provisions of said application. The board of commissioners may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
Section 25. - Severability. 
In the event any section or part of this franchise ordinance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not effect the remaining sections or portions of this franchise ordinance. If the terms of this franchise should conflict with any laws or regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (or any other governmental agency now existing or to be formed issuing rules and regulations affecting telecommunications) the State of Georgia or the United States Government, compliance by grantees with such rules shall not cause a forfeiture of this franchise. 
Section 26. - Service to county. 
Grantee shall provide one free connection to any county-owned or leased building or portion thereof used solely for the conduct of business, education, or their activities of the county, provided that such building is passed by the cable system of grantee. 
Section 27. - New developments. 
It shall be the policy of the county to liberally amend this ordinance upon application of any grantee when necessary to enable a grantee to take advantage of any development in the field of transmission of television, radio signals and cable TV, which will afford it an opportunity more effectively, efficiently, comprehensively or economically to service its customers; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to require the county to make any amendment. 
Approved and adopted this 7th day of February, 1989. 

 
[Exhibit 1] 
APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, provide the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. 
(2)  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of the said corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the securities and exchange commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all facilities; and demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(8)  A detailed plan of construction including, proposed construction schedule and/or schedule of service of the franchise area, and a detailed map of the area to be served, together with the public ways upon which any part of the system is to be located. 
NOTE: The board of commissioners may request such other information as it may deem appropriate. 
All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the board of commissioners, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
All applications shall be considered firm offers to the county, shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED, this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
_____ (SEAL) 
By _____ 
Its _____ 
Attest _____ 
Its _____ 
NOTE: Attachments may be use[d] for full completion of required information. 
[Exhibit 2] 
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into by and between PUTNAM COUNTY, GEORGIA, hereinafter called county or franchising authority; and ___________ hereinafter called Grantee or Franchisee, effective as of the _____ day of ________, 20___. 
RECITALS 
WHEREAS, county has determined that the grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability which is reasonably sufficient to provide services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the service area designated; and 
WHEREAS, grantee desires to subject itself to all of the terms, conditions and requirements as provided herein in exchange for the privilege provided herein; 
NOW THEREFORE, county does hereby grant to grantee the nonexclusive right and privilege to construct, operate and maintain a cable system and service in the service area designated. 
1. 
There is incorporated herein and made a part hereof all of the terms and conditions of the Putnam County Cable Television Ordinance as originally adopted and as currently amended and supplemented so that all of the terms thereof shall apply to the grantee herein as if specifically named therein. There is also made a part hereof the application filed by grantee with county, and upon which this grant is based, specifically including and being limited by the service area designated therein. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands and seals the day and year first above written. 

 
APPENDIX B - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's special events ordinance as set forth in Ord. of 7-19-2016(2) , adopted by the board of commissioners on July 19, 2016. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be titled the "Putnam County Special Events Ordinance." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely dicta. 
(1)  Manager . The manager of the government of Putnam County, Georgia, or his designee for the administration of this chapter. 
(2)  Producer . Any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event. 
(3)  Special event . The term "special event" or "event" shall mean any organized activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or occurs on private property and impacts government services on public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Vendor . Any person or persons who engage in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. The definition of vendor, as used in this chapter, shall not be construed to include or prohibit a permanent business, operating under the provisions of the business license ordinance and other applicable laws, from displaying goods or merchandise on a public sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the permanent business structure so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic and so long as other laws and ordinances pertaining to such business or displays are complied with. 
Sec. 3. - Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in Putnam County without having obtained a valid permit for such event. 
(b)  Geographic limitation; responsibility for law enforcement and sanitation service . A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place and the producer of a special event shall be responsible for the provision of safety and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event for a period of two hours past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such event. 
(c)  Time limitation . Except for clearing of the area, no special event shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the event. 
(d)  Delineation of boundaries; preservation of areas for circulation . The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. The manager, or designee, shall require, as part of the approval for the event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area(s) delineated for the event. 
(e)  Maps for walks or runs . The producer of a special event such as a walk or run, as to which the provisions of subsection (d) above would not be practicable, shall submit with the application for a permit a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. 
Sec. 4. - Application; fee. 
(a)  A producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for such event at the office of the manager on a form prescribed by the manager. 
(b)  An application for a special event should be filed at least 60 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is filed. Fees shall be based on a schedule developed by Putnam County Planning and Development. Such fee shall be payable to Putnam County. 
Sec. 5. - Identification of producer. 
The producer of an event, if a group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who may be the actual producer or a designated agent of the producer, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
Sec. 6. - Administrative review. 
The manager, or his designee, shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the manager determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the manager in facilitating the event and services required. 
Sec. 7. - Special conditions on permit. 
Each department of the government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the manager may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this chapter. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 8. - Final approval of permit; minimum review period. 
(a)  The manager is authorized to approve the permit application after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs. Upon approval of the manager, the county clerk shall issue the permit. Any decision of the manager with regard to the disapproval of a permit application may be appealed to the board of commissioners by filing a written notice of such appeal within five business days of the manager's decision with the manager. Such appeal shall be taken up at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  A minimum of 30 working days shall be allowed for the administrative review of an application and the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  The government shall approve, tentatively approve or deny the permit no later than 30 working days following the date the completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. The manager may tentatively approve an application for a permit received more than 135 days prior to the proposed special event. A tentative approval reserves the locations, dates and times of a special event and is subject to revision based upon the manager's subsequent review, in accordance with paragraph (a) of this Code section, of information received following issuance of a tentative permit. If a permit is tentatively approved, final approval and issuance of the permit shall occur no later than 90 days prior to the special event. 
Sec. 9. - Emergency issuance of permit. 
In extraordinary circumstances, the manager shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a special event permit upon payment by the producer of all applicable fees and costs for such event. 
Sec. 10. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The fee for a permit to conduct a special event shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than 72 hours prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. 
(d)  No producer of any special event, except as otherwise provided for, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees and charges required under this chapter. 
Sec. 11. - Liability. 
The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the Board of Commissioners Putnam County, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event. 
Sec. 12. - Vendors. 
(a)  Sales permitted . The sale of food, including the sale of alcohol or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the producer of the event and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
(b)  Authorization of vendors . The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending as a component of an event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business at any location or in any manner not authorized by the producer of the event. 
(c)  Identification required . Any vendor authorized by the event producer shall be required to prominently display on his or her person a badge identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches by three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. 
(d)  Permit not required . Vendors authorized by the producer of an event as a component of the event shall not be required to obtain any separate vendors permit to operate during the period of the event. However, all other vendors, of whatever nature, not authorized as a participant in the special event shall obtain the appropriate licenses and permits as required under other applicable ordinances. 
(e)  Unauthorized vending prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer of a special event as provided under this section to engage in such business within a distance of 25 yards of such event from one hour before until one hour after the event. 
(f)  Food sales . The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as a part of a special event shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the producer of an event to assure compliance with this section by any such vendors. 
Sec. 13. - Sale of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits. 
Special outdoor cafe areas where malt beverage, wine, and distilled spirits may be dispensed and consumed shall be permitted only within the delineated boundaries of a special event subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The producer of a special event shall have the discretion to provide areas where alcohol may be served within the delineated boundaries of the event. 
(2)  Whenever any event will include the dispensing and consumption of alcohol, the producer of such event, at least 45 days prior to the event, shall meet with appropriate staff members of the Putnam County government as designated by the manager in order to review the plans, conditions and restrictions pertaining to the event. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the event, the producer shall sign a statement of understanding and agreement to the terms and conditions imposed on the event. Such statement shall become a part of the conditions of the permit for the event. 
(3)  The dispensing of alcohol at any special outdoor cafe area shall be restricted to a holder of a temporary or permanent caterer alcohol license issued by Putnam County. 
(4)  The producer of the special event where alcohol is served shall provide, at his/her own expense, security personnel as approved by sheriff, or his designee. 
(5)  Every area where alcohol is consumed shall be conspicuously posted at all times at each point of entrance/exit with signs stating the following: "The possession of alcoholic beverages beyond this point is prohibited." The letters of such signs shall not be less than three inches in height and one-half inch in width and shall be in black letters on a contrasting light background. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for patrons of any area(s) of a special event in which alcohol is permitted to bring into or take outside the designated area(s) any alcoholic beverage or to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person outside the designated area where alcohol is permitted. Provided, however, that participants in and sponsors of home-brew special events may transport malt beverages to a home-brew special event in a special outdoor cafe in accordance with applicable law. 
(7)  The application for a special event at which alcohol is permitted shall include, in addition to the map identifying the outermost boundaries of the event, a map no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, clearly identifying the area(s), including all public streets and sidewalks within and adjacent to the area(s), where the consumption of alcohol is proposed. 
(8)  The application for a permit for a special event at which alcohol is permitted shall include a description of the area(s), including the size and the number of seats proposed for such area(s). The application also shall contain a description of the method and structures that will be used to secure and separate such area(s) from other public areas as required in subsection (4) above. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any person dispensing and/or consuming alcohol in accordance with this section shall comply with all other laws and ordinances pertaining to the sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Sec. 14. - Glass containers. 
The use of glass containers within the area of any special event shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 15. - Law enforcement services. 
Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the Putnam County Sheriff's Office and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the sheriff. 
Sec. 16. - Toilet facilities. 
The producer of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any event at which 200 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the director of the building inspection department. 
Sec. 17. - Tents, stages or other structures. 
Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands or other temporary facilities constructed or erected as a part of a special event shall be approved by the director of the building inspection department. 
Sec. 18. - Street closing. 
The complete or partial closure of any street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the Manager in consultation with the sheriff. 
Sec. 19. - Banners and signage. 
Temporary, noncommercial banners or signs may be permitted overhead across public streets for the purpose of designating "starting" and "finish" lines for a race. Small banners, pennants, signs or other decorations which do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and which do not damage or deface any tree or public structure may be allowed as part of a special event. The producer of the event shall be responsible for the removal of such banners, pennants or decorations within 48 hours after the close of the event. 
Sec. 20. - Duration of permit. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
Sec. 21. - Cessation of activity. 
The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The sheriff may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire event, which does not meet this community standard. Upon notification of the event producer in person by the sheriff to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such producer and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. 
Sec. 22. - Picketing and demonstrations. 
Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place. Any person, group or organization engaged in such activities is required to make application as set forth in section 4. However, any such person, group or organization shall be exempt from the permit requirement in section 3 and the fees set forth in sections 4 and 10. 
Sec. 23. - Entertainment. 
Musical entertainment shall be provided in a manner consistent with the peace and good order of the community. Musical entertainment shall not commence before 10:00 a.m. and must cease before 11:00 p.m. 
Sec. 24. - Exemptions. 
The following special events shall not be required to receive a permit under this appendix, but shall otherwise be subject to all regulations herein contained: 
(1)  Any parade or procession conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral; 
(2)  Meetings or events of church or religious services or assemblies; 
(3)  County sponsored events; 
(4)  Regular meetings of the members and guests of civic clubs or organizations or non-profit corporations who hold 501(c)(3) status but shall apply to any organized activity of such club or organization having as its purpose fund raising and to which the general public is invited to attend; 
(5)  Events held at event centers as defined in the Code of Ordinances, so long as such activities do not exceed the capacity for the event center as established by the planning and zoning officer; or 
(6)  Events sponsored by the Putnam County Charter School System or Central Georgia Technical College. 
Sec. 25. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-13 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances. In addition to the aforementioned fines, the court may impose court costs for each offense of may combine the court costs upon the discretion of the court if any multiple violations occur at or about the same date. 
APPENDIX C - MEDIA PRODUCTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's media production ordinance as set forth in Ord. of 5-16-2017(1), adopted by the board of commissioners on May 16, 2017. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be titled the "Eatonton-Putnam County Media Production Permit Ordinance." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely dicta. 
a.  Applicant . Applicant includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or any association of joint stock or ownership. 
b.  Charitable or student film . Charitable or student film means any filming by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization or done on behalf of an accredited educational institution. 
c.  City administrator . City administrator means the City Administrator of Eatonton or his/her designee. 
d.  City equipment . City equipment means and includes any tangible property, other than real property, owned or controlled by the city. 
e.  County equipment . County equipment means and includes any tangible property, other than real property, owned or controlled by the county. 
f.  County manager . County manager means the County Manager of Putnam County or his/her designee. 
g.  High impact media production . High impact media production activities are those activities having an intended duration of 15 or more consecutive days and will disrupt normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses, including but not limited to any filming involving automobile crashes or chases, gunfire (including simulated gunfire), fire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft (including drones and similar remotely controlled aircraft), stunts, non-domestic animals and similar activities. 
h.  Low impact media production . Low impact media production involves an on-location production crew of three or fewer persons and three or fewer on-location production vehicles and is conducted entirely on private property and has no impact on public rights-of-way and is in compliance with all local ordinances including, but not limited to noise, light and littering. (Examples of impacts on the public right-of-way include, but are not limited to on-street parking; street closures; interruption of vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow; placement of production equipment on public property.) Low-impact activities are those activities having an intended duration of no more than 14 consecutive days, with little or no disruption to normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. 
i.  Media production . Media production (filming) means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting moving or still images including, but not limited to, movies, motion pictures, film or video in any format, television shows or programs, video series, feature films and documentaries, commercial advertisements, music videos, commercial still photography, infomercials and public service announcements, computer-based programs, digital photography or videography, or other visual reproduction technology now known or hereafter created whether the media product is intended for commercial use or not and regardless of the media outlet upon which the product is displayed or intended for display, regardless of the format in or upon which the media product is stored and regardless of the manner in which the media product is distributed for consumption. The period of filming includes the set-up, strike and time of photography, and any pre-production and post-production activities on said film. 
j.  Permit . Permit means the media production permit required by this chapter. 
k.  Permittee . Permittee means any applicant to whom a media production permit is issued by the county. 
l.  Portrait photography . Portrait photography shall mean all activity related to professional photography of a subject lasting less than two hours which involves set-up and tear down time of less than ten minutes. 
m.  Production crew . Production crew means any and all persons who are in any way involved with or engaged in shooting moving or still images, including, but not limited to, all who will or who customarily receive credit of any sort either during opening or closing credit sequence of a completed film. 
n.  Production equipment . Production equipment means and includes any and all equipment utilized during filming which shall include, but not be limited to cameras, video recording devices, sound recording devices, lighting equipment, sound equipment, tracking, scaffolding, cranes, and temporary vending or other equipment used for providing food and beverages to the production crew. 
o.  Production location . Production location means any location at which filming is to take place. 
p.  Production vehicles . Production vehicles means and includes any and all vehicles which are in any way utilized during filming including transporting the production crew to and from the production location which may include, but is not limited to campers, mobile homes, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, boats and aircraft (including drones and other remotely controlled aircraft), regardless of ownership. 
q.  Public property . Public property means and includes any public street, sidewalk, park, recreational facility, cemetery, building, lake or other water body or real property owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city, county, or other local government entity. 
r.  Temporary structure . Temporary structure means and includes anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground assembled on or near a production location for the purpose of filming. A single structure encompasses all manmade materials which are tightly integrated to form the whole. 
Sec. 3. - Application of ordinance; filming locations. 
a.  Subject to the exemptions listed in this appendix, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any media production activity in the City of Eatonton and the unincorporated areas of Putnam County, without having obtained a valid permit for such production, except that any media production or portrait photography activity which occurs solely on private property with no impact to public property, equipment, facilities, or services shall be allowed without a permit. 
b.  Filming on private property . Filming on private property shall require written permission of the property owner, or their agent, in addition to the requirement of a permit, however, there shall be no more than four media production permits granted for the use of any single family residence during a given calendar year. Further, there shall be no more than 12 media production permits granted for the use of any residentially zoned property not used as a residence during a given calendar year. 
c.  Filming on streets and right-of-way . Filming on streets and right-of-way shall require a permit. No public highway, street or road shall have its public access restricted or limited except by a permit issued pursuant to this division. Any filming activity that may disrupt the normal flow of traffic shall require the hiring of off-duty, POST-certified (peace officer standards and training) law enforcement officers by the applicant. Any costs for the hiring of off-duty, POST-certified law enforcement officers shall be paid for by the applicant. 
d.  Filming on public property . Filming on public property, including, but not limited to, publicly owned parks and facilities, and use of city or county equipment may require the payment of fees to the local government for use thereof. The need for city or county personnel and equipment, including POST-certified law enforcement officers, shall be determined through the application review process. The hiring of and any costs associated with the hiring of off-duty, POST-certified law enforcement officers shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
Sec. 4. - Exemptions. 
The following media production activities are exempt from the permitting requirements found in section 3 of this appendix: 
a.  Broadcast studios . Any commercial motion picture, television or videotaping studio or photography studio operating at its established or fixed place of business in the county. 
b.  Current news . Reporters, photographers, soundpersons, crew, vehicles or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, television station or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting or recording of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences in the news and of general public interest. 
c.  Personal-family use . Any noncommercial media production or videotaping of motion pictures which are solely for personal-family use. 
d.  County direction . Any media productions which are conducted by or at the direction of the county. 
e.  Training, educational and public service use . Any industrial, corporate, charitable, public service, public service announcements or not-for-profit media production intended for in-house training or educational purposes, including productions which are conducted by students as part of a class project. 
f.  Non-commercial private events . Any private events recorded or photographed for non-commercial purposes, such as private parties or weddings. 
g.  Low impact media production . Any low impact media production. 
Sec. 5. - Permit application. 
a.  Applications . Any person seeking the issuance of a media production permit shall complete the written application form provided by the county and shall provide all information therein, and file that written application with the county not less than three business days before the proposed media production activity, and not more than 180 days before the commencement of media production, unless otherwise agreed to by the county. The application must be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant and meet the following requirements: 
i.  The application shall contain a detailed narrative of the scope of production activities, and include drawings, maps, or aerial photos to illustrate production locations, property boundaries, existing conditions, planned temporary improvements, curb cuts and driveways, adjoining streets, traffic patterns, and similar information helpful to assess the impact of the proposed activity. 
ii.  The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: automobile crashes or chases, gunfire (including simulated gunfire), fire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft (including drones and similar remotely controlled aircraft), stunts, non-domestic animals, and similar activities. In addition, the application shall list the person in charge (pilot, technician, operator, handler, or other qualified individual) of special effects, together with his/her qualifications and licensure by the applicable federal and state agencies. 
iii.  The applicant shall submit a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur; if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted, certification to that effect is required. Detours shall be determined and approved by the jurisdiction which owns affected roads or infrastructure; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant. 
iv.  The application for a media production permit shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and/or city from all damages, suits, actions or liabilities, including all attorneys' fees, resulting from acts of the media production company or its agents during the media production activity or occurring as a result of the use of media production locations by the media production company. A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the county and city attorney, shall accompany the application, together with a certificate of insurance naming the county and/or city as an additional insured, as well as proof of coverages as required by this division. 
v.  Proof of general liability insurance coverage in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per incident or occurrence. The county manager and/or city administrator may require a larger amount of insurance and/or that the county and/or city be named as an additional insured if it is determined that the nature of the proposed media production activity necessitates such action. 
vi.  Proof of worker's compensation insurance coverage for each and every employee in any way involved with the media production, as required under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
vii.  A comprehensive list of on-location non-computerized special effects to be utilized, the proposed date and site for performance of each special effect or use of explosive devices, accompanied by proof of an amount of additional insurance as set by the county and/or city, if any, per incident or occurrence of liability insurance therefore, naming the county as additional insured. 
viii.  The applicant shall provide a signed copy of the notice to be provided to all businesses and residents affected by the proposed media production activity. 
ix.  All applications shall be filed with the county manager, who may require such additional information as needed to assess the proposed extent and intensity of the production within the county and/or city. 
Sec. 6. - Administrative review. 
a.  All applications under these ordinances shall be submitted to the county manager, or in the event application for a permit within the city limits is filed, as the city administrator may otherwise designate. Upon receipt of an application, the county manager shall, within three business days, either make a determination regarding the requested permit if the request is to allow only media production as defined in this ordinance, or provide notice to the applicant that the requested permit includes high impact media production as defined by this ordinance. In the event the requested permit seeks to allow high impact media production, the county manager shall make a determination regarding the requested permit within ten business days. 
b.  Prior to making application for a permit, it shall be incumbent on the applicant to meet with the county manager to review production locations and the general scope of activities planned during the production. 
c.  The manager shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the manager determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the manager in facilitating the event and services required. 
d.  All applications shall be approved with specific terms and conditions, or denied, by the county manager in writing. For applications requesting a permit for media production activity within the city limits, the county manager shall notify and coordinate with the city administrator regarding review of the application. If approved, the county shall issue a permit to the applicant, in writing, with all terms and conditions clearly set forth therein. If the application is denied, the county manager shall state, in writing, the reason(s) for denial. An aggrieved applicant whose application requests a permit to allow media production activity within the city may appeal to the City Council of Eatonton at the next regular meeting or, if the application requests a permit to allow media production activity within the unincorporated areas of the county may appeal to the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting, by filing a written notice of appeal with the appropriate local government. In the event the requested permit seeks to allow media production activity within both jurisdictions, the applicant may appeal to either or both jurisdictions, though neither jurisdiction may allow the permit to issue over the other party's objection. 
e.  Denial of the application is not limited to, but may be denied upon the following: 
i.  The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
ii.  Traffic impacts will occur, but no acceptable mitigation plan is provided. Examples of traffic impacts include, but are not limited to street closures, on-street parking and interruption of vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow. 
iii.  The media production requires approval of any component activities subject to concurrent jurisdictional approval and that approval was not granted by the concurrent jurisdictional authority. 
iv.  The media production fails to comply with any of the criteria designated under this article for issuance of the media production permit or rules and regulations governing the production. 
v.  If the application is for extension of a media production permit or a subsequent permit, the applicant has violated conditions of the initial or previous permit or has violated ordinances or regulations of the county in the conduct of the media production. 
vi.  Permits may be denied, in whole or in part, due to prior scheduled events or activities sanctioned or permitted by the county under other provisions of this Code. 
vii.  The county manager or city administrator determines the production in any way adversely affects the public health, safety or general welfare of the citizenry, community and environment of the county. 
Sec. 7. - Permit conditions. 
a.  Each department of either government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the manager may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this appendix. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this appendix. 
b.  The application for a media production permit shall constitute a covenant between the applicant and the county and/or city, specifying that the applicant will halt or interrupt media production upon instruction from the county manager and/or city administrator, with respect to each jurisdiction, or upon violation of any state law, local ordinance or fire code. The county and/or city covenants not to instruct that media production be halted or interrupted unless in its discretion it perceives that the media production activities shall cause or coincide with interference with traffic movement, disturbance of the peace, destruction of property, violation of the law or a threat to the public peace, health, safety or welfare. 
c.  The application for a media production permit shall constitute an agreement by the applicant to pay for county and/or city personnel expenses and extraordinary services provided by the county and city, including all repairs, and restoration or replacement which is necessitated by virtue of renovations and landscaping the production, unless another agreement to fix all damages to public property caused by the production is agreed upon by the applicant and the county and/or city. 
d.  Any alterations created by the laying of cabling, placement of equipment or ancillary items related to the production of any filming on any sidewalks, curb ramps or other sloped surfaces in the county and/or city where ADA access is provided shall be properly clear of such obstructions. Where such obstructions are necessary for the production of filming, suitable temporary ramps to sidewalks or ADA cable ramps shall be placed to allow for the uninterrupted flow of all ADA traffic. 
Sec. 8. - Fees and waivers. 
a.  An application fee of $200.00 shall be tendered with any permit application. 
b.  Upon approval of application, a permit fee shall be paid prior to granting of the permit. The fee for a permit under this appendix shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of production, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the permittee shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter. 
c.  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than 72 hours prior to the date of the event. 
d.  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. 
e.  Fees for use of county and/or city services or facilities may be reduced or waived for charitable or non-profit organizations holding § 501(c) status from the I.R.S., or for other governmental agencies. All waivers shall require approval of the county manager. 
Sec. 9. - Revocation. 
The county manager, or city administrator in the event the media production activity takes place within the city limits, shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued under this appendix. Prior to suspension or revocation of a media production permit, the permittee shall be notified in writing of the grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit, and a hearing shall be held before the revoking governing body, whichever is applicable. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the permittee at least three days prior to the hearing, unless the conduct or activity of the permittee creates an imminent peril to the environment or the public health, safety or welfare, the specific activities which create such peril may be summarily suspended upon notice to the permittee until such time as the permittee is able to demonstrate to the county manager or city administrator that the peril has been eliminated. A media production permit may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
a.  A material false statement contained in the application; 
b.  Failure to comply with federal, state or local laws and regulations; 
c.  Failure to comply with any conditions imposed within the media production permit; 
d.  Failure to operate the media production in accordance with such ordinances, laws, orders, rules and regulations as may be applicable; or 
e.  Conducting the media production business or activity in a fraudulent or disorderly manner or in a manner which endangers the public health, safety, welfare or in any manner which disrupts the public peace. 
Sec. 10. - Notification of affected businesses and residents. 
a.  The media production company shall notify in writing the county manager and all known occupied residences adjacent to the permitted locations for the proposed activity. The county manager shall place signage consistent with planning and zoning procedures at the permitted location for three business days following receipt of an application and shall also cause notice of the application to be placed on the county and/or city website. No permit shall be issued until such notices are provided and a response period of three business days after the notice date has expired. For the purposes of meeting this requirement, the county manager must be served with notification in the same manner and at the same time as the businesses and residents. 
b.  Notice shall be provided to an adult occupant of a dwelling unit or business facility located wholly or partially within a distance of 300 feet of the property on which the media production activity will occur. Based upon the nature of the activity, the county manager shall have the discretion to specify a wider area of notification as a condition of issuance of the permit. 
c.  In the event the application requests closure of any public right of way, the applicant shall coordinate with affected property owners regarding access to affected property and parking areas. 
d.  Notification shall include all available information concerning the location and duration of the media production, prep and wrap activities, the times of day required for each location, proposed parking restrictions and restrictions on public streets, proposed location for all support facilities, as well as specifics regarding the use of lights, noise and any special effects or extraordinary equipment. The notification shall also contain the media production company's production office telephone number and inform that any concerns, objections or complaints pertaining to the planned activity must be registered in writing with the office of the county manager by a specific date that is three calendar days after the notice date. 
e.  After commencement of the media production activity, the media production company shall provide written notification to the affected businesses and residents of any subsequent changes to the information provided in the original notification and of any additional variances, permits or extensions granted to the media production company. 
Sec. 11. - General standards. 
The following general standards shall apply to all low impact media production, media production, and high impact media production: 
a.  All media production activity shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., unless otherwise agreed to within the permit. 
b.  All temporary structures, including, but not limited to, tents, temporary sanitary facilities, trash collection, or food service facilities shall be located in accordance with requirements for accessory structures as set forth in this Code of Ordinances. 
c.  Temporary structures may require a separate building permit from the county and/or city; any food preparation or food service provided at the location shall require a food service permit from the county health department, or evidence of exemption. 
d.  Lighting for filming should be oriented away from adjacent or nearby properties as much as possible and shall not interfere with the safe movement of vehicular traffic. 
e.  Temporary signage must be approved in writing, in advance, prior to erection, by the development director, or his/her designee; approval of temporary signage is conditioned on restoration of permanent signage by the permittee following completion of the media production activity. 
f.  No regulatory traffic control signage within a public right-of-way shall be removed or modified without the prior written consent of the applicable jurisdiction. 
g.  No modification to any existing traffic signage, street light, traffic control device or other officially-installed facility or improvement shall be made without prior written consent of the applicable jurisdiction. 
h.  No street, road, alley, or sidewalk shall be closed, barricaded or other obstruction erected within a public right-of-way, and no access shall be denied or restricted to public or private property or facilities unless the closure or restriction is approved as a condition of the permit or amendment thereto by the respective governing authority having jurisdiction over each affected road or infrastructure; reasonable alternative access shall be arranged whenever possible. 
i.  No trees, vegetation (including grasses), or ornamental shrubs shall be cut or removed from public property without prior written consent of the county in the permit, based upon an agreed landscape restoration plan. A land disturbance permit may be separately required depending upon the nature and extent of the activity. 
j.  The applicant shall submit a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur; if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted, certification to that effect is required. Detours shall be determined and approved by the jurisdiction which owns affected roads or infrastructure; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant; where applicable, the plan shall be submitted for review and approval/denial to the appropriate local government department. 
k.  Putnam County and the City of Eatonton shall be listed, separately, in the production credits for all permits required. 
Sec. 12. - High impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a high-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
a.  No permit shall issue for a term of less than 15 consecutive days from its date of issuance; the duration of the permit shall be based upon an agreed production schedule submitted by the applicant. Permits may be extended for reasonable cause. A single application shall include all production locations for the same production within the county. Application shall be made no less than ten business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available displayed, on location, at all times while activity is occurring and made available to county and/or city inspectors upon request. 
b.  Normal hours of high impact media production activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum. 
c.  Street closure(s), obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall be detailed in the application, including any use of on-street parking spaces and/or parking in alleys or side streets. 
d.  The county and/or city shall not intervene on behalf of any permittee or negotiate access rights to private property with property owners; the permittee is expected to deal directly with private property owners for required permission and consent. 
e.  Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required state or local government permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
f.  Based upon the proposed scope of production activity and in consideration of any potential danger to the safety, health and welfare of the community, particularly private property and residents near the production location, the Sheriff of Putnam County, director of public safety for the city, and/or county fire department/marshal may require on-site security (qualified private security or use of off-duty law enforcement officers) and/or may require personnel and equipment be placed on standby for portions of the high-impact activity at the expense of the applicant. The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: automobile crashes or chases, gunfire (including simulated gunfire), fire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft (including drones and similar remotely controlled aircraft), stunts, non-domestic animals, and similar activities. 
Sec. 13. - Special effects, explosives and similar devices. 
a.  No media production which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire or other special effects which involve flames or incendiary devices may be undertaken unless all required federal, state and local permits have been obtained. 
b.  Use of public water by way of hydrant hookup shall require coordination with the Eatonton-Putnam Water and Sewer Authority. Payment for any such water consumed shall be the responsibility of the applicant and be coordinated with the Eatonton-Putnam Water and Sewer Authority. 
Sec. 14. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of the Putnam County Code of Ordinances and section 1-12 of the City of Eatonton Code of Ordinances. In addition to the aforementioned fines, the court may impose court costs for each offense or may combine the court costs upon the discretion of the court if any multiple violations occur at or about the same date. 
APPENDIX D - SHORT TERM VACATION RENTAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's short term vacation rental ordinance as set forth in Ord. of 1-16-2018 >, adopted by the board of commissioners on January 16, 2018. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be titled the "Putnam County Short Term Vacation Rental Ordinance." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely dicta. 
a.  Short term vacation rental. Short term vacation rental means an accommodation for transient guests where, in exchange for compensation, a residential dwelling unit is provided for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. Short term vacation rental shall not include any residential dwelling unit not regularly offered for rental, which shall be defined as any residence offered for rental less than 14 days in any given calendar year. For the purposes of this definition, a residential dwelling shall include all housing types and shall exclude group living or other lodging uses. 
Sec. 3. - Regulations for short term vacation rentals. 
Short term vacation rentals may be offered to the public for rental following issuance of a short term vacation rental certificate, receipt of an occupation tax certificate, and payment of any and all applicable state and county taxes. Any taxes owed to the county as a result of any hotel motel tax shall be paid to the county clerk and any failure to remit the same or to register pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to the penalties included in section 54-38 of this Code of Ordinances. Owners shall also insure occupants do not disrupt or interfere with rights of adjacent property owners to quiet enjoyment of their property and shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.  Owners shall not allow occupants to violate any federal, state, or local law, statute, rule or ordinances, including, but not limited to, sections 29-1 and 32-20. 
b.  Owners shall not allow overnight occupancy to exceed the maximum capacity specified in the rental certificate. 
Sec. 4. - Application; fee. 
a.  An application for a short term vacation rental certificate shall be submitted, under oath, on a form specified by the planning & development director, or their designee, accompanied by a $25.00 non-refundable application fee as set forth by the board of commissioners, which shall include at a minimum the following information or documentation: 
1.  The name, address, telephone and email address of the owner(s) of record of the dwelling unit for which a certificate is sought. If such owner is not a natural person, the application shall identify all partners, officers and/or directors of any such entity, including personal contact information; 
2.  The address of the unit to be used as a short term vacation rental; 
3.  The name, address, telephone number and email address of the short term vacation rental agent, which shall constitute his or her 24-hour contact information and who shall: 
a.  Be reasonably available to handle any problems arising from use of the short term vacation rental unit; 
b.  Appear on the premises within 24 hours following notification from the planning and development director, or his/her designee, of issues related to the use or occupancy of the premises. 
c.  Receive and accept service of any notice of violation related to the use or occupancy of the premises; and 
d.  Monitor the short term vacation rental unit for compliance with this chapter; 
4.  The owner's sworn acknowledgment that he or she has received a copy of this section, has reviewed it and understands its requirements; 
5.  The owner shall state the maximum occupancy for the residence, which shall be the same number as advertised and marketed to potential renters by or on behalf of the owner; 
6.  The owner's agreement to use his or her best efforts to assure that use of the premises by short term vacation rental occupants will not disrupt the neighborhood, and will not interfere with the rights of neighboring property owners to the quiet enjoyment of their properties; 
7.  A copy of an exemplar agreement between the owner and occupant(s) which obligate the occupant to abide by all of the requirements of the chapter, and other county ordinances, state and federal law, and that such a violation of any of these rules may result in the immediate termination of the agreement and eviction from the premises, as well as potential liability for payment of fines levied; 
8.  Proof of the owner's current ownership of the short term vacation rental unit; and 
9.  Proof of homeowner's insurance. 
b.  Registration under this code section is not transferrable and should ownership of a short term vacation rental change, a new application is required, including application fee. In the event of any other change in the information or facts provided in the application, the holder of the short term rental certificate shall amend the filed application without payment of any additional application fee. 
Sec. 5. - Review of application. 
Review of an application shall be conducted by the planning and development director, or their designee, in accordance with due process principles and shall be granted unless the applicant fails to meet the conditions and requirements of this chapter, or otherwise fails to demonstrate the ability to comply with local, state, or federal laws. Any false statements or information provided in the application are grounds for revocation, suspension and/or imposition of penalties, including denial of future applications. A certificate shall not be issued unless the owner demonstrates compliance with the applicable codes. 
Sec. 6. - Violations; revocation. 
a.  In any instance in which use of the short term rental by a guest results in a violation of these ordinances, or any other ordinance of the county, notice of such violation shall be provided to the short term vacation rental agent. Failure to remedy any notice of violations may result in the issuance of a citation, which shall be prosecuted pursuant to this Code. Upon a conviction of violation, the planning & development director may revoke the short term vacation rental certificate and reject all applications for the subject premises for a period of 12 consecutive months. 
b.  Short term rentals occurring on or after January 1, 2019 without a valid rental certificate shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250.00. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
c.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit any action by the county health department to seek the remediation of any dangerous condition at the short term vacation rental or to take any action seeking to protect and preserve against any threat to public safety. 
Sec. 7. - Appeal rights. 
A person aggrieved by the planning & development director's decision to revoke, suspend or deny a short term vacation rental certificate may appeal the decision to the county manager. The appeal must be filed with the county manager's office in writing, within 30 calendar days after the adverse action and it shall contain a concise statement of the reasons for the appeal. A decision from the county manager shall be rendered within five business days of receipt of the appeal, and may hold any administrative hearing deemed necessary in consideration of the appeal. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 